tsH 


(9fP 


nn 


(^A 


1  r- 


,»"■'}:; 


5f 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations ; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,   on    the  Verses  of   The    Bible 


Rev.    JOSEPH    S.    EX  ELL,    M.A. 


FIRST  JOHN 


New  York 


Chicago 


Toronto 


Fleming  H.   Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JOHN, 

St.  John  the  apostle  akd  his  wbitings. — As  compared  with  St.  Peter,  St.  John 
exhibits  to  us  a  calm  and  reflective  nature,  with  a  pre-eminent  receptivity :  every 
word  of  his  beloved  Master,  which  tends  to  solve  to  his  heart  the  mystery  which  he 
pondered,  he  apprehends  in  his  deepest  soul,  and  holds  it  fast,  and  meditates  upon 
it,  blessedly  losing  himself  in  the  contemplation  of  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  Man. 
He  was  lost  in  the  pondering,  affectionate  contemplation  of  Jesus,  as  a  bride  in  the 
contemplation  of  the  bridegroom ;  in  the  most  profound  and  purest  love,  he  sank 
into  the  person  of  his  Master  (hence  he  was  chosen  as  an  individual  friend  rather 
than  the  others,  John  xiii.  23,  (fee).  St.  John  had  the  nature  of  a  living  mirror, 
which  not  merely  received  the  full  brightness  of  the  Lord's  glory,  but  could  also 
reflect  it  back.  Plainly,  and  altogether  without  artificial  attractions — often,  it 
might  seem,  wearisomely — he  faithfully  gives  back  "  that  which  he  had  seen  and 
heard '  (1  John  i.  1).  We  are  conducted  to  another  side  of  St.  John's  nature  by 
the  comparison  with  the  Apostle  Paul.  In  inwardness  St.  Paul  is  much  more  like 
St.  John  than  St.  Peter  is ;  but  it  is  another  kind  of  inwardness :  in  St.  Paul  it  is 
dialectic,  in  St.  John  purely  contemplative.  St.  Paul's  is  a  much  gentler  character 
than  that  of  the  vlog  fSpovTrjg  (Mark  iii.  17).  St.  John,  indeed,  has  often  been 
called  "  the  apostle  of  love,"  because  the  word  dydTrij  often  occurs  in  his  writings 
as  an  important  term  in  his  doctrine.  But  this  dyaTrri  occurs  at  least  as  often  in 
St.  Paul's  writings  :  in  St.  Paul,  in  its  relation  to  faith  as  its  outward  expression ; 
in  St.  John,  in  its  opposition  to  hatred  and  wickedness.  St.  John  has  even  been 
regarded  by  many  as  a  sentimental  man  of  feeling,  and  he  has  been  painted  as  a 
youth  with  soft  and  effeminate  features  ;  but  thus  his  personal  character  has  been 
most  egregiously  misconceived.  On  the  other  hand,  the  passage  (Luke  ix.  51  seq.) 
by  no  means  justifies  those  who  describe  him  as  a  man  of  violent  temperament. 
Eather  he  was  that  which  the  French  describe  in  their  expression,  "il  est  entier" ; 
he  had  no  mind  or  sense  for  relativities  and  mediating  modes ;  and  hence  was  not 
a  man  of  middle  courses.  He  had  never  moved  in  contradictories.  He  had  been 
from  earliest  youth  piously  trained  ;  for  his  mother,  Salome  (Mark  xvi.  1 ;  Matt. 
XX.  20),  belonged  to  the  circle  of  those  few  souls  who  found  their  consolation  as 
true  Israelites  in  the  promises  of  the  Old  Covenant,  and  who  longed  for  the  coming 
of  the  Messiah.  The  family  was  not  without  substance ;  for  Zebedee  had  hired 
servants  for  his  fishing  trade  (Mark  i.  20),  Salome  ministered  to  Jesus,  St.  John 
possessed  rd  ISia,  a  dwelling  (John  xix.  17),  and  was  personally  known  in  the  house 
of  the  high-priest  (John  xviii.  15).  As  soon  as  the  Baptist  came  into  trouble,  St. 
John  adhered  to  him  with  aU  the  energy  of  his  receptive  inwardness.  His  relation 
to  the  Baptist  was  analogous  to  that  which  he  afterwards  bore  to  Christ ;  he  appre- 
hended those  profounder  views  of  the  preaching  of  John  which  were  compara- 
tively concealed    from  others.      The   Synoptists  dwelt  largely  on  the  Baptist's 


Vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JOHN. 

preaching  of  repentance ;  and  added  only  a  brief  notice,  that  he  pointed  also  to  the 
coming  Messiah.  But  this  last  point  is  taken  up  by  St.  John  as  the  centre  of  the 
Baptist's  work ;  and  he  has  preserved  and  recorded  his  prophetic  discourses  con- 
cerning the  nature  and  the  passion  of  Christ  which  no  other  has  preserved.  From 
the  Baptist  he  had  further  received  the  fundamental  categories  of  his  own  subse- 
quent doctrine — the  antithesis  of  heaven  and  earth  (John  iii.  31),  the  love  and 
•wrath  of  God  (ver.  36) ;  and  even  the  word  in  ver.  29  may  have  sounded  afterwards 
in  his  soul  as  a  prophetic  note  of  his  own  relation  to  Christ.  But  with  the  same 
decision  of  will  and  absoluteness  of  purpose  with  which  he  had  joined  himself  to 
the  Baptist,  and  at  his  command  fully  renounced  all  fellowship  with  the  (TKjjn'a,  he 
now  joined  himself  to  Jesus,  when  to  Him  he  was  directed  by  the  Baptist  (John  i. 
35  seq.).  This  fixed  decision,  this  absolutism  in  the  best  sense,  manifested  itself  in 
his  whole  nature — so  far  as  that  nature  was  not  yet  entirely  purified  and  shone 
through,  or  was  still  under  the  influence  of  erroneous  views.  When  the  inhabi- 
tants of  a  Samaritan  village  would  not  receive  Jesus,  his  Jesus,  he  does  not  break 
out  into  reproach — that  would  have  been  the  reaction  or  vehemence  of  a  hot 
temperament — but  he  goes  with  his  brother  to  Jesus,  and  asks — again  purely 
receptive  and  self -resigning ;  but  what  he  asks  testifies  to  the  internal  absoluteness 
with  which  he  apprehends  the  two  perfect  opposites — he  asks  whether  he  should 
not  call  fire  down  from  heaven.  In  his  nature  and  temperament  he  is  everywhere 
and  always  receptive :  not  prominent,  active,  interfering,  challenging ;  but 
expectant,  observant,  listening,  and  self-devoting.  But  in  his  internal  distinctive 
character  he  is  always  most  fixed  and  decided.  His  is  a  self-devoting  nature  ;  but 
it  is  devoted  only  to  one  object,  and  to  that  altogether  and  absolutely  devoted. 
And,  because  his  nature  was  so  self-denying,  therefore  it  needed  such  strong 
decision.     (J.  H.  A.  Ebrard.) 

The  Gospel  and  Epistle  of  St.  John. — This  Epistle  is  quoted  by  two  of  the 
Fathers  who  had  been  disciples  of  the  Apostle  John,  viz.  Polycarp  and  Papias.  It 
is  also  recognised,  and  quoted,  as  John's  by  Irenasus,  who  had  been  a  disciple  ■  of 
Polycarp.  It  is  freely  quoted  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  Tertullian  ;  it  is 
referred  to  in  the  Muratorian  Fragment,  and  it  is  one  of  the  books  contained  in  the 
old  Syriac  Version.  Its  internal  character  is  such  as  to  confirm  us  in  the  belief 
that  it  was  written  by  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Not  only  has  it  many 
verbal  similarities,  e.g.,  cf .  i.  1,  John  i.  1, 14,  xx.  27 ;  i.  2,  John  iii.  11 ;  i.  3,  John  xvii. 
21 ;  i.  4,  John  xvi.  24 ;  i.  5,  6,  John  i.  5,  iii.  21,  viii.  12 ;  ii.  11,  John  xii.  35 ; 
iii.  14,  John  v.  24 ;  iv.  9,  John  i.  14,  iii.  16 ;  iv.  14,  John  iv.  42 ;  v.  6,  John  xix.  34  ; 
but  it  is  dominated  by  the  same  Christian  idealism  which  refers  all  things  in  human 
life  to  the  ultimate  principles  of  light  and  darkness,  truth  and  error,  good  and 
evil,  love  and  hatred,  life  and  death,  God  and  the  devil.  So  intimate  is  the 
connection  between  the  two  books  that  the  Epistle  was  regarded  by  the  late  Bishop 
Lightfoot  as  forming  a  postscript  to  the  Gospel.     {J.  A.  McClymont,  D.D.) 

Chabacter  and  Contents. — In  this  Epistle — probably  the  last  inspired  utterance 
of  the  New  Testament  excepting  the  two  brief  missives  that  follow  it — we  have  the 
translation  into  the  Christian  life  of  those  great  truths,  regarding  the  fellowship  of 
Gk)d  with  man,  that  are  found  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  in  connection  with  the  life  and 
ministry  of  Jesus  Christ.  That  Gospel  is  doctrinal  as  well  as  historical,  but  its 
doctrines  are  here  applied  to  the  lives  of  Christ's  followers.  The  Epistle  is  thus  in 
advance  of  the  Gospel,  being  designed  to  lead  Christians  to  a  conscious  realisation 
of  the  new  life  to  which  they  are  called  in  fellowship  with  Christ  {cf.  v.  13  and  i  4 
with  John  xx.  31).  Its  thought  springs  mainly  out  of  a  twofold  conception  of  the 
Divine  Nature  as  "light"  (l.-ii.).  and  as  "love"  (iv.  7-v.),  united  by  a  bond  of 
righteousness  (ii.  29-iv.  6).  There  is  no  laboured  argument  such  as  we  find  in 
Bome  of  Paul's  Epistles,  but  simply  an  appeal  to  first  principles  that  are  to  be  seen 
with  the  spiritual  eye,  not  to  be  proved  by  means  of  logic.  Although  lofty  and 
spiritual,  the  teaching  in  the  Epistle  is  at  the  same  time  intensely  practical.  It  was 
evidently  intended  to  counteract  the  growing  tendency  to  magnify  knowledge  at  the 
expense  of  practice  (i.  6-7 ;  ii.  3-6  ;  iii.  vi.  10 ;  cf.  ii.  18-19).  One  form  of  this 
incipient  gnosticism  was  associated  with  the  name  of  Cerinthus,  who  lived  at 
EphesuB  in  the  time  of  the  apostle.  Cerinthus,  like  many  others,  denied  the  reality 
of  Christ's  humanity,  maintaining,  in  particular,  that  the  Divine  Being  only 
entered  into  the  man  Jesus  at  His  baptism  and  left  him  on  the  eve  of  His  passion. 
Eence  the  emphatic  statement  of  the  apostle  (v.  6),  "  This  is  He  that  oame  by 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JOHN.         vii 

•water  and  blood,  even  Jesus  Christ ;  not  with  the  water  only,  but  with  the  water 
and  with  the  blood  " — that  is  to  say,  the  Saviour  fulfilled  His  Divine  mission  in  His 
death  upon  the  Cross  as  well  as  in  His  baptism.  Again  and  again,  in  other 
passages,  the  apostle  insists  on  the  reality  of  the  union  between  Jesus  and  the 
Christ,  as  an  essential  element  of  the  Christian  faith  (ii.  22 ;  iv.  2-3,  15  ;  v.  1,  5 ; 
cf.  i.  1-4).  While  it  gives  no  quarter  to  evil  and  falsehood,  the  Epistle  overflows 
with  exhortations  to  the  love  of  God  and  man  (ii.  9-11 ;  iii.  11-18  ;  iv.  7-13,  16-21 ; 
V.  1-2).  As  we  read  the  apostle's  language  here,  we  find  it  easy  to  believe  the  story 
told  of  him  by  Jerome,  that  when  he  was  too  old  to  preach  he  used  to  be  carried  to 
church,  simply  to  repeat  in  the  hearing  of  the  congregation,  "  Little  children,  love 
one  another."  And  when  some  one  asked  him,  "  Master,  why  dost  thou  always 
speak  thus?  "  he  answered,  "Because  it  is  the  Lord's  command;  and  if  only  this 
be  done,  it  is  enough."     (Ibid.) 

Tkaching  of  the  Epistle. — Out  of  this  Epistle  we  may  gather  an  abstract  of  the 
things  to  be  known,  and  that  concerning  God,  ourselves,  and  Christ.  1.  Concern- 
God.  We  may  hence  be  instructed  in  His  nature,  attributes,  and  person :  as  to  His'' 
nature,  that  "  He  is  light,  and  in  Him  no  darkness";  His  attributes,  that  He  is 
faithful,  just,  holy,  righteous,  pure,  invisible,  knowing  all  things,  and  love  itself ; 
the  persons,  that  "  there  are  three  which  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  these  three  are  one."  2.  Concerning  ourselves.  We 
may  here  learn  what  we  are  by  nature,  namely,  "  lying  in  wickedness  "  ;  what  we 
are  by  grace,  to  wit,  "  born  of  God  "  ;  and  what  we  shall  be  in  glory,  "  like  to  Him, 
seeing  Him  as  He  is."  3.  Concerning  Christ.  We  have  Him  here  characterised 
in  His  natures,  offices,  acts,  and  benefits.  (1)  In  respect  of  His  natures.  He  is  as 
to  His  Deity  called  "  true  God,"  and  yet  more  distinctly,  with  reference  to  His  Per- 
sonaUty,  "  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  "  ;  as  to  His  humanity.  He  is  said  to  be 
"  sent  into  the  world,"  and  so  truly  man,  that  He  was  "seen,  heard,  and  handled" 
by  the  apostles.  (2)  As  to  His  offices.  He  is  here  asserted  in  general  to  be  the 
Christ,  and  so  anointed  to  those  offices  ;  and  in  particular,  as  priest,  "  to  take  away 
sin,"  to  be  "  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,"  and  "  our  advocate  with  the  Father  "  ;  as 
prophet,  by  His  Spirit  to  "  teach  us  aU  things  "  ;  and  as  a  king,  to  "  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil."  (3)  Most  of  His  mediatorial  acts  are  here  specified :  His 
incarnation,  where  He  is  said  to  "  come  in  the  flesh "  ;  passion,  in  that  He 
"layeth  down  His  life  for  us  " ;  His  resurrection,  inasmuch  as  "eternal  life"  is  said 
to  be  "  in  Him  "  ;  and  His  ascension  and  intercession,  because  He  is  affirmed  to  be 
an  "  advocate  with  the  Father,"  and  His  coming  again  in  the  day  of  judgment  to 
appear  as  Judge  of  the  world.  (4)  Lastly,  we  need  not  go  further  than  this  Epistle 
to  meet  with  those  benefits  we  obtain  by  Him,  in  that  He  "  giveth  His  Spirit  to  us," 
whereby,  "  we  dwelling  in  Him,  and  He  in  us,  have  fellowship  with  the  Father  and 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ,"  and  by  virtue  of  this  "  forgiveness  of  our  sins  for  His 
name's  sake";  "adoption,"  whereby  we  are  called  the  "sons  of  God";  finally, 
justification  by  blood,  sanctification  by  water,  and  eternal  life.  2.  Nor  are  only 
doctrines  of  faith,  but  rules  of  practice,  deducible  from  this  Epistle.  (1)  Would  we 
know  what  to  avoid  ?  This  book  teacheth  us  in  general  to  eschew  all  sin,  both 
describing  what  it  is,  a  transgression  of  the  law,  and  dehorting  us  from  the  com- 
mission of  it ;  in  particular,  to  expel  the  love  of  the  world,  to  abandon  hatred, 
maUce,  and  envy,  to  keep  ourselves  from  idols,  and  especially  to  beware  of  the  sin 
unto  death.  (2)  Would  we  be  instructed  what  we  are  to  put  in  practice  in  this 
Epistle?  We  are  called  upon  to  "  believe  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,"  to  "  love 
God  who  hath  begotten  us,  and  to  love  those  who  are  begotten  of  Him"  ;  to  have 
the  "  hope  of  glory  "  fixed  in  us,  to  declare  our  repentance,  by  "  confessing  our  sins, 
and  purifying  ourselves " ;  to  "  overcome  the  wicked  one  and  the  world "  ;  to 
conquer  the  "lusts  of  the  flesh";  to  "walk  as  Christ  walked,"  by  imitation  of 
Him,  and  to  "  abide  in  Him  "  by  perseverance  !  to  "  hear  the  word  preached  by  the 
ministers  of  Christ ;  to  "  ask  the  things  we  want  according  to  His  will";  to  "  open 
bowels  of  compassion,"  and  distribute  our  worldly  goods  to  our  needy  brethren ; 
finally,  to  "do  righteousness,  keep  God's  commandments,  and  do  those  things 
which  are  pleasing  in  His  sight."     {N.  Hardy,  D.D.) 


THE    BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOE. 

I.  JOHN. 
CHAPTEE   I. 

Vers.  1-4.  That  whicli  was  from  the  beginning.— TAe  preface  to  the  First 
Epistle  of  John : — This  is  a  homiletical  Epistle,  the  address  of  an  absent  pastor 
to  his  flock,  or  to  disciples  widely  scattered  and  beyond  the  reach  of  his  voice. 
It  is  a  specimen  of  apostolic  preaching  to  beUevers,  a  masterpiece  in  the  art 
of  edification.  The  address  is  based  on  the  gospel  history,  which  it  pre- 
supposes throughout.  Some  have  thought  the  Epistle  written  on  purpose  to 
accompany  St.  John's  Gospel,  in  order  to  serve  as  its  practical  application  and 
enforcement.  The  two  lie  so  near  to  each  other  in  their  cast  of  thought  and  dialect, 
and  are  connected  by  so  many  turns  of  expression,  that  it  is  evident  they  are  the 
outcome  of  the  same  mind,  and,  we  may  safely  say,  of  the  same  stage  and  state 
of  mind.  The  preface  to  the  Epistle  is,  in  effect,  a  summary  of  the  Gospel  accord- 
ing to  John,  as  we  see  at  once  when  we  compare  it  with  the  opening  and  closing 
words  of  that  narrative  (John  i.  1-18,  xx.  30,  31).  The  revelation  of  God  through 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  a  revelation  entirely  human  and  apprehended  already  by  his 
readers,  is  that  which  the  writer  desires  to  communicate  and  set  forth  in  its  living 
effect.  This  revelation  is  the  spring  of  a  new  eternal  life  for  all  men,  a  life  of 
fellowship  with  God  Himself,  in  which  St.  John  would  fain  make  his  fellows  sharers 
with  him.  It  is  this  preface  that  we  have  now  to  consider,  consisting  of  chap.  i. 
1-4.  Its  subject  is  the  eternal  life  manifested.  We  adopt  the  revised  translation 
of  these  four  verses,  preferring,  however,  in  ver.  1  the  marginal  "word  of  life," 
without  the  capital.  For  it  is  on  life  rather  than  word  that  the  stress  of  the 
sentence  lies  ("  for  the  life  was  manifested,"  John  continues) ;  and  Word  must 
have  stood  alone  to  be  recognised  as  a  personal  title,  or  could  at  most  be  qualified 
as  it  is  in  the  Apocalypse  (xix.  13) :  "  His  name  is  called  the  Word  of  God."  John's 
"  word  of  life  "  resembles,  the  "  word  of  life  "  that  Paul  bids  the  Philippians  "  hold 
forth  "  (ii.  16),  "  the  words  of  life  eternal "  which  Peter  declared  his  Master  to 
possess  (John  vi.  68),  and  "  all  the  words  of  this  life  "  which  the  apostles  were 
bidden  to  "  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  people  "  (Acts  v.  20).  It  is  synonymous  with 
"  the  gospel,"  the  message  of  the  new  life  which  those  bear  witness  to  and  report 
who  have  first  "  heard  "  it  and  proved  its  living  power.  "  Concerning  the  word  of 
life  "  stands  in  opposition  to  the  four  preceding  relative  clauses  ("  that  which  we 
have  heard  .  .  .  our  hands  handled  ")  and  states  their  general  subject-matter  and 
import ;  while  the  first  clause,  "  That  which  was  from  the  beginning,"  stands  alone 
in  its  sublime  completeness.  "  Declare,"  in  vers.  2,  3  more  precisely  understood, 
signifies  "  report "  (dirayyeWofiEv).  It  is  the  carrying  of  tidings  or  messages  from 
the  authentic  source:  "What  we  have  seen  and  heard  we  report  also  to  you" 
(cf.  ver.  5) — we  are  the  bearers  to  you  of  the  word  we  received  from  Him.  So  in 
ver.  2:  "We  bear  witness  and  report";  where,  as  Haupt  acutely  says,  in  the 
former  expression  the  emphasis  lies  on  the  communication  of  truth,  in  the  latter 
on  the  communication  of  truth.  Readers  of  the  Greek  wUl  note  the  expressive 
transition  from  the  perfect  to  the  aorist  tense  and  back  again,  that  takes  place  in 
vers.  1-3.  When  John  writes,  "  That  which  we  have  heard  "  and  "  have  seen  with 
our  eyes,"  he  asserts  the  abiding  reaUty  of  the  audible  and  visible  manifestation  of 

1 


^ 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

God  in  Christ.  This  is  now  the  fixed  possession  of  himself  and  of  his  readers,  the 
past  realised  in  the  present ;  and  to  this  immovable  certainty  he  reverts  once  and 
again  in  vers.  2,  3.  The  sudden  change  of  tense  in  the  middle  of  ver.  1,  missed  by 
our  authorised  translation,  carries  us  back  to  the  historical  fact.  Looking  with 
John's  eyes  upon  this  mysterious  Person,  feeling  and  grasping  with  his  hands  its 
flesh  and  blood  reality,  and  pondering  its  meaning,  we  say  with  him :  "  The  life 
was  manifested,  the  eternal  life  that  was  with  the  Father,  was  manifested  to  us." 
While  Weaffdneda  (we  beheld)  implies  an  intent  contemplative  gaze,  i\l/t]\d<pT)ffav, 
occurring,  in  the  New  Testament,  only  in  Acts  xvii.  27,  and  Heb.  xii.  18  beside 
these  two  passages,  denotes  not  the  bare  handling,  but  the  searching,  exploring 
use  of  the  hands,  that  tests  by  handling.  So  much  for  the  verbal  elucidation  of 
the  passage.  Let  us  look  at  its  substantial  content.  I.  St.  John  had  witnessed, 
AS  HE  BELIEVED,  THE  SUPREME  MANIFESTATION  OF  GoD.  The  sccret  of  the  universe 
stood  unveiled  before  his  eyes,  the  everlasting  fact  and  truth  of  things,  the  reality 
underlying  aU  appearances,  "  that  which  was  from  the  beginning."  Here  he 
touched  the  spring  of  being,  the  principle  that  animates  creation  from  star  to 
farthest  star,  from  the  archangel  to  the  worm  in  the  sod:  "  The  life  was  manifested, 
the  life  eternal  which  existed  with  the  Father,  was  manifested  to  us."  If  "  the 
life  "  of  this  passage  is  identical  with  that  of  the  Gospel  prologue,  it  has  all  this 
breadth  of  meaning;  it  receives  a  limitless  extension  when  it  is  defined  as  "  that 
which  was  from  the  beginning."  The  source  of  spiritual  life  to  men  is  that  which 
was,  in  the  first  instance,  the  source  of  natural  life  to  all  creatures.  Here  lies  the 
foundation  of  St.  John's  theology.  It  assumes  the  solidarity  of  being,  the  unity  of 
the  seen  and  unseen.  It  contradicts  and  excludes,  from  the  outset,  all  Gnostical, 
dualistic,  and  doeetic  conceptions  of  the  world.  This  essential  and  aboriginal  life, 
he  tells  us,  became  incarnate,  that  it  may  have  fellowship  with  men ;  it  was  slain, 
that  its  blood  may  cleanse  them  from  iniquity — for  the  cross  is  not  far  off,  we  shall 
find  it  in  the  next  paragraph.  It  is  the  fourth  verse,  rather  than  the  first  of  the 
Gospel,  which  supplies  the  text  for  the  Epistle:  "  That  which  hath  come  to  be,  in 
Him  was  life;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men"  (R.V.  margin).  II.  In  the 
second  place,  observe  the  energy  with  which  the  apostle  asserts  the  actuality  of 
the  manifestation  of  the  life  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  Thrice  in  three  verses  he 
reiterates,  "  we  have  seen  "  it,  twice  "  we  have  heard  "  ;  and  twice  he  repeats,  "  the 
life  was  manifested."  This  stupendous  fact  has,  naturally,  always  had  its  doubters 
and  deniers.  In  any  age  of  the  world,  and  under  any  system  of  thought,  such  a 
revelation  as  that  made  in  Jesus  Christ  was  sure  to  be  met  with  incredulity.  It  is 
equally  opposed  to  the  superstitions  and  to  the  scepticisms  natural  to  the  human  i^ 
mind.  In  truth,  the  mind  that  is  not  surprised  and  sometimes  staggered  by  the 
claims  of  Christ  and  the  doctrines  of  Christianity,  that  has  not  felt  the  shock  they 
give  to  our  ordinary  experience  and  native  convictions,  has  hardly  awakened  yet  to 
their  full  import.  St.  John  feels  that  the  things  he  declares  demand  the  strongest 
evidence.  He  has  not  believed  them  lightly,  and  he  does  not  expect  others  to 
believe  them  lightly.  This  passage,  like  many  besides  in  the  New  Testament 
record,  goes  to  show  that  the  apostles  were  well  aware  of  the  importance  of  historical 
truth ;  they  were  conscientious  and  jealously  observant  in  regard  to  this  cardinal 
requirement.  Their  faith  was  calm,  rational,  and  sagacious.  They  were  perfectly 
certain  of  the  things  they  attested,  and  believed  only  upon  commanding  and 
irresistible  proof,  that  covered  the  whole  extent  of  the  case.  But  the  facts  they 
built  their  faith  upon  are  so  largely  of  the  spiritual  order,  that  without  a  correspond- 
ing spiritual  sense  and  faculty  they  can  never  be  absolutely  convincing.  Already, 
in  St.  John's  old  age,  the  solvents  of  philosophical  analysis  were  being  applied  to 
the  gospel  history  and  doctrine.  The  Godhead  incarnate,  the  manifestation  of  the 
infinite  in  the  finite,  was  pronounced  impossible  and  self-contradictory;  we  know 
beforehand,  the  wise  of  the  world  said,  that  it  cannot  be.  The  incarnation,  the 
miracles,  the  resurrection,  the  ascension — what  are  they  but  a  myth,  a  beautiful 
poetic  dream,  a  pictorial  representation  of  spiritual  truth,  from  which  we  must 
extract  for  ourselves  a  higher  creed,  leaving  behind  all  the  supernatural  as  so  much 
mere  wrappage  and  imaginative  dress  I  So  the  Apostle  John  confronts  them,  and 
their  like  in  every  time,  with  his  impressive  and  authoritative  declaration.  Behind 
him  lies  the  whole  weight  of  the  character,  intelligence,  and  disciplined  experience 
of  the  witnesses  of  Jesus.  Of  what  use  was  it  for  men  at  a  distance  to  argue  that 
this  thing  and  that  thing  could  not  be?  "I  tell  you,"  says  the  great  apostle,  "  we 
have  seen  it  with  our  eyes,  we  have  heard  Him  with  our  very  ears;  we  have  touched 
and  tested  and  handled  these  things  at  every  point,  and  we  know  that  they  are  so." 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  3 

As  he  puts  it,  at  the  end  of  his  letter,  "  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come  ;  and 
He  hath  given  us  an  understanding  that  we  may  know  Him  that  is  true."  The 
men  who  have  founded  Christianity  and  written  the  New  Testament  were  no  fools." 
They  knew  what  they  were  talking  about.  No  dreamer,  no  fanatic,  no  deceiver, 
since  the  world  began,  ever  wrote  like  the  author  of  this  Epistle.  III.  And  now,  in 
the  third  place,  there  is  founded  upon  the  facts  thus  attested,  there  is  derived  from 
the  eternal  life  revealed  in  Christ,  a  new  Divine  fellowship  fob  men.  To  promote 
this  end  St.  John  writes :  "  That  you  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us."  To 
communicate  these  truths,  to  see  this  fellowship  established  and  perfected  amongst 
men,  is  the  apostle's  one  dehght,  the  business  and  delight  of  all  those  who  share  his 
faith  and  serve  his  Master :  "  These  things  we  write,  that  our  joy  may  be  fulfilled." 
We  have  a  great  secret  in  common,  we  and  the  apostles.  The  Father  told  it  to 
Jesus,  Jesus  to  them,  they  to  us,  and  we  to  others.  Those  who  have  seen  and  heard 
such  things,  cannot  keep  the  knowledge  to  themselves.  These  truths  belong  not  to 
us  only,  but  to  "  the  whole  world  "  (ii.  2) ;  they  concern  eveiy  man  who  has  a  soul 
to  save,  who  has  sins  to  confess  and  death  to  meet,  who  has  work  to  do  for  his 
Maker  in  this  world,  and  a  way  to  find  for  himself  through  its  darkness  and  perils. 
The  Apostle  John  is  writing  to  Greeks,  to  men  far  removed  from  him  in  native 
sympathy  and  instinct ;  but  he  has  long  since  forgotten  aU  that,  and  the  difference 
between  Jew  and  Greek  never  once  crosses  his  mind  in  writing  his  letter.  He  has 
risen  above  it,  and  left  it  behind  through  his  fellowship  with  Christ.  The  only 
difference  he  knows  is  that  existing  between  men  who  "  are  of  God  "  and  men  who 
"  are  of  the  world."  In  St.  John  the  idea  of  the  Church  cathoUc  as  a  spiritual 
brotherhood  is  perfected.  But  our  fellowship  is  not  only  with  prophets,  apostles, 
martyrs,  saints  of  God.  We  do  not  hold  with  the  apostle  merely  such  fellowship 
as  we  have  with  other  great  minds  of  the  past ;  nor  was  John's  communion  with 
his  Lord  that  which  we  cherish  with  our  beloved  dead,  the  communion  of  memory, 
or  at  best  of  hope.  If  the  facts  the  apostles  test  are  true,  they  are  true  for  us  as 
for  them.  If  the  life  manifested  in  the  Lord  Jesus  was  eternal,  then  it  is  living  and 
real  to-day.  As  it  "was  from  the  beginning,"  it  will  be  to  the  end.  Jesus  Christ 
had  brought  His  disciples  into  spiritual  union  and  fellowship  with  the  living  God. 
He  had  shown  them  the  Father.  He  had  made  them  individually  children  of  God, 
with  Himself  for  elder  brother.  He  had  passed  away  from  their  sight,  to  be  with 
them  for  ever  in  His  Spirit.  In  this  way  He  had  reaUy  come  to  them,  and  the 
Father  with  Him,  when  He  seemed  to  be  going  (John  xiv.  18-23,  R.V.).  They  felt 
themselves  to  be  in  direct  communion  and  communication,  every  day  they  lived, 
with  the  Almighty  Father  in  heaven,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  whom  they  had 
known  and  loved  on  earth.  To  this  fellowship  they  invite  and  summon  all  man- 
kind. The  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ  makes  fellowship  with  God  possible  in 
an  altogether  new  and  richer  way.  Does  not  the  very  distinction  revealed  in  the 
Godhead  render  such  communion  accessible,  as  it  could  not  be  otherwise  to  human 
thought?  "Our  communion,"  writes  John,  "is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ " — with  each  distinctly,  with  each  in  and  through  and  for  the 
other.  We  have  fellowship  with  Christ  in  the  Father.  He  has  explained  the 
Father  (John  i.  18),  and  talked  to  us  about  Him ;  and  we  are  entering  into  His 
views.  We  share  Christ's  thoughts  about  God.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have 
fellowship  with  God  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  is  God's  ;  but  He  is  ours  as 
well  1  God  has  told  us  what  He  thinks  about  His  Son,  and  wishes  us  to  think  with 
Him.  Showing  Him  to  the  world.  He  says :  "  This  is  My  Son,  the  Beloved,  in 
whom  I  am  ever  well  pleased."  And  we  agree  to  that :  we  are  well  pleased  with 
Him  too  I  We  solemnly  accept  the  testimony  of  God  concerning  His  Son.  Then 
we  are  at  one  with  God  in  respect  to  Christ.  And  aU  harmony  and  peace  centre 
there.  "  The  Father  Himself  loveth  you,"  said  Jesus  to  His  disciples,  "  because 
you  have  loved  Me,  and  believed  that  I  came  out  from  the  Father."  In  Him  God 
is  reconciling  the  world  to  Himself.  Only  when  we  think  aright  of  Christ,  and 
are  rightly  disposed  toward  Him,  can  we  have  fellowship  with  each  other,  and 
work  together  with  God  for  the  world's  redemption.  (George  G.  Findlay,  B.A.) 
John's  testimony  to  Christ : — I.  The  faith  which  came  by  seeing  Jesus.  Too 
often  intimate  acquaintance  lowers  our  reverence  even  for  the  great.  How 
different  the  result  of  John's  close  friendship  with  Christ  1  Such  was  the 
faith  which  came  by  seeing  Christ.  What  a  faith  it  was  1  It  breathes  in  aU 
his  writings;  it  breathed  in  his  actions;  it  fitted  him  to  look  through  heaven's 
open  door  and  teU  us  what  he  saw.  U.  The  faith  which  comes  by  heabino 
OF  Jesus.      We  cannot  as  yet  rise  to  the  level  of   the  faith  which  grew  by 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

seeing  Jesus ;  but  we,  too,  hope  to  see,  hear,  handle  Christ.  And  even  now  there 
is  a  special  blessing  promised  to  them  "who  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed." 
III.  The  joy  of  faith.  Clearly  the  writer's  joy  was  full.  A  faith  so  vigorous 
could  not  be  otherwise.  And  St.  John  seeks  to  fill  us  with  the  same.  We  are 
unworthy  servants,  weary  pilgrims,  fainting  soldiers,  desponding  amid  sorrows,  led 
astray  by  deceptive  joys.  We  want  a  faith  which  shall  make  our  courage  strong, 
and  our  joy  full.  [T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  The  apostles'  doctrine  : — The  very 
mistakes  of  the  primitive  Churches  have  been  to  us  the  sources  of  unspeakable 
advantage.  Principally  to  refute  existing  errors,  the  apostles  gave  out  those  beautiful 
expositions  of  Christian  doctrine  and  duty  which  make  the  glory  of  the  epistolary 
scriptures.  Thus  we  see  how,  under  the  reign  of  omnipotent  love,  error  itself  is 
made  to  elicit  truth,  and  the  evils  of  a  day  to  work  out  forms  of  good  that  shall 
brighten  and  unfold  for  ever.  I.  The  declaeation  kespec»ing  Christ.  1.  The 
eternal  existence  of  Christ.  He  says,  He  is  "  that  eternal  life  "  ;  and  at  the  close 
of  his  appeal  he  adds  the  assertion,  "  This  is  the  true  God  and  eternal  life."  Try 
to  take  in  the  meaning  of  the  word  "eternal"  !  You  are  unable  to  do  it.  We  can 
explain  nothing  which  lies  beyond  the  horizon  of  our  limited  life.  To  us,  that 
which  is  infinite  never  can  be  definite.  Mysterious  as  is  the  word  eternity,  this 
one  thing  is  clear — He  who  is  eternal  must  be  Divine.  He  who  is  "  before  all 
things  "  must  be  the  cause  of  all  things ;  and  creation,  however  wide  in  range  or 
rich  in  splendour,  must  be  less  by  infinity  than  its  author.  2.  Jesus  assumed 
human  nature.  The  mystery  is  no  argument  against  its  truth.  You  are  unable  to 
explain  the  wonderful  union  of  God  and  man  in  the  nature  of  Christ ;  but  are  you 
more  perfectly  able  to  explain  the  union  of  matter  and  spirit  in  your  own  ?  3.  Jesus 
is  the  Word.  What  words  are  to  thought,  Christ  is  to  God  ?  He  utters  God ;  and 
of  every  imaginable  manifestation  of  God,  He  is  the  manifestor.  Nature  shows 
the  Divine  perfections,  but  we  may  stiU  doubt  if  it  proves  the  Divine  personality. 
The  personal  man  yearns  for  the  knowledge  of  a  personal  God.  Age  after  age  rose 
the  ceaseless  cry  of  man,  "  For  God,  for  the  living  God !  "  Christ  heard  that  cry, 
and  said,  "  Lo,  I  come,  I  come!"  In  the  earliest  times  He  shadowed  out  the 
Divine  personality  by  His  appearance  as  the  Angel  of  the  Presence  ;  and  when  the 
fulness  of  time  arrived  He  broke  the  silence  of  ages,  and  in  Him,  at  last,  "  the 
unutterable  "  found  utterance.  But  Christ  has  given  a  yet  more  advanced  revela- 
tion than  this.  He  has  uttered  the  Divine  love  to  sinners.  Great  God !  conscience 
threatens  us ;  the  law  threatens  us ;  death  threatens  us,  and  we  deserve  it  all. 
"Art  thou  with  us,  or  with  our  adversaries?"  The  Cross  furnishes  the  reply.  4 
Jesus  is  our  Life.  As  the  Word,  He  is  the  Eevealer  of  what  we  need  ;  as  the  Life, 
He  is  the  Communicator  of  what  we  need.  As  the  Word,  He  is  God  uttering  Him- 
self ;  as  the  Life,  He  is  God  giving  Himself.  As  the  Word,  He  is  God  without  us  ; 
as  the  Life,  He  is  God  within  us.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Fellowship  with  the 
Father  : — I.  St.  John  was  now  an  old  man  in  a  new  world.  It  was  an  age  of  busy 
thought  and  daring  speculation.  It  had  its  realists,  who  held  that  Jesus  was  but  a 
man,  and  Christianity  but  one  of  the  religious  movements  of  the  last  century.  It 
had  its  dreamy  idealists,  who  spiritualised  away  all  the  facts  of  Christianity.  The 
age,  in  fact,  called  for  a  restatement  of  Christian  truth.  We  too  have  our  realists 
in  art  and  literature — painters  who  strip  the  halo  from  Christ's  brow,  and  set  before 
us  simply  the  man  Jesus,  the  peasant-saint  of  Galilee — authors  who  write  "lives 
of  Jesus  "  as  the  Son  of  Mary,  but  not  of  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  We 
too  have  our  idealists,  who  regard  Christianity  as  a  dream  of  man's  spirit — a 
beautiful  dream,  yet  capable  of  being  improved,  and  so  they  wish,  not  to  destroy, 
but  to  remake  the  Christ,  to  pull  the  Gospels  to  pieces,  but  only  to  put  them  together 
again  after  a  better  fashion.  Here  we  have  the  last  word  of  inspiration.  The 
revelation  that  began  in  Genesis  ends  here.  II.  We  have  in  our  text  the  substance 
OF  THE  GOSPEL — what  it  is  in  the  last  analysis.  1.  It  is  something  eternal — "  that 
which  was  from  the  beginning."  Christianity  is  not  one  of  the  religious  move- 
ments of  a  recent  age.  It  is  not  one  of  a  class.  It  cannot  be  compared  with  other 
religions.  Its  sources  are  out  of  sight.  It  was  manifested  in  time,  but  it  was  from 
the  beginning.  2.  It  is  something  historical.  "  That  which  we  have  heard,  that 
which  we  have  seen  [not  in  vision]  with  our  eyes,  that  which  we  beheld,  and  our 
hands  handled,  .  .  .  declare  we  unto  you."  We  do  not  announce  fancies  of  our 
own.  We  bear  witness  to  facts — to  an  eternal  truth  revealed  in  time.  3.  It  is  some- 
thing absolutely  unique.  "The  word  of  life,  the  eternal  life,  which  was  with  the 
Father."  Christ  approaches  humanity.  He  comes  not,  as  one  of  many,  on  a 
common  errand  of  sympathy  with  sorrow.     His  mission  is  unique.     He  comes 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  5 

alone.  He  comes  to  give  men  life — eternal  life — life  as  it  was  with  the  Father — tha 
very  life  of  God  Himself  in  its  purest  form.  III.  Again,  we  have  the  end  aimed 
AT  IN  THE  GOSPEL  Stated  in  its  largest,  fullest  form.  "  That  which  we  have  seen  and 
heard  declare  we  unto  you  also,  that  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us."  Men 
are  to  be  saved  for  something  as  well  as  from  something,  and  that  is  for  the  fellow- 
ship of  holy  spirits,  the  commonwealth  of  souls,  the  city  of  God.  Truth  says  to  all 
who  possess  it,  "  I  am  sacramental  bread  and  wine ;  eat  of  me,  drink  of  me,  and 
pass  me  on  to  others."  As  every  stream  of  water  makes  for  the  sea,  every  rill  of 
truth  is  making  for  fellowship.  The  missionary  spirit  is  often  spoken  of  as  some- 
thing separate,  peculiar  to  certain  people.  No  !  it  is  the  spirit  of  all  truth.  Get 
Christ  into  men,  and  the  Christ  in  them  will  straightway  want  to  get  into  other  men ; 
for  the  great  end  for  which  every  Christian  truth  is  making,  is  fellowship — the  per- 
fect brotherhood  of  all  souls.  IV.  Yes !  But  brotherhood  can  only  be  through 
Fatherhood.  "  And  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ."  Union  is  union  with  God.  Cicero  has  said  that  there  can  be  no  friendship 
but  between  good  men.  Bad  men  may  combine,  but  cannot  unite.  Their  combina- 
tion is  a  rope  of  sand.  God  only  unites.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they 
labour  in  vain  that  build  it."  The  hope  of  the  world  lies  not  in  agitation,  nor  in 
revolution,  nor^in  reformation,  but  in  regeneration.  V.  Communion  with  men  must 
then  begin  as  union  with  God.  "And  this  is  the  message  " — "  God  is  light" — is 
hoUness  and  love.  Do  you  say,  "  It  is  a  message  that  crushes  "  ?  Nay,  it  consoles 
too,  it  inspires.  There  is  a  gospel  in  it.  The  sun  looking  down  at  the  green  wheat- 
blade,  says,  "  You  must  be  like  me."  But  how  ?  "  By  looking  at  me.  I,  by 
shining  on  you,  will  make  you  to  be  what  I  want  you  to  be."  God  is  light !  If  He 
is  holiness  without  spot.  He  is  also  love  without  measure.  He  gives  Himself  away 
like  the  light.  [J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The  perfect  Saviour : — I.  The  apostles'  testi- 
mony concerning  Christ  as  a  perfect  Saviour  (vers.  1,  2).  1.  No  stronger  evidence 
can  be  conceived.  2.  The  statement  of  such  evidence  proves  the  importance  of 
giving  facts  as  the  foundation  of  Christianity.  3.  The  terms  of  this  statement 
deserve  careful  study.  (1)  The  pre-existence  of  our  Lord.  (2)  The  real,  objective 
humanity  of  our  Lord.  (3)  The  life-giving  power  of  our  Lord.  11.  The  design  of 
THIS  testimony — that  others  might  participate  in  the  peculiar  privileges  of  the 
apostles  of  Christ  (ver.  3).  1.  Fellowship.  2.  Fulness  of  joy.  IH.  The  evidences 
OF  real  union  with  Christ  as  perfect  Saviour.  1.  A  life  of  practical  holiness 
(vers.  5-7).  2.  A  Scriptural  sentiment  (vers.  8-10).  3.  Compliance  with  the  con- 
dition of  forgiveness  and  cleansing  (ver.  9).  Lessons:  1.  The  solid  basis  of  Chris- 
tianity— a  historical  Christ,  attested  by  unimpeachable  witnesses.  2.  The 
distinguished  privileges  of  a  believer  in  Christ.  (1)  Divine  fellowship.  (2) 
Divine  cleansing.  (3)  Divine  forgiveness.  3.  The  blessed  and  royal  life  of 
the   Christian.     To  "walk   in  the  light."      (D.   G.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Witnesses 

of  the  Word  of  life: — These  words  are  as  a  head  to  the  body,  a  gate 
to  the  field,  a  porch  to  the  building  of  this  epistle ;  an  introduction  which  very 
much  speaketh  the  writer  to  be  St  John,  because  it  is  as  it  were  a  resounding  to  the 
proem  of  his  Gospel.  I.  The  apostle's  care  of  publishing  the  gospel  is  that 
which  St.  John  doth  here  insert  in  the  behalf  not  only  of  himself,  but  his  fellow- 
apostles,  for  it  is  not  the  singular  "  I,"  but  the  plural  "we."  1.  The  first  we  meet 
with  is  fiapTvpovfiiv,  "  bear  witness."  This  was  indeed  the  chief  office  to  which  the 
apostles  were  designed  by  Christ,  to  bear  witness  of  Him  ;  and  that  they  might  be 
enabled  to  the  faithful  discharge  of  it.  He  promised  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
(John  XV.  26, 27 ;  Acts  i.  8).  2.  The  next  expression,  cnrayyeWofiEv,  is  twice  repeated, 
vers.  2,  3,  but  Englished  by  two  several  words,  "  we  show"  and  "  we  declare,"  it  is 
that  which  intimateth  what  kind  of  bearing  witness  the  apostle  here  intended.  The 
nature  of  light  is  to  discover,  the  business  of  an  ambassador  is  to  impart  his 
message ;  and  accordingly  the  work  of  an  apostle  is  to  reveal  the  gospel.  We 
declare,  as  being  sent  by  God  to  publish  this  errand ;  and  that  which  hereby  is 
intimated  to  us  is  that  these  holy  apostles  did  not  run  before  they  were  sent,  but 
had  a  mission  and  commission  to  show  and  declare  the  things  of  the  gospel. 
3.  There  is  yet  one  term  more  behind,  ver.  4,  and  that  is  ypa^o/tsv,  "we  write  unto 
you  "  :  and  as  declaring  showeth  what  kind  of  bearing  witness  the  apostle  chiefly 
relateth  to,  so  this  writing  what  kind  of  declaring  he  especially  speaketh  of  ;  for 
whereas  there  are  but  two  ways  of  declaring  the  gospel,  to  wit,  semio  and  scriptio, 
word  and  writing,  by  the  tongue  and  the  pen,  this  latter  is  that  which  the  apostle 
principally  intendeth  when  he  saith.  We  declare,  we  write ;  that  is,  we  declare  by 
writing.     (1)  By  this  it  is  we  speak  to  many,  very  many,  even  those  that  are  absent 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  far  distant  from  us ;  in  which  respect  writing  is  wittily  styled  an  invention  to 
deceive  absence.  (2)  Again,  by  this  it  is  we  speak,  not  only  whilst  alive,  but  when 
we  are  dead,  and  so  declare  the  truth,  not  only  to  them  who  are  coetaneous  with  us, 
but  shall  in  future  ages  succeed  after  us ;  in  which  regard  that  of  the  Psalmist  is 
very  suitable  (Psa.  cii.  18).  II.  The  gospel's  excellency.  1.  The  appellation  here 
affixed  to  the  gospel  is  choice  and  comfortable,  it  is  the  word  of  life  ;  a  title  which 
is  made  use  of  by  St.  Paul  (Phil.  ii.  15,  16).  2.  The  reason  of  this  appellation  is 
fit  and  pregnant,  because  those  words,  "  eternal  life  is  manifested  to  us,"  are  such 
a  confirmation  that  they  are  withal  an  explication  of  the  title  in  both  the  branches 
of  it.  (1)  Would  we  know  what  this  life  is,  whereof  the  gospel  is  the  word  ?  The 
answer  is,  it  is  eternal  life ;  in  which  respect  St.  Peter  saith  to  Christ  (John  vi.  68). 
(2)  Would  we  know  in  what  respect  the  gospel  is  the  word  of  this  life  ?  The  answer 
is,  because  this  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father  is  by  it  manifested  to  us.  To 
apply  this,  what  should  the  consideration  teach  us  but — 1.  Thankfully  to  acknowledge 
what  a  rich  treasure,  a  precious  pearl,  God  hath  vouchsafed  to  us  in  bestowing  the 
gospel  on  us !  2.  To  endeavour  that  what  this  word  of  life  is  in  itself  it  may  be  to 
every  one  of  us ;  and  as  it  is  the  word  of  life  by  way  of  manifestation,  so  it  may  be 
also  by  way  of  operation,  effectual  to  bring  us  to  that  life  which  it  revealeth  to  us. 
(N.  Hardy,  D.D.)  Christ  the  revealer  of  God : — I.  Him  of  whom  John  is  here 

SPEAKING — "  that  which  was  from  the  beginning."  What  God  is  in  His  nature, 
persons,  life,  blessedness,  glory,  immortality,  and  eternity,  is,  and  ever  will  be, 
incomprehensible  (Job  xi.  7,  8,  9).  The  person  of  Christ  was  from  the  beginning. 
He  was  as  God-man  before  the  world,  and  had  a  glory  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was  (John  viii.  58).  This  most  glorious  one,  who  was  God-man  before  the 
world  was,  became  incarnate  in  the  fulness  of  time.  John  lived  in  the  days  of  Christ's 
Incarnation  ;  he  had  the  honour  to  see  Christ,  the  Messiah,  and  was  favoured  with 
communion  with  Him.  This  was  grace  and  glory  inexpressible.  II.  He  had  heard, 
HE  had  seen,  he  had  HANDLED  HiM.  So  had  othcrs  also.  These  various  terms  of 
hearing,  seeing,  looking,  handling,  are  designed  to  express  the  reality  of  our  Lord's 
Incarnation.  That  He  had  a  real  body.  It  was  a  palpable  one ;  it  was  seen  ;  it 
was  touched  ;  it  was  heard.  The  truth  of  this  was  denied  by  some  heretics  in  the 
apostolic  age ;  to  refute  which  the  apostle  expresseth  himself  as  he  here  doth. 
There  was  satisfaction  given,  and  such  demonstration  given  to  every  sense  of  body 
and  mind,  that  Christ  had  a  body  like  our  own,  that  no  greater  proof  could  be  given. 
He  was  made  in  all  things  like  unto  His  brethren.  It  was  in  our  nature  He  obeyed. 
Bore  the  sins  of  many  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  The  person  of  Christ  is  a  most 
transcendently  excellent  subject.  The  Incarnation  of  Christ,  a  deep  and  most 
momentous  subject.  III.  The  persons  who  had  thus  seen  Him — "  which  we  have 
heard,"  &g.  They  were  the  apostles  themselves.  He  speaks  in  their  and  his  own 
name  here.  Not  but  other  saints  beside  them  saw  the  Lord  in  His  incarnate  state  ; 
yet  they  were  not  called  and  appointed  to  be  witnesses  of  this,  as  the  apostles 
were.  The  evidence  the  apostles  had  of  His  person  and  Incarnation  was  different 
from  ours.  We  receive  ours  from  them :  and  that  in  a  way  of  believing.  They 
had  the  evidence  of  sense  as  truly  as  we  have  the  evidence  of  faith.  True  believers 
hear  the  voice  of  Christ  in  His  Word,  and  in  hearing  it  their  souls  live.  They  see 
Christ  in  the  light  of  the  gospel,  and  behold  salvation  and  everlasting  life  in  Him ; 
but  this  is  with  the  eyes  of  their  mind.  They  touch,  they  taste,  and  handle  Christ 
mystically  and  representatively  in  their  fellowship  with  Him  in  His  holy  supper, 
yet  this  is  quite  different  from  what  the  apostle  is  here  speaking.  Yet  it  is  as 
effectual  to  us  for  our  souls'  benefit  as  theirs  was.  Yet  notwithstanding  this,  the 
different  ends  answered  by  the  same  are  so  essential,  that  they  ought  to  be 
distinguished.  They  were  to  record  His  life,  His  words.  His  miracles.  His 
threatenings.  His  promises.  His  prophecies,  His  holiness.  His  righteousness, 
His  passion.  His  death.  His  burial,  His  resurrection.  His  ascension  into 
heaven.  His  session  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  His  coronation  in 
glory,  and  His  sending  down  the  Holy  Ghost  from  heaven,  to  prove  Him  to  be  the 
Lord's  Messiah,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Now  the  apostles  who  were  to  be 
witnesses  of  all  this  unto  the  people,  saw  God  incarnate,  and  conversed  with  Him 
in  His  incarnate  state — a  sight  we  shall  never  behold.  It  is  everlastingly  impossible 
we  should,  that  state  being  past.  We  shall  see  God  incarnate,  God-man,  in 
heaven — we  shall  see  Him  in  the  state  of  ultimate  glory.  We  see  Him  now,  in  the 
glass  of  the  everlasting  gospel,  as  truly  as  the  apostles  did,  in  our  measure  and 
degree,  though  not  as  they  did  with  their  bodily  eyes.  We  see  Him  with  the  eye  of 
faith,  as  certainly  as  those  persons  did  with  the  eyes  of  their  body,  and  as  truly, 


CHAP.  I,]  I.  JOHN.  7 

yet  not  so  clearly  and  fully,  a3  saints  in  heaven  do  by  sense  and  vision.  IV.  The 
TiTiiE  John  gives  this  most  wonderful  One.  He  styles  Him  "  The  Word  of  life." 
The  word  is  the  index  of  the  mind.  By  what  is  contained  in  the  mind  is  expressed. 
So  Christ,  as  one  in  the  self-existing  Essence,  speaks  out  the  mind  of  the  eternal 
Father.  It  was  by  His  Almighty  fiat  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  created,  and 
all  the  host  of  them.  It  was  by  Him  all  the  secrets  of  the  Most  High  were  spoken 
out  and  proclaimed,  and  the  invisible  God  brought  out  of  His  invisibility.  It  is  in 
Him  the  fuU  revelation  of  Godhead  is  made  known.  It  is  in  the  essential  Word  all 
the  mind  of  God  is  opened,  aU  the  love  of  God  expressed,  the  whole  of  God  declared. 
It  is  as  this  essential  Word,  and  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  shines  forth  as  God-man, 
in  His  most  glorious  person,  mediation,  work,  grace,  and  salvation,  in  the  everlasting 
gospel,  and  enlightens  His  Church  therewith,  that  they  in  His  light  see  light. 
(S.  E.  Pierce.)  The  Incarnation  of  Christ,  before  and  after  : — Midway  down  the 
Simplon  Pass,  the  traveller  pauses  to  read  upon  a  stone  by  the  wayside  the  single 
word  "  Italia."  The  Alpine  pines  cling  to  the  mountain-sides  between  whose  steeps 
the  rough  way  winds.  The  snow  covers  the  peaks,  and  the  brooks  are  frozen  to  the 
precipices.  The  traveller  wraps  his  cloak  about  him  against  the  frost  that  reigns 
undisputed  upon  those  ancient  thrones  of  icebound  rock.  But  at  the  point  where 
that  stone  with  the  word  "  Italia  "  stands,  he  passes  a  boundary-line.  From  there  the 
way  begins  into  another  world.  Soon  every  step  makes  plainer  how  great  has  been 
the  change  from  Switzerland  to  Italy.  Humanity  has  crossed  a  boundary-line 
between  two  eras.  Up  to  Bethlehem  was  one  way,  growing  bleaker,  and  more 
barren,  and  colder,  as  man  hastened  on.  Down  from  Bethlehem  has  been  another 
and  a  happier  time.  The  one  civilisation  was  as  Switzerland  shut  in  among  its  icy 
Alps ;  the  other  is  as  Lombardy's  fruitful  plain.  The  one  led  up  to  Stoicism  ;  the 
other  opens  into  charity.  Judaism,  also,  and  the  gospel  are  as  two  different  cHmes. 
We  need  deny  no  pagan  virtue,  we  need  exaggerate  no  pagan  vice,  in  order  to  bring 
out  the  greatness  of  the  change  which  began  at  Bethlehem.  For  it  is  not  simply  a 
difference  in  men,  or  in  civilisation,  which  we  have  to  observe,  great  as,  without 
historical  exaggeration,  that  may  be  shown  to  be ;  but  the  advent  of  Christ  works  a 
difference  in  motives,  and  in  the  motive-powers,  which  make  human  life,  and  which 
are  creative  of  civilisations.  It  was  the  coming  of  a  new  power  to  change  the 
world.  The  impulse  which  was  imparted  to  humanity  by  the  presence  among  men 
of  Jesus  Christ  can  be  compared  to  nothing  less  potential  than  the  impulse  which 
was  given,  we  may  suppose,  to  the  creation  when  motion  first  became  a  fact  and 
law  of  primeval  matter.  And  from  the  advent  of  motion  dates  the  order  of  the 
worlds.  (Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)  The  Divine  and.  human  in  Christ : — The  picture 
produced  in  the  stereopticon  is  fuller,  rounder  and  more  natural  than  the  same 
picture  seen  without  the  use  of  that  instrument.  But  to  produce  the  stereoscopic 
picture  there  must  be  two  pictures  blended  into  one  by  the  use  of  the  stereopticon, 
and  both  the  eyes  of  the  observer  are  brought  into  requisition  at  the  same  time, 
looking  each  through  a  separate  lens.  Thus  Christ  is  only  seen  in  His  true  and 
proper  light,  when  the  record  of  His  human  nature  and  the  statement  of  His  Divine 
are  blended.  It  is  a  flat,  unfinished  Christ  with  either  left  out.  But  it  is  as  seen 
in  the  Word,  with  the  moral  and  mental  powers  of  our  being  both  engaged  in  the 
consideration,  and  thus  only,  that  we  get  the  full  and  true  result.  Which  we 
have  heard.  —  Obedient  hearing: — ^The  word  translated  "heard"  often  signifies 
with  the  inspired  writers  an  obedient  hearing.  It  is  such  a  hearing  of  the 
proposed  truth  as  issues  in  the  conviction  of  the  mind,  and  more  than  this, 
such  a  hearing  as  disposes  the  mind  to  submit  itself  to  the  doctrine  presented : 
it  is  in  this  way  that  faith  springs  up,  and  from  hence  its  origin.  The 
Lord  by  His  special  grace  induces  this  result.  "  Faith  is  of  the  operation 
of  God"  (James  i.  16-18).  When  addressing  the  gracious  Author  of  his  faith, 
the  favoured  child  of  man  thus  speaks ;  "  Mine  ears  hast  Thou  opened  "  (John  x.  3). 
Which  we  have  looked  upon. — Contemplative  faith  : — The  apostle  is  not  weary  of 
describing  faith's  various  actings  in  the  soul.  And  it  is  for  our  edification  that  he 
sets  before  us  his  own  experience  in  this  matter.  It  is  in  order  that  such  of  us 
as  have  heard  and  seen  Jesus  may  still  fix  on  Him  the  eyes  of  our  under- 
standing with  an  intent  and  protracted  gaze.  And  can  one  view  of  "  the  King  in 
His  beauty"  satisfy  the  spiritual  eye?  No;  it  will  rest  with  a  mingled  feeling  of 
sorrow  and  joy  on  Him  whom  our  sins  have  pierced.  When  Jesus  has  been  seen 
as  "  full  of  grace  and  truth  " — "  fairer  than  the  children  of  men  " — the  believer  will 
surely  look  upon  Him  with  a  steady  contemplation  of  the  soul  and  fixed  devotion 
of  the  heart.      It  may  be  that  it  is  not  given  to  all  believers  to  attain  to  the  full 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

experience  of  the  beloved  disciple,  or  to  realise  all  He  felt  when  He  says  "  which 
we  have  looked  upon  "  ;  but  in  a  measure  the  same  contemplative  faith  is  proper 
to  all  the  saints.  And  without  it  there  could  be  no  due  assimilation  to  the  image 
of  Christ.  It  is  by  the  contemplation  of  Christ's  person  that  we  become  in  a 
measure  changed  into  His  likeness.  Christ  looked  upon  as  a  wondrous  spectacle, 
steadfastly,  deeply,  contemplatively.  Appropriate  to  John's  contemplative  cha- 
racter. (A.  R.  Fausset,  M.A.)  And  our  hands  have  handled  of  the  Word  of  life. 
■ — Appropriating  faith  : — Without  this  concluding  sentence  the  apostle's  descrip- 
tion of  the  experience  of  faith  had  been  imperfect ;  for  wherever  the  Lord  carries  on 
"  the  work  of  faith  with  power,"  there  is  on  the  believer's  part  an  appropriation  to 
himself  of  that  eternal  fife  which  he  has  heard,  seen,  and  looked  upon  by  faith. 
There  is,  as  John  expresses  it,  "  a  handling  "  of  the  Word  of  life.  And  probably 
the  expression,  "  which  our  hands  have  handled,"  denotes  some  sensible  experience 
of  our  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  a  consciousness  that  we  are  within  the 
bonds  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  so  that  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  can  say 
with  Paul,  "  He  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  "  Laying  hold  on  eternal 
^  life,"  and  apprehending  Christ  with  a  faith  which  says,  "  I  will  not  let  Thee  go, 
except  Thou  bless  me,"  we  are  blessed  indeed,  and  exclaim  in  the  language  of 
faith's  assurance,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  !  "  (Anon.)  The  realisation  of  faith : — 
Consider  what  impressions  we  gain  from  the  sense  of  touch.  It  is  touch  which, 
more  than  any  other  sense,  convinces  us  of  the  reality  of  matter.  What  you  see 
might  be  merely  a  phantom,  an  optical  illusion,  a  picture  painted  on  the  retina 
of  the  eye,  and  nothing  more  ;  but  if  you  go  up  to  the  thing  you  see,  and  touch  it, 
and  handle  it,  you  become  assured  of  its  existence,  you  know  that  it  is  substantial. 
Now  what  is  faith  ?  It  may  be  defined  as  the  faculty  by  which  we  realise  unseen 
things.  I  say  the  faculty  (not  by  which  we  conceive,  but)  by  which  we  realise  these 
things,  feel  them  to  have  a  body  and  a  substance.  To  imagine  the  truths  of  religion 
is  not  to  believe  them.  We  may  from  time  to  time  imagine  God  as  He  is  in 
heaven,  surrounded  by  myriads  of  glorious  angels — we  may  imagine  Christ  looking 
down  upon  us  from  God's  right  hand,  interceding  for  us,  calling  us  to  account  at 
the  last  day,  and  awarding  to  us  our  final  doom ;  but  the  mere  picturing  these 
things  to  ourselves  is  not  the  same  thing  as  believing  them  ;  the  believing  them  is 
the  having  such  a  conviction  of  their  reality  as  to  hve  under  their  influence,  and  to 
be  in  some  measure,  at  least,  governed  by  them.  In  short,  to  imagine  the  truths  of 
religion  is  like  surveying  things  by  the  eye ;  to  believe  in  the  truths  of  religion  is 
like  grasping  the  same  things  with  the  hand,  and  thus  proving  them  to  have 
substance  and  consistency.  (Dean  Goulburn.)  The  mystery  of  the  holy  Incar- 
nation : — There  is  not  in  Scripture  a  more  amazing  statement  than  this.  "  The 
Word  of  life  "  is  God  the  Son.  And  now  speaking  of  this  eternal  and  Divine 
Person,  the  evangelist  affirms  that  he  and  other  men  had  heard  Him,  had  seen 
Him  with  their  eyes,  had  looked  upon  Him,  and  had  handled  Him.  Well  may 
such  expressions  trouble  the  mind ;  they  are  so  real,  so  physical,  so  material,  so 
intense.  But  the  whole  force  of  the  gospel  is  in  them.  That  gospel  is  no 
philosophy,  no  human  invention ;  but  the  mystery  of  godliness  meeting  man's 
deepest  needs.  Among  those  needs  is  that  of  a  real  access  to  God  and  communion 
with  Him ;  not  by  way  of  thought  merely,  not  through  the  chill  avenue  of  the 
intellect,  but  as  body  with  body,  and  flesh  with  flesh ;  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear, 
and  the  seeing  of  the  eye ;  by  taste  and  touch,  by  emotion  and  sensation ;  in  short, 
through  the  entire  nature,  and  not  only  through  one  part  of  it.  This  is  the  need  of 
which  the  apostle  here  declares  that  it  has  been  satisfied :  and  in  the  fact  that  it  has 
thus  been  met  lies  the  power  of  the  gospel.  I  begin  with  this  proposition  :  that  in 
the  proportion  in  which  religious  belief  becomes  intellectualised  and  refined,  in  that 
same  proportion  does  it  lose  its  power  over  men  and  cease  to  control  the  practical 
order  of  their  lives.  This  will  best  appear  by  contrasting  two  types  of  religion : 
the  first  is  that  of  the  vulgar  idolater,  the  second  that  of  the  advanced  philosophical 
mind :  the  former  a  superstition,  the  latter  a  rationalistic  theory ;  but  of  the  two 
the  former  has  the  greater  power,  and,  as  a  religion,  is  better  than  the  latter.  1.  First, 
look  at  the  lowest  form  of  idolatry.  Here  is  a  man  who  makes  an  image  of  wood 
or  stone.  This  is  to  him  a  god.  The  man  has,  after  all,  what  lies  at  the  basis  of 
true  religion ;  the  faith  in  a  power,  outside  of  him,  above  him,  and  acting  on  him 
directly;  capable  of  being  approached,  prayed  to,  propitiated;  "a  very  present  help 
in  trouble."  He  thinks  the  power  to  be  somehow  in  a  carved  stone  or  a  bit  of 
painted  and  gilded  wood  :  but  at  least  he  believes  in  the  power  ;  he  has  a  religion ; 
and  it  is  practical  and  positive ;  it  all'ects  his  actions,  it  comes  home  to  him  in  his 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  9 

dark  life.  2.  Secondly,  let  us  take  another  type  of  religion.  It  is  that  of  the  man 
whose  belief  in  God  has  been  attenuated  into  a  mere  intellectual  assent  to  the 
proposition  that  there  is  something  somewhere  or  other,  to  which  he  is  willmg  to 
concede  the  sacred  name.  This  God  of  his  has  no  personality ;  it  cannot  hear  or 
see  or  feel,  it  cannot  be  heard  or  seen  or  felt ;  it  cannot  think,  it  cannot  love  ;  it 
has  neither  heart,  nor  will,  nor  memory  ;  no  relation  to  us  such  as  we  have  toward 
each  other.  This  is  the  opposite  extreme :  and  of  the  two  the  lower  is  better  than 
the  higher.  The  poor  heathen's  religion  is  still  a  religion.  It  is  a  link  (that  blind, 
gross,  material  notion)  between  him  and  a  higher  world,  whose  invisible  powers  he 
reveres,  dreads,  and  trusts  ;  it  has  the  elements  of  Christian  faith,  and  needs  only 
to  be  purified  by  grace.  But  the  notions  of  the  acute  philosophic  mind  have  in 
them  no  reality.  The  refinement  has  gone  too  far  ;  the  evaporation  has  produced 
a  thin  film,  without  light,  without  warmth,  without  value  to  any  human  being. 
Such  are  two  extremes,  whereof  every  age  of  the  world  thus  far  affords  illustrations. 
The  truth  is  in  neither  of  them :  it  lies  between.  Going  from  the  former  towards 
the  latter,  there  is  a  point  at  which  we  must  stop,  having  found  what  we  need.  We 
want  what  is  above  the  first,  but  stops  short  of  the  second ;  the  reality  of  the 
idolater's  faith  and  the  spirituality  of  that  of  the  philosopher ;  the  material  and 
the  immaterial  together ;  a  religion  meeting  man  as  a  body,  and  meeting  him  also 
as  a  spirit ;  helping  and  upholding  him  on  the  physical  and  spiritual  side  at  once. 
All  these  wants  are  met,  in  the  gospel  and  theology  of  the  Incarnation.  When 
the  Word  was  made  flesh  there  stood  before  men,  first,  what  could  not  have  been 
more  real  to  the  senses  than  it  was.  The  Son  of  God  took  flesh  ;  He  dwelt  among 
us  in  a  true  body ;  He  did  not  abhor  such  material  tabernacle.  In  that  flesh  dwelt 
He  who  is  a  spirit  and  whom  men  are  to  worship  in  spirit  and  truth  (John 
iv.  24).  God,  immaterial  and  spiritual,  without  parts,  or  passions,  was  manifested 
in  a  body  having  members,  in  a  humanity  like  unto  our  own,  sin  only  excepted,  in 
and  under  sensible  and  material  forms,  to  the  senses  first,  and  through  them  to  the 
spirit  and  heart  of  men.  This  is  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  which  whosoever 
looketh  upon  with  faith  and  love  shall  find  the  extreme  terms  in  the  problem  of 
religion  brought  together  and  harmonised  therein.  Thus  far  I  have  been  speaking 
mainly  of  the  days  when  Christ  was  here  on  earth.  All  that  began  so  strangely 
has  been  carried  on  no  less  strangely  among  us  since  He  went  away.  Still  is  the 
Lord  unto  us  very  Man  and  very  God  in  one.  Christianity,  rightly  understood, 
is  Christ ;  and  Christ  is  the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  still  God  and  man 
in  one.  Christianity,  therefore,  being  ultimately  resolvable  into  Him,  and  being,  in 
fact,  the  perpetual  and  abiding  manifestation  in  Him,  must  be  what  He  is,  Divine 
and  human  at  once.  It  must  also  have  two  sides,  two  elements,  the  physical  and 
the  spiritual,  the  material  and  the  immaterial,  the  body  akin  to  the  dust,  the  spirit 
out  of  heaven.  Neither  of  these  can  be  spared;  religion  without  the  latter  would 
be  a  gross  and  carnal  system ;  without  the  former  a  cold  abstraction.  The  Church 
of  Christ  is  a  visible  body ;  from  her  it  was  intended  that  a  visible  and  outward 
glory  should  shine  through  this  dark  world.  Let  us  understand  our  mission ;  we 
are  the  apostles,  the  representatives  of  a  religion  which  should  give  to  the  world  not 
only  the  grandest  ideas,  the  holiest  thoughts,  the  most  powerful  inspirations,  the 
deepest  truths,  and  the  most  practical  and  valuable  maxims,  but  also  the  most 
splendid  sights,  the  most  elevating  sounds,  and  aU  that  can  cheer  and  sustain  the 
heart  of  pilgrim  man.  It  is  Christianity,  on  its  physical  side,  which  has  given  us 
the  cathedrals  of  the  world,  grand  creeds  and  anthems  at  once  in  stone  and 
sculpture,  reflecting  the  spiritual  glory  of  the  Lord  in  their  solemn  magnificence, 
and  praising  Him  as  far  as  their  towers,  domes,  and  cross-topped  spires  can  be 
Been;  it  is  from  that  side  of  religion  that  men  have  drawn  the  fulness  of  that 
refreshment  which  a  simple  and  unsophisticated  humanity  craves.  It  boots  not  to 
Bay  by  way  of  objection  that  these  are  material  things  ;  they  are,  of  course.  Even 
BO  Christ  was  Man,  and  beautiful  in  His  humanity  to  the  eye  of  faith ;  and  these 
things  represent  the  Word  made  flesh,  the  human  Christ.  This  visible  side  of 
rehgion,  all  glory  and  magnificence,  was  intended  to  correspond  to  the  human  side 
in  Christ,  that  body  wherein  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead.  (Morgan 
Dix,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  For  the  life  was  manifested. — Christ  the  manifestation  of  the  eternal : — 
1.  We  may  think  of  Christ  as  the  manifestation  of  that  eternal  life  whence  has 
come  all  that  has  ever  been — all  creation,  aU  nature,  all  time,  all  history ;  of  that 
mysterious  life  which  ever  beats  at  the  heart  of  the  universe,  which  ever  feeds  its 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

unfailing  springs.  2.  Christ  is  the  manifestation  of  the  eternal,  in  the  extent  to 
which  He  has  brought  more  fully  to  light,  and  more  practically  established,  the 
spiritual  kingdom  of  likeness  to  God,  of  fellowship  with  God,  for  which  aU  hearts 
are  intended  and  required.  He  at  once  so  guaranteed  and  illustrated  its  existence 
and  meaning,  as  everywhere  to  lift  this  spiritual  kingdom  to  a  higher  plane.  He 
made  it  far  more  possible  and  certain  than  any  other  teacher  or  messenger  from 
God  had  ever  desired  or  conceived.  He  brought  it  within  the  reach  not  alone  of 
the  chiefest  and  the  best,  but  also  of  the  commonest  and  the  lowest.  He  showed 
it  to  be  the  proper  life  of  every  man — showed  that  purity,  righteousness,  justice, 
mercy,  patience,  love,  are  as  essential  and  necessary  to  every  man  as  they  are  to 
God  ;  that  the  true  and  blessed  life  for  man  means  supremely  this — after  His  own 
example,  fellowship  with  God,  likeness  to  God,  sonship  to  God.  3.  Christ  manifested 
the  eternal,  not  alone  by  the  transcendent  excellence  and  spiritual  elevation  of  His 
life,  but  also  by  the  power  which  He  displayed  of  showing  the  inherent  oneness  of 
material  and  moral  forces  —  in  other  words,  of  proving  the  rightful  control  of 
spirit  over  matter.  What  to  us  may  look  like  signs  or  wonders  or  unusual 
phenomena,  to  Him  were  but  natural  facts,  natural  revelations  or  efforts  of  the 
deep,  underlying  oneness  between  things  outward  and  inward,  between  all  nature 
and  life.  4.  Christ  manifested  the  eternal  by  revealing  to  us  the  after-life,  the 
future  world.  Of  the  two,  that  world  seemed  to  Him  even  more  real  than  this. 
He  spoke  of  it  with  even  the  same  deep  intensity,  and  yet  with  the  same  calm,  self- 
evident  truthfulness  as  He  did  of  the  existence,  and  name,  and  character,  and 
purpose  of  His  Father.  To  Him  the  future  world,  the  immortal  life,  were  but  the 
natural  outcome  of  the  existence  and  kingdom  and  purpose  of  His  Father.  To 
Him,  because  God  is,  and  ever  will  be,  man,  His  child,  will  continue  to  be  as 
living,  as  personal  as  He.  Jesus,  knowing  Himself  to  be  the  outcome,  the  evidence, 
the  gift  of  all  spu-itual  and  eternal  realities,  could  look  beyond  the  seeming  defeat  and 
dread  suffering  of  His  last  days,  beyond  the  bitterness  and  sting  of  His  own  death, 
beyond  the  gloom  and  corruption  of  His  own  grave,  to  an  existence  for  Himself 
that  should  be  as  changeless  and  lasting  as  the  Father's,  whose  presence  and  truth 
and  love  He  declared ;  nay,  more — He  could  look  beyond  all  the  failure,  pain,  and 
death  with  which  any  of  His  brothers  or  sisters  on  earth  should  have  to  struggle,  or 
to  which  they  should  succumb,  and  could  give  to  them  the  offer,  the  assurance,  the 
possession  of  a  life  as  spiritual,  as  blessed,  as  immortal  as  His  own.  (J.  T.  Stannard.) 
The  only  life  worth  living ; — What  is  the  conception  that  St.  John  had  of  the 
Incarnation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  In  his  gospel  he  looks  upon  it  as  the 
manifestation  of  God :  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us  (and  we 
beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father),  full  of  grace  and 
truth."  But  in  the  Epistle  he  looks  upon  the  Incarnation  as  the  manifestation  of 
life.  He  here  declares  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it,  and  bear 
witness,  and  show  unto  you  that  eternal  life  which  was  toward  the  Father — for  so  it 
literally  should  be — which  was  Fatherward  and  was  manifested  unto  us.  Now, 
it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  a  young  man  setting  out  in  life  to  set  some  high  ideal 
before  him.  You  can  understand  a  young  man  in  business  setting  before  him  the 
ideal  of  a  George  Peabody  or  a  George  Moore.  It  is  not  so  much  the  success  the 
man  has  achieved,  as  the  way  in  which  he  spent  the  well-earned  wealth,  which 
fires  the  ambition  of  the  youth.  But  what  was  St.  John's  ideal?  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  There  was  the  life.  The  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it.  It  is  a 
question  often  asked.  Is  life  worth  living  ?  And  that  depends  very  much  upon  the 
kind  of  life  you  mean  to  live.  If  you  mean  a  life  of  selfishness  and  self -pleasing, 
the  answer  must  be  distinctly.  No  1  Or  a  life  of  worldliness  or  luxury  ?  No  !  A 
life  of  avarice  and  covetousness  ?  No !  For  these  kinds  of  lives  are  very  disappointing 
now,  and  the  issue  of  them  hereafter  is  terrible  to  contemplate.  If  you  think  o£ 
life  simjjly  as  amassing  wealth,  if  you  think  of  life  simply  as  acquiring  esteem,  as 
winning  pleasure,  you  have  not  seen  life.  But  the  life  has  been  manifested,  the 
only  life  worth  living,  and  he  points  you  back  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Now, 
what  were  the  characteristics  of  the  life  which  was  thus  manifested  to  us  ?  It  was 
a  life  Fatherward,  that  was  the  life,  that  eternal  life,  which  was  toward  the  Father. 
There  are  some  who  live  a  life  towards  the  world  ;  their  whole  inspiration  is  drawn 
from  the  world  ;  their  whole  pleasure  is  found  in  the  world.  You  have  a  very 
striking  picture  of  such  a  life  in  Ezek.  xvii.  6,  where  Israel  is  likened  unto  a 
spreading  vine  of  low  stature,  whose  branches  turned  toward  him.  Towards 
whom  ?  Toward  the  great  Assyrian  power,  and  so  it  became  a  vine,  and  brought 
forth  branches  and  shot  forth  sprigs.     Instead  of  seeking  all  their  strength  from 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  11 

Grod,  they  turned  their  roots  towards  Assyria,  and  tried  to  draw  strength  from 
Assyria.  Now,  there  are  a  great  number  of  people  hving  who  have  these  earth- 
ward lives,  their  roots  turning  towards  the  world — drawing  in  all  their  strength,  all 
their  sustenance,  all  their  pleasure  from  the  world.  St.  John  says :  Life  which  was 
manifested  was  not  towards  the  world,  it  was  towards  the  Father.  This  implies 
absolute  obedience.  The  work  that  my  Father  hath  given  me  to  do,  shall  I  not  do 
it  ?  This  life  implies  perfect  trust.  "  Your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  what  things 
ye  have  need  of  before  ye  ask  Him."  This  life  implies  perfect,  complete  resigna- 
tion. "Father,  not  My  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  This  life  implies  the  most 
blessed  intercourse.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  go  out  on  the  mountain-side 
and  continue  all  night  in  prayer  to  God.  Why  ?  Because  God  was  His  Father. 
This  life  Fatherward  means  also  love  to  the  brethren,  for  if  God  is  our  Father  we 
must  love  one  another.  It  is  not  our  Father's  will  that  one  of  these  little  ones 
should  perish.  This  life  Fatherward  implies  ambition  for  the  Father's  glory.  We 
must  let  our  light  so  shine  before  men  that  they  may  glorify  our  Father  which  is  in 
heaven.  And  this  life  Fatherward  contains  the  blessed  hope  of  a  reunion.  I  go 
to  My  Father.  "  If  ye  loved  Me  ye  would  rejoice,  because  I  said,  I  go  unto  the 
Father."  So  you  see  how,  during  all  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  life,  it  was  a  lite  Father- 
wards.  And  St.  John  says,  We  have  seen  it.  Oh,  it  is  a  different  life  to  what  we 
see  in  the  world.  If  you  look  at  a  man  living  towards  the  world,  what  a  life  of  fear 
it  is,  what  a  life  of  terror :  he  is  afraid  lest  he  should  break  the  customs  of  the 
world ;  he  is  afraid  lest  he  should  endure  obloquy  from  the  world.  A  life  which  is 
lived  towards  the  world  is  always  a  slavish  life,  because  it  must  be  in  entire  accord 
with  the  dictates  of  worldly  policy.  But  a  life  towards  the  Father  is  without  fear. 
"  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."  Now  St.  John  says,  "  We  have  seen  that  life ;  we 
walked  with  Him  three  and  a  half  years,  and  we  saw  all  through  His  life  this  was 
His  great  characteristic — What  would  my  Father  wish  Me  to  do  ?  And  he  goes  on 
to  say.  Not  only  did  we  see  it,  but  we  bear  witness  of  it — that  is  to  say,  We  have 
tried  to  follow  it  ourselves ;  and  now  we  want  to  tell  you  that  there  is  no  life  worth 
living  compared  with  this ;  that  we  can  bear  witness  to  it,  and  have  learned  some- 
thing of  what  it  means.  More  than  that,  we  come  to  tell  you  about  it,  because 
we  want  you  to  have  fellowship  in  this  life.  We  have  seen  this  life  towards  the 
Father ;  we  have  tasted  it,  and  can  bear  witness  that  it  is  the  sweetest  hfe,  that  it  is 
the  purest  life,  that  it  is  the  life  most  worth  living,  and  now  we  want  you  to  have 
fellowship  with  us.  And  one  thing  more  he  goes  on  to  say  :  "And  this  is  eternal 
life."  It  is  life  not  only  on  the  earth  here,  but  in  heaven.  {E.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.) 
Christ  the  life  : — Christ,  God-man,  Mediator,  is  the  life,  that  eternal  life,  in  respect 
of  His  threefold  offices  of  king,  priest,  and  prophet.  As  prophet.  He  is  the  life  by 
way  of  revelation,  discovering  this  eternal  life  to  us ;  as  priest,  by  way  of  tmpetra- 
tion ;  securing  this  eternal  life  for  us  ;  as  king,  by  way  of  collation,  conferring  this 
eternal  life  on  us.  And  as  the  fulness  of  water  is  dispensed  by  the  sea  to  the  earth, 
and  the  fulness  of  light  is  communicated  by  the  sun  to  the  air,  and  the  fulness  of 
com  was  divided  by  Joseph  among  the  people,  so  the  fulness  of  grace  and  glory,  of 
life,  even  eternal  life,  is  conveyed  by  Christ  to  His  Church,  and  therefore  very  justly 
doth  this  character  belong  to  Him.  And  now,  what  should  this  consideration  teach 
us  ?  1.  To  bewail  our  sad  condition  whilst  we  are  without  Christ  ;  for  if  Christ  be 
the  life,  all  that  know  Him  not,  or  believe  not  in  Him,  must  needs  be  in  a  state  of 
death  and  damnation.  2.  To  seek  after  this  life,  because  it  is  eternal,  and  to  seek 
it  by  union  with  Christ,  who  is  the  life.  3.  To  set  an  high  value  upon  Christ,  and 
give  Him  the  glory  of  this  great  mercy,  even  eternal  life.  (N.  Hardy,  D.D.) 
The  incarnate  life : — I.  The  person  spoken  of,  the  titles  given  Him,  and  what 
IS  HERE  said  concerning  Him.  For  the  life  was  manifested — that  Eternal  Life 
which  was  with  the  Father.  I.  It  is  Christ,  God-Man,  is  the  Person  spoken  of. 
2.  I  will  next  glance  at  the  titles  given  Him  in  the  words  before  us.  He  is 
entitled,  "  The  Life."  He  is  so  most  emphatically.  He  is  expressly  called  the 
living  God  by  the  apostle  (Heb.  iii.  12).  He  is  life  essentially,  He  is  life  communi- 
catively. He  is  life  spiritually.  He  is  life  eternally.  He  is  the  life  of  the  whole 
creation,  the  life  of  grace,  the  life  of  glory.  And  He  is  all  this  as  God-Man,  the 
Lord,  the  Creator,  the  Proprietor  of  every  creature.  He  is  "  Eternal  Life."  His 
life  never  decays.  He  lives  in  all  generations,  and  His  Name  and  memorial  are 
from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  Our  spiritual  and  eternal  life  cometh  from  Christ 
only.  He  is  the  fountain  of  it.  The  knowledge  of  Him  is  our  eternal  life. 
Communion  with  Him  is  the  means  whereby  the  blessedness  contained  in  the 
knowledge  of  Him  is  imparted  to  us  and  enjoyed  by  us.     II.  The  apostles'  having 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

SEEN  THIS  GREAT  SIGHT,  GoD-iNCARNATE.  "  We  have  Seen  it,"  or  rather  Him.  We 
have  seen  Him  as  manifested  in  the  flesh.  We  have  seen  and  bear  witness,  and 
show  the  truth  of  this  in  our  ministry  of  the  gospel  unto  you.  To  have  seen 
Christ,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  must  have  been  a  great  sight.  To  retain  the 
true  sense  and  apprehension  of  what  they  saw  in  Him,  and  heard  and  received 
from  Him,  must  have  been  to  them  life  everlasting.  Their  whole  ministry  was 
filled  up  with  giving  a  simple  narrative  of  the  Person,  Incarnation,  Life  and 
Actions,  Crucifixion,  Death,  Burial,  Kesurrection,  Ascension  and  Exaltation  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  This  they  were  called  to  bear  their  immediate  testimony  unto.  This 
forms  the  foundation  of  the  four  Gospels.  And  it  is  by  the  spiritual  apprehension 
of  Christ,  as  set  forth  therein,  we  live.  Nor  must  the  history,  nor  the  mystery  of 
Christ  be  rejected,  nor  neglected  by  us.  The  one  being  the  foundation  of  the 
other,  therefore  the  one  must  be  of  as  great  importance  as  the  other.     IH.  What 

THE  APOSTLES  DECLARED  OF  HiM,  WHICH  WAS  WHAT  THEY  KNEW,  FROM  THE  DiVINB 
KNOWLEDGE    WHICH    THEY   HAD    OF    HiM,    THAT    He    WAS     THAT     EtERNAL     LiFE     WHICH 

WAS  WITH  THE  FATHER.  TMs  must  be  the  fruit  of  Divine  revelation  and  inspira- 
ration  :  by  which,  their  minds  being  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  were,  under 
His  further  illumination,  enabled  to  receive  true  apprehensions  of  the  Person, 
Incarnation,  Mission  and  Commission  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  into  their  minds. 
They  found  real  blessedness  in  the  subject — in  declaring  the  same,  in  bearing  their 
witness  and  testimony  to  the  truth  thereof,  in  showing  forth  the  eternity,  the 
dignity,  the  personal  glories  of  their,  and  our.  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     IV.  This  was  a 

VERY    PARTICULAR   PART    OF     THE     WITNESS     WHICH    THEY     BARE     OF     HeVI THAT    Hb 

WAS  MANIFESTED  UNTO  THEM.  A  Very  singular  favour.  Such  as  I  conceive  we 
can  form  no  adequate  ideas  of.  How  should  we  ?  That  age  is  past.  It  will 
never  return.  All  the  Lord's  ministers  and  people,  and  that  to  the  end  of  time, 
will  be  witnesses  for  Him,  and  show  forth  the  truths  of  His  gospel,  some  in 
a  greater,  some  in  a  less  measure  and  degree,  yet  not  in  the  same  way,  nor  to 
answer  the  same  end,  for  which  the  apostles  were  appointed.  (S.  E.  Pierce.) 
The  manifested  life : — This  chapter,  this  verse,  concerning  the  life  which  was  mani- 
fested, is  the  record  of  St.  John's  whole  Christian  experience  given  in  the  last  years 
of  his  life  ;  it  is  St.  John's  full  thought,  his  mature,  final  testimony  to  the  Christ. 
Think  of  the  phrase  which  he  uses — the  word  of  life.  A  word  is  a  means  of  ex- 
pression, a  way  of  disclosing  some  secret  thought,  a  manifestation  of  mind  to  mind. 
The  word  of  life,  then,  is  the  expression  of  life,  the  means  of  making  the  life  known, 
the  revelation  of  its  nature.  And  the  word,  or  revealing,  of  life,  of  which  John 
speaks,  was  not  a  writing  from  heaven,  not  even  a  voice  becoming  articulate  from 
out  the  skies ;  it  was  the  life  manifested  in  a  person,  it  was  the  personal  Word  of 
God ;  it  was  the  eternal  life,  the  life  with  the  Father,  making  itself  known  in  the 
person  of  the  Lord.  The  life — what  is  it  ?  What  is  its  nature  ?  What  has  it  been 
from  the  beginning?  We  have  seen  and  heard,  says  John,  what  it  is,  what  it  has 
been  from  the  beginning — it  is  such  a  life  as  we  have  seen  Christ  live ;  He  is  its 
spoken  word,  He  is  its  manifestation ;  we  declare  unto  you  that  which  we  have 
seen  and  heard.  So  much,  then,  in  general  as  to  what  this  text  meant  to  John 
himself.  Following  the  leading  of  St.  John's  experience  of  the  Christ  in  this 
passage,  let  us  think,  in  the  second  place,  what  it  may  mean  to  us.  John  saw  the 
life  in  its  personal  manifestation  in  the  Christ ;  we  see  it  in  its  increasing  spiritual 
attraction  and  universal  beneficence.  Let  us  think  more  closely  what  this  eternal 
life,  which  was  with  the  Father,  may  be,  the  life  from  the  beginning,  concerning 
the  personal  word  of  which  St.  John  bore  witness,  and  of  whose  continuous  and  in- 
creasing power  the  world,  becoming  Christian,  witnesses.  The  word  "  life,"  which 
St.  John  uses,  is  still,  even  in  its  lowest  physical  manifestations,  the  unexplained 
word  of  our  science.  Our  best  definitions  of  life  are  but  learned  words  thrown  out 
into  the  darkness.  Our  clearest-cut  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  living  matter  run 
out  into  the  indefinite  and  the  unimaginable.  The  life  that  awakens  from  the 
wintry  sleep,  that  gives  colour  and  grace  to  the  tops  of  the  elm-trees  which  we  have 
seen  for  months  as  dark  lines  etched  against  the  sky ;  the  life  that  turns  the  prose 
of  the  dull  landscape  into  the  poetry  of  fresh  meadows  and  waving  forests  ;  the  life 
with  which  this  earth  has  been  for  ages  richly  endowed,  and  whose  abundant 
energy  fails  not  nor  grows  dim  with  the  centuries  ;  it  is  a  manifestation  of  energy 
which  even  more  directly  than  other  forms  of  force  seems  to  be  the  touch  thrUling 
through  nature  of  the  living  God  !  And  this  life  which  we  behold  manifested  in 
the  world  around  us,  we  know  more  intimately  in  our  own  self-consciousness.  For 
this  is  the  additional  marvel,  this  the  wonder  of  it  all-  -that  the  life  which  was  from 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  13 

the  beginning,  which  stirs  in  the  least  portion  of  living  matter,  at  last  feels  itself 
throbbing  in  our  veins,  and  grows  conscious  of  its  own  power  in  our  wills,  and  rises 
to  its  perfection  of  spirit  in  the  love  of  our  human  hearts.  And  beyond  our 
knowledge  of  personal  life  in  us,  according  to  the  witness  of  the  apostles,  and  all 
the  world's  subsequent  spiritual  verification  of  the  truth  of  their  gospel,  another 
even  higher,  richer  manifestation  has  been  given  of  the  life  which  was  from  the 
beginning.  The  life,  the  eternal  life,  which  was  with  the  Father,  has  summed  up 
all  its  revelations,  completed  its  ages  of  working,  carried  its  whole  manifestation  to 
utmost  perfection  in  the  word  of  Ufe,  in  Him  who  at  last,  standing  upon  this  earth, 
could  say,  "  I  am  the  life  of  the  world !  "  "I  am  come  that  ye  might  have  life,  and 
that  ye  might  have  it  abundantly."  Thus  the  world  leads  at  last  to  the  perfect 
man,  and  the  perfect  man  is  God's  explanation  of  the  world.  Thus  the  manifested 
life  of  the  world  reveals  its  eternal  purpose  and  end.  It  is  from  the  Father,  and  it 
goes  to  the  Father.  But  from  these  thoughts  which  carry  us  far  and  deep,  let  me 
turn  to  some  nearer,  perhaps  plainer,  applications  of  our  Scripture.  One  imme- 
diately following  is  this  :  it  is  of  the  utmost  practical  importance  for  us  to  be  im- 
pressed with  the  fact  that  the  life  which  we  may  live  is  the  sacred  thing.  Death  is 
not  the  supreme  power,  but  the  life  is.  Death  is  not  the  end,  but  the  new  beginning 
of  life.  It  was  not  possible  for  the  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  Henceforth  life 
shall  be  strong  and  pure,  sacred  as  the  true  word  of  the  living  God,  and  full  of 
promise  as  of  love,  because  Christ  has  shown  how  life  may  be  lived  and  death  over- 
come ;  and  Christ  is  risen  as  the  firstfruits  of  the  resurrection.  The  one  further 
application  which  I  would  now  make  of  this  most  fruitful  subject  is  this :  The  one 
single  object  of  all  the  Scriptures,  of  the  whole  gospel,  of  all  true  preaching  of  it, 
is  to  bring  us  into  fellowship  with  the  life,  even  that  life  which  from  the  beginning 
was  with  the  Father,  and  which  has  been  lived  perfectly  in  the  Son,  and  which  is 
glorified  in  Him  and  all  who  live  with  Him.  (N.  Smyth,  D.D.)  The  manifested 
life : — "  Like  draws  to  like,"  is  man's  maxim,  and  man's  principle  of  action.  But 
such  is  not  the  heavenly  law.  The  principle  of  Divine  action,  the  regulating  power 
of  the  infinite  heart  above,  is  the  reverse  of  this.  The  law  of  grace  is  what  man 
would  call  the  law  of  unfitness,  and  unworthiness,  and  unlikeness.  Well  for  us 
that  it  is  so !  What  would  have  been  our  hope  had  it  been  otherwise  ?  In  God's 
dealings  with  man,  it  is  the  unlike  that  we  see  uniting.  What  more  dissimilar  than 
heaven  and  earth  ?  yet  they  have  come  together  !  The  life  has  been  manifested ! 
This  is  our  gospel.  It  is  not  "  the  life  is,"  but  "  the  life  "  has  come  forth  from  its 
eternal  mystery.  The  life  has  been  manifested  !  What  has  given  it  opportunity  to 
come  forth  ?  Death  !  It  is  not  Ufe  that  has  attracted  life,  nor  light  that  has  given 
occasion  for  the  outshining  of  light.  Thus  God,  the  God  of  all  grace,  revealed  to  us 
the  breadth  and  length  of  His  infinite  love.  As  it  needs  darkness  to  bring  out  the 
glory  of  the  starry  heavens,  so  it  needed  death  to  show  forth  the  life — -life  such  as  had 
not  been  possessed  before,  nor  could  be,  by  man  unfallen,  or  upon  a  sinless  earth. 
Hence  the  deep  significance  of  the  Lord's  words  (John  x.  10).  Thus  and  then  the 
life  entered !  Not  like  a  monarch,  to  take  possession  of  a  fitting  palace ;  but  like  a 
physician,  to  take  possession  of  an  hospital ;  like  spring,  coming  to  take  possession 
of  a  wintry  earth ;  like  dayspring,  coming  to  take  possession  of  the  darkened  skies. 
What  an  entrance !  Not  invited  by  kindred  life,  still  hngering  among  men ;  but 
uninvited,  nay,  repelled.  It  is  the  absence  of  life  here  that  is  the  cause  of  its  mani- 
festation from  on  high.  The  life  was  manifested  !  And  we  have  seen  it !  Life  in 
the  realms  of  the  dead ;  light  in  the  land  of  darkness ;  God  manifest  in  flesh :  this 
is  what  our  eyes  have  seen.  Yes ;  at  the  cradle,  and  the  cross,  and  the  tomb,  the 
life  has  been  manifested  !  Blessed  manifestation  for  us,  the  dead  in  sin !  The  life 
has  come ;  and  because  He  Uveth,  we  shall  live  also ;  for  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
life.  Surely  there  is  no  lack  of  life  for  us.  But  what  if  it  be  rejected  and  despised  ? 
Here  is  life  for  you ;  but  is  it  in  you  ?  Here  is  life  come  down  to  earth ;  but  has  it 
quickened  you  ?  Life  died  that  death  might  live.  Immortality  went  down  into  the 
tomb,  to  bring  up  thence  for  us  immortality  and  incorruption.  Life  for  the  dead  ! 
This  is  our  message  to  the  sons  of  men.  This  is  our  gospel ;  a  gospel  for  the  dead, 
not  for  the  living.  It  is  the  gospel  of  the  "manifested  life."  You  say,  perhaps, 
that  it  is  just  your  state  of  death  that  makes  this  no  gospel  to  you.  Your  conscious- 
ness of  death  leads  to  despondency.  Ah !  were  you  not  so  dead  you  would  not  need 
the  life,  and  would  present  fewer  attractions,  as  well  as  fewer  necessities,  to  the 
living  One ;  there  would  be  less  in  you  to  call  out  the  hfe.  The  danger  lies,  not  in 
your  being  too  dead,  but  in  your  not  knowing  how  thoroughly  dead  you  are.  So 
long  as  there  is  the  unconsciousness  of  death,  there  is  a  barrier,  a  non-conducting 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i.  . 

medium  between  you  and  the  Life.  The  Holy  Spirit,  in  revealing  to  you  your  true 
condition  of  utter  death,  is  throwing  down  that  barrier,  and  substituting  a  conduct- 
ing for  a  non-conducting  medium.  "  This  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  ua 
eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son."  His  Son  is  the  "  manifested  life,"  the 
••resurrection  and  the  life,"  and  "he  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  What  have  you 
found  in  it  ?  Have  you  read  in  it  the  love  of  God  ?  Have  you  obtained  from  it  the 
life  of  your  soul  ?  But  the  manifestation  of  this  Life  is  not  yet  over.  The  Life  has, 
as  it  were,  retired  for  a  season,  and  gone  within  the  veil ;  but  this  same  Jesus,  who 
came  the  first  time,  as  the  Life,  shall  come,  as  such,  the  second  time  also  ;  and  that 
day  of  His  manifestation  shall  be  the  day  of  ours  as  well.  The  "  resurrection  unto 
life  "  shall  be  the  completion  of  the  great  manifestation.  As  His  first  coming  waa 
its  alpha,  or  beginning,  so  shall  His  second  coming  be  its  omega,  or  end.  He  comes 
to  give  His  Church  the  full  benefit  of  the  manifested  life.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
The  manifested  life  to  be  observed  : — I  know  a  great  scientific  man  whose  greatest 
cause  of  regret  is  that  on  one  occasion  there  were  brought  under  his  observation 
certain  phenomena  of  human  disease  which  might  have  enabled  him  to  anticipate  a 
great  discovery  which  was  made  in  Germany  in  late  years.  He  had  the  very  facta 
under  his  eye,  and  he  did  not  notice  them.  What  would  be  our  feeling  if  we  should 
find  that  in  a  region  more  important  than  any  with  which  science  is  concerned,  we 
had  had  under  our  eye,  in  the  intelligible  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  a  disclosure  of 
the  character  of  God,  and  from  mere  lack  of  moral  observation,  had  refused  to  take 
notice  of  it?  {Canon  Gore,  M.A.)  The  eternal  life  manifested  : — His unlikeness 
to  this  world  implies  His  likeness  to  another  world.  One  evening  you  find  among 
the  reeds  of  your  lake  an  unknown  bird,  whose  broad  breast  and  powerful  pinions 
are  not  meant  for  this  inland  scene.  It  is  resting  midway  between  two  oceans,  and 
by  to-morrow  will  have  gone.  Does  not  that  bird  prove  the  ocean  it  left?  does  it  not 
prove  the  ocean  whither  it  has  flown  ?  "  Jesus,  knowing  .  .  .  that  He  was  come 
from  God,  and  went  to  God,"  is  the  revelation  and  confirmation  of  ageless  life. 
{John  Watson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you. — The  gospel 
ministry ;  its  spirituality,  motive,  and  object: — Our  text  presents  a  work,  a  motive, 
and  an  object.  A  work  to  declare  Christ  unto  you ;  a  motive,  to  become  your 
spiritual  benefactors ;  an  object,  to  bring  you  into  fellowship  with  us,  "  and  truly 
our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ."    I.  A  peksonal 

AND    EXPBRIMENTAIi   KNOWLEDGE     OF     ChEIST     EMINENTLY     FITS     US     TO     DECLARE     HiM 

UNTO  Tou.  This  is  our  work,  and  for  this  experimental  qualification  there  can  be 
no  substitute ;  neither  training,  learning,  nor  natural  talent  may  be  put  in  its  place. 
Spiritual  knowledge  and  experience  is  a  mighty  power  here  ;  without  it,  all  ia 
feeble.  1.  It  implies  a  revelation  of  Christ.  The  age  for  personal  manifestation  ia 
passed  away ;  this  book  supplies  its  place.  This  is  the  Christ  we  declare — a  Divine 
Christ,  in  whom  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  2.  It  implies  resil 
and  experimental  knowledge  of  Christ.  We  have  seen  Him,  not  with  mortal  eyes, 
but  by  spiritual  sight,  seen  Him  through  an  adapted  medium,  as  set  forth  in  revela- 
tion, as  apprehended  by  faith  ;  seen  Him  so  as  to  know,  love,  and  trust  in  Him.  3. 
It  implies  appreciation.  "  We  have  handled  Him,"  heard  with  our  own  ears,  seen 
with  our  own  eyes ;  handled  with  our  own  hands,  and  tested  with  our  senses,  and 
now  we  appreciate  Him  as  Saviour.  He  has  saved  us — we  feel  it,  we  know  it.  As 
such,  we  present  Him  to  you  ;  we  appreciate  Him  as  able  to  do  aU  things  for  us : 
what  He  has  done,  guarantees  ability  to  do  all  that  is  needful.  Being  justified  by 
His  death,  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life.      H.  In  declaring  Christ  to  you,  we  abb 

MOVED  BY  A  SACRED  AND  DiVINE  FEELING  OF  BENEVOLENCE.       1.    It  iS  loVC.       The  loVC  Of 

Christ  constrains  us.  That  love  is  without  parallel  or  comparison  ;  it  was  love  to 
enemies,  and  manifested  in  intense  suffering.  I  enjoy  the  benefit  of  it ;  I  want  you 
to  do  the  same.  2.  To  this  we  are  moved  by  sympathy.  We  know  your  state  ;  we 
see  you  strangers  and  aliens  from  God ;  we  know  your  woes,  disappointments,  and 
dissatisfaction  ;  yes,  and  we  know  your  danger — we  were  once  in  the  same  state. 
We  have  found  great  spoil,  we  want  you  to  come  and  share  it ;  we  have  found  great 
joy,  we  want  you  to  come  and  be  glad  with  us  ;  we  have  found  Christ,  we  want  you 
to  find  Him  too  :  hence  we  declare  Him  unto  you.  3.  In  this  we  are  moved  by  a 
sense  of  duty.  Thus  it  becomes  a  motive  here.  Every  servant  has  work  to  do. 
Christ  bids  us  preach,  we  niiiy  not  be  silent;  the  Church  requires  the  gospel, and 
we  must  preach  it ;  the  world  is  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge,  and  we  must  teach 
it.     A  field,  waste  and  desolate,  lays  at  our  feet — we  must  cultivate  it ;  souls  are  in 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  15 

danger,  and  we  must  not  parley  nor  trifle.     III.  In  a  spiritual  participation  and 

FELLOWSHIP  WITH    THE    FaTHER   AKD   THE    SoN,    THE    WANTS    OF    MAN    ARE  MET.       1.    We 

have  fellowship  with  Christ  by  faith ;  this  meets  our  necessity  as  sinners.  2.  We 
have  fellowship  in  labour  and  honour ;  this  meets  our  wants  as  probationers.  3. 
We  have  fellowship  in  blessedness ;  and  this  meets  our  necessities  as  sufferers.  4. 
We  have  fellowship  in  the  things  of  eternity ;  and  this  meets  our  necessity  as 
immortal  beings.  (C.  Talbot.)  The  testimony  of  the  beloved  disciple  to  the  person 
and  offices  of  Christ : — I.  The  pre-eminent  subject  of  the  apostle's  instructions. 
In  the  expression,  "  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard,"  he  briefly  recapitulates 
that  which  he  had  more  fully  described  in  the  first  verse.  His  subject,  then,  was 
Christ,  the  Word  of  life.  He  preached  the  eternal  Word  as  being  absolutely  and  in 
Himself  the  possessor  of  life.      11.  The  purpose  and  object  which  he  had  in  view 

WHEN  HE  THUS  DECLARED  THE  NATURE    AND    OFFICES    OF  ChRIST.        His  desire  WaS  that 

the  privilege  which  he  himself  enjoyed  might  be  shared  by  all  the  people  of  God. 
"  That  which  we  have  seen,"  &c.  1.  St.  John  was  not  only  an  apostle,  but  a 
pecuharly  distinguished  and  favoured  apostle  ;  yet  this  exalted  oflice  did  not  induce 
him  to  lose  sight  of  that  which  he  was  in  common  with  all  the  other  children  of 
God.  (1)  By  declaring  Christ  he  sought  to  promote  a  fellowship  with  himself  in 
judgment.  (2)  The  apostle  also  desired  by  his  instructions  to  promote,  on  the  part 
of  those  whom  he  addressed,  a  fellowship  with  himself,  and  with  other  believers  in 
affection.  (3)  The  apostle  moreover  desired  the  fellowship  of  others  with  himself 
in  the  enjoyment  of  Christian  privileges.  2.  But  the  beloved  apostle  states  the 
reason  for  which  he  desired  that  others  might  be  joined  in  fellowship  with  himself. 
It  was  because  fellowship  with  him  involved  that  highest  of  blessings — fellowship 
with  God.  (1)  It  implies  a  reciprocity  of  mutual  affection  and  love.  (2)  This 
sacred  and  mysterious  fellowship  comprehends  also  a  reciprocity  of  mutual  interests. 
(3)  The  fellowship  of  believers  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  consists,  moreover,  in 
the  freedom  of  mutual  intercourse.  HI.  The  subject  mat  suggest  several  prac- 
tical TOPICS  OF  REFLECTION.  1.  If  wc  are  partakers  of  this  sacred  fellowship,  we 
need  not  regret  the  absence  of  those  opportunities  of  seeing  and  hearing  the  in- 
carnate Saviour  which  St.  John  enjoyed.  2.  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  this 
fellowship  must  be  a  personal  and  individual  experience.  3.  It  is  further  worthy  of 
remark,  that  this  fellowship  has  an  assimilating  effect  on  those  who  partake  of  it. 
4.  Nor  must  the  happiness  of  this  Divine  fellowship  be  forgotten.  Trials  may 
depress  the  natural  spirits ;  but  the  soul  which  maintains  fellowship  with  the  Father 
and  the  Son  shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  that  joy  shall  be  its  strength.  (J.  Hill,  M.A.) 
God's  message  to  be  declared : — We  ought  to  speak  out  the  messages  given  us  for 
others.  God  puts  something  into  the  heart  of  every  one  of  His  creatures  that  He 
would  have  that  creature  utter.  He  puts  into  the  star  a  message  of  hght,  and  you 
look  up  into  the  heavens  at  night,  and  it  tells  you  its  secret.  Who  knows  what  a 
benediction  a  star  may  be  to  the  weary  traveller  who  finds  his  way  by  it,  or  to  the 
sick  man  lying  by  his  window,  and  in  his  sleeplessness  looking  up  at  the  glimmering 
point  of  light  in  the  cahn,  deep  heavens  ?  God  gives  to  a  flower  a  mission  of  beauty 
and  sweetness,  and  for  its  brief  life  it  tells  out  its  message  to  aU  who  can  read  it. 
Wordsworth  says : 

"  To  me  the  meanest  flower  that  blooms  can  give 
Thoughts  that  do  often  lie  too  deep  for  tears." 

Especially  does  God  give  to  every  human  soul  a  message  to  deliver.  .  .  .  Each 
Iriend  of  Christ  living  close  to  Him  learns  something  from  Him  and  of  Him  which 
no  one  has  learned  before,  which  he  is  to  f orthtell  to  the  world.  (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.) 
An  influential  testimony  : — Before  the  AustraUan  goldfields  were  opened  a  party  of 
experts  were  sent  to  explore  the  district.  They  made  their  survey,  and  sent  in  their 
report  that  gold  would  be  found.  But  somehow  nobody  was  greatly  interested. 
Some  time  after  some  lads  came  from  the  Bush  to  Melbourne  with  some  lumps 
of  yellow  ore  in  their  pockets.  "  Why,"  said  those  to  whom  they  showed  it,  "  that's 
gold;  where  did  you  get  it  from?  "  "  Oh,"  said  they,  "  there's  plenty  of  it  up  our 
way."  Next  morning  every  one  who  could  was  off  to  the  diggings.  As  witnesses 
to  Christ  our  Uves  must  show  we  have  the  "  nuggets."  (The  Railway  Signal.) 
The  charm  of  testimony  : — A  report  of  a  report,  says  Manton,  is  a  cold  thing  and  of 
small  value ;  but  of  a  report  what  we  have  witnessed  and  experienced  ourselves 
comes  warmly  upon  men's  hearts.  So  a  mere  formal  description,  observes  Spurgeon, 
of  faith  and  its  blessings  falls  flat  on  the  ear  ;  but  when  a  sincere  believer  tells  of 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

his  own  experience  of  the  Lord's  faithfulness,  it  has  a  great  charm  about  it.  We 
like  to  hear  the  narrative  of  a  journey  from  the  traveller  himself.  In  a  court  of  law 
they  wiU  have  no  hearsay  evidence.  "  Tell  us,"  says  the  judge,  "  not  what  your 
neighbour  said,  but  what  you  saw  yourself."  Personal  evidence  of  the  power  of 
grace  has  a  wonderfully  convincing  force  upon  the  conscience.  "  I  sought  the  Lord, 
and  He  heard  me,"  is  better  argument  than  all  the  Butler's  Analogies  that  will 
ever  be  written,  good  as  they  are  in  their  place.  {Proctor's  Gems  of  Thought.) 
The  argument  from  experience  : — The  validity  of  such  an  argument  Ues  on  the 
surface.  It  is  useless  to  tell  the  famishing  wanderer  that  the  pool  into  which  he  has 
dipped  his  cup  is  but  a  mirage  of  the  desert,  when  the  refreshing  fluid  is  akeady 
moistening  his  parched  lips.  {J.  Watson,  M.A.)  Experience  helpful  to  a  teacher : — 
The  pictures  of  struggling  poverty  which  enriched  the  early  writings  of  Dickens 
with  such  freshness  of  original  humour  and  quite  unstudied  pathos,  and  which  gave 
them  such  sudden  popularity,  he  had  witnessed  when  he  lived  in  Bayham  Street, 
Camden  Town.  They  came  with  all  the  dewy  novelty  of  one  who  had  seen  every 
detail  continually  and  could  wondrously  reproduce  it.  (IF.  M.  Statham.)  That 
ye  also  may  have  fellowship. — Fellowship  in  Christ : — The  knowledge  of  Christ  is 
the  basis  of  fellowship.  If,  like  the  apostle  Paul,  we  can  say,  "  It  hath  pleased 
God  to  reveal  His  Son  in  me,"  we  will,  after  his  example,  "  assay  to  join  ourselves 
to  the  disciples."  I.  It  is  the  believer's  privilege  to  have  "  fellowship  with 
THE  Father."  He  has  been  enabled  to  behold  God  in  the  light  of  a  Father,  and  to 
cherish  towards  Him  the  feelings  of  a  child.  And  herein  consists  the  essence  of  the 
fellowship  which  he  maintains  with  Him.  As  a  child  has  near  access  to  his  father, 
so  has  he  to  God.  This  privilege,  and  the  grounds  of  it,  are  set  forth  with  peculiar 
richness  in  the  Divine  word  (Heb.  iv.  14-16,  x.  19-22).  These  gracious  words  and 
powerful  arguments  are  put  into  our  mouth  by  God  Himself,  that  we  may  approach 
Him  with  all  the  confidence  of  children.  As  a  child  enjoys  the  assurance  of  his 
father's  favour,  so  has  the  believer  that  of  God.  He  knows  he  is  sinful  and 
unworthy,  but  he  believes  that  in  Christ  "  he  has  redemption  through  His  blood, 
even  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace."  As  a  child 
cherishes  the  love  which  he  bears  to  his  father,  so  does  the  believer  toward  God. 
He  feels  the  force  of  that  irresistible  appeal  (2  Cor.  v.  20,  21).  He  must  say,  "  We 
love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  In  a  word,  the  believer  is  exhorted,  "  delight 
thyself  also  in  the  Lord,  and  He  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart."  And 
this  is  the  height  of  the  fellowship  to  which  he  should  aspire — to  be  able  to  say, 
"  We  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Let  it  not  be  forgotten,  too,  that 
it  is  a  duty  as  well  as  a  privilege  to  maintain  it,  and  there  are  many  ways  in  which 
it  may  be  done.  We  should  have  fellowship  with  God  in  His  works.  So  had 
David  when  he  said  (Psa.  viii.  3,  4).  How  blessed  to  look  on  all  the  works  of 
nature,  and  say,  "  My  Father  made  them  all."  We  should  more  particularly 
seek  to  hold  fellowship  with  God  in  His  Word.  His  will  is  more  plainly  revealed 
there,  as  well  as  His  character  and  government.  We  may  have  similar  fellowship 
in  the  ordinances  of  grace.  In  them  we  may  pray  (Psa.  cvi.  4,  5).  It  would  be 
alike  our  duty  and  wisdom  to  say  with  the  Psalmist  (xxvii.  4).  So  also  should  we 
see  and  hear  Him  in  the  dispensations  of  His  providence.  Whatever  they  may  be, 
joyous  or  sorrowful,  we  should  recognise  their  author  and  learn  their  lessons. 
II.  The  fellowship  of  the  believer  "  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  In  the 
text  this  is  pointedly  distinguished  from  that  which  has  been  already  considered. 
Nor  is  it  difficult  to  perceive  the  reason  of  the  distinction.  Fellowship  with  the 
Father  can  be  held  only  through  Christ.  He  has  said  expressly,  "  I  am  the  Way — 
no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  On  the  other  hand  fellowship  with 
the  Son  is  direct.  The  reason  is  that  He  has  taken  our  nature,  and  converses  with 
us  in  it.  He  was  in  the  beginning  with  the  Father.  He  is  therefore  possessed  of 
all  Divine  perfections.  His  wisdom  is  unerring,  His  power  almighty,  and  His  love 
infinite.  This  is  the  Being  who  came  to  us  in  the  capacity  of  a  Saviour.  Again 
He  is  described  in  His  humanity.  He  was  seen,  heard,  and  handled.  He  assumed 
that  humanity  for  the  very  purpose  of  qualifying  Him  to  be  the  Saviour  of  men. 
He  has  felt  all  that  man  can  feel.  He  has  the  sympathy  of  a  brother.  Especially 
He  endured  all  the  sorrows  of  humanity.  He  suffered  from  poverty,  neglect, 
reproach,  injustice,  and  cruelty.  He  agonised  under  mental  grief,  as  well  as 
bodily  tortures.  He  was  tried  by  temptations  the  most  harassing  and  powerful. 
Well,  therefore,  does  He  understand  our  trials.  Not  merely,  however,  is  He 
described  in  His  deity  to  encourage  our  confidence,  and  in  His  humanity  to  assure 
us  of  His  sympathy,  but  in  His  office  also  as  "  the  Word  of  Life,"  He  has  "  eternal 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  17 

life  "  as  the  Saviour  of  men.  It  is  His  to  dispense  it  to  sinners.  He  says  to  all 
who  believe  in  Him,  "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."  Surely  if  we  are  encouraged 
to  have  fellowship  with  the  Father,  we  may  be  specially  encouraged  to  maintain  it 
with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  everything  in  Him  to  invite  us  to  cultivate 
it.  ni.  The  fellowship  of  believees  with  one  another.  If  we  have  fellowship 
with  the  Father,  then  we  are  His  children,  and  are  animated  by  their  spirit.  If  we 
have  fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ,  then  we  are  His  redeemed  ones,  and  the  subjects 
of  His  grace.  It  follows,  therefore,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  that  wherever  there 
is  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  there  must  also  be  fellowship  with  those 
who  believe  in  them.  What,  then,  is  the  fellowship  of  believers  ?  Let  the  apostle 
Paul  reply  (Eph.  iv.  4-6).  The  communion  arising  out  of  such  unity  must  be 
universal,  and  pervading  throughout  all  who  are  bound  by  it.  They  are  one  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  we  just  name  some  of  the  forms  in  which  their  fellowship  will 
appear.  1.  They  have  a  community  of  nature.  They  are  all  "partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature,"  and  obey  its  impulses.  Their  tastes  and  habits  are  therefore 
alike  heavenly.  2.  They  have  a  community  of  views.  They  can  all  say,  "  To  them 
that  believe  Christ  is  precious,"  "  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether 
lovely."  3.  They  have  communion  in  feelings.  Loving  Christ,  they  love  one 
another  (chap.  v.  1).  4.  They  have  communion  in  joy  and  sorrow  (1-Cor.  xii.  26). 
As  it  is  with  the  members  of  the  body,  so  it  is  in  the  church.  5.  They  have  com- 
munion in  the  kind  offices  of  brotherly  love  (1  Cor.  xii.  21).  6.  They  have  fellowship 
in  the  progress  of  true  religion.  7.  They  have  fellowship  in  the  prospects  of  heaven 
and  eternity  (1  Pet.  i.  3).  It  ought  to  be  the  aim  of  believers  to  cultivate  such 
fellowship  as  this.  There  are  many  reasons  to  enforce  it.  1.  One  is  their  own 
good  (Psa.  cxxxiii.).  2.  Another  is  the  advancement  of  religion  on  the  earth. 
Jesus  prayed  (John  xvii.  21).  3.  And  to  these  let  it  be  added,  that  it  is  vain  to 
speak  of  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  if  we  have  not  fellowship  with 
one  another.  Wherever  one  of  these  is  they  must  all  be.  They  are  inseparable. 
They  wiU  all  be  found,  too,  in  an  equal  measure.  {Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Christian 
felloicship  : — I.  The  peivilege.  1.  A  peculiar  state  of  blessedness,  in  relation  to 
God,  described  by  Paul,  as  "  this  grace  wherein  we  stand  "  (Kom.  v.  2).  This  is 
the  true  "  kingdom  of  God  on  earth" — a  restoration  to  the  knowledge,  favour,  and 
image  of  God,  not  perfectly,  but  really  and  extensively.  'Tis  the  state  of  men 
elevated  above  all  low,  earthly,  and  grovelling  desu-es ;  maintaining  sweet  and 
sanctifying  intercourse  with  God,  as  their  Father  in  Christ.  2.  The  means  of  its 
realisation.  II.  The  mutual  eelationship  essentially  involved  in  this  fellow- 
ship. 1.  One  holy  brotherhood  is  established  among  aU  saints.  The  various 
characters  of  their  several  occupations,  the  diversity  of  their  mental  capabihties, 
the  distance  of  their  several  residences,  and  other  cncumstances,  preclude  continual 
and  intimate  intercourse.  But  while  even  on  earth  it  is  not  wholly  so,  and  might 
be  much  less  so  than  it  is,  all  these  circumstances  of  earth  shall,  in  the  future 
state,  be  wholly  unknown.  2.  A  prevailing  sympathy  actually  subsists  among  aU 
the  true  followers  of  Christ ;  differing  indeed  in  intensity,  but  real,  and,  if  healthy 
and  Scriptural,  rising  above  the  narrow  and  temporary  distinctions  which  obtain 
among  men.     III.  The  duties  devolving  on  Cheistians  as  brethren  in  Christ. 

1.  The  cultivation  of  brotherly  love  is  obvious  and  paramount.  A  oneness  of 
experience  creates  mutual  interest  in  all  by  whom  such  experience  is  shared.  Their 
feelings,  as  they  resemble  our  own,  encourage  our  hope  and  strengthen  our  faith. 

2.  The  cultivation  of  mutual  intercourse  is  an  obvious  and  natural  obhgation 
devolving  on  all  the  brethren .  (1)  As  individuals .  All  should  remember  the  beautiful 
and  imperative  law  of  heaven,  "  Be  courteous."  (2)  Social  intercourse,  too,  will  not 
be  disregarded.  3.  Mutual  aid  is  obligatory,  and  this  both  in  temporal  and  spiritual 
matters.  4.  Mutual  supervision  is  also  incumbent  on  Christians  with  the  view  of 
preventing,  or  reclaiming  from  spiritual  delusion.  (J.  Richard.)  Fellowship : — 
If  two  of  us  know  one  thing  we  are  thus  far  in  fellowship,  and  this  may  be  and 
often  is  the  closest  tie  which  can  bind  men  together  for  good  or  evil.  We  see  this 
if  we  think  of  two  men  knowing  of  a  crime,  or  of  the  hiding  place  of  a  treasure. 
The  bond,  too,  is  strong  just  as  the  thing  known  is  great.  Here  the  tie  which 
makes  us  one  with  the  apostles  is  the  knowledge  that  life  has  come  into  our  dead 
world,  and  that  this  life  may  be  ours.  No  knowledge  can  be  of  greater  value 
to  us  than  this.  To  share  it,  is  the  closest  bond  that  can  join  us  to  each 
other,  for  all  who  have  it  are  therefore  among  the  Uving  and  not  with  the 
dead  (John  xvii.  3).  To  know,  then,  what  St.  John  knew  is  to  have  life  as  he  had 
it :  it  is  to  know  God,  in  so  far  as  we  can  know  Him,  as  God  knows  Himself,  to 

2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i.' 

have  no  false  thoughts  of  Him,  and  thus  to  have  fellowship  with  Him,  in  clearly 
seeing  that  He  is  holy  and  just,  but  also  that  He  is  full  of  love  and  of  boundless 
pity.  This  knowledge,  once  gained,  brings  with  it  a  joy,  which  St.  John  tells 
ns  we  share  with  all  those  who  have  that  knowledge.  (C.  Watson,  D.D.) 
The  internal  ba^is  of  Christian  fellowship  : — Thus  the  final  and  highest  positive  end 
which  St.  John  aimed  to  attain  by  his  gospel  was  this,  that  thb  jigh-priestly  prayer 
of  Jesus  (John  xvii.  21)  should  have  its  fulfilment  in  his  readers ;  that  they  (1) 
should  grow  as  living  members  into  that  fellowship,  the  mother-stem  and  centre  of 
which  was  the  disciples  themselves — into  that  fellowship  the  members  of  which 
among  themselves  were  one,  but  the  common  unity  of  which  (2)  has  its  internal 
ground  of  life  in  the  unity  in  which  every  individual  stands  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  It  is  obvious,  accordingly,  that  the  two  members  of  this  final  statement 
of  the  design  do  not  simply  stand  side  by  side  in  external  conjunction,  but  are 
most  internally  and  livingly  one.  The  latter  specifies  the  internal  living  ground 
and  principle  of  life,  on  which  the  former  grows,  and  on  which  alone  it  can  be 
brought  to  perfection.  (J.  H.  A.  Ebrard.)  Our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father, 
and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ. — Believers^  communion  with  the  Father  and  Son  : — 1. 
Union.  This  is  the  basis  of  communion.  Believers  are  united  to  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  and  the  Father  and  the  Son  to  them.  2.  Community.  (1)  Of  enjoyments. 
The  Lord  is  ours,  and  we  are  His.  (2)  Community  of  affections.  The  Lord  and 
His  saints  have  the  same  affections,  rurming  in  the  same  channel,  fixed  on  the 
same  objects.  (3)  A  community  of  interest.  The  Lord  and  saints  have  the  same 
ends,  the  same  friends  and  enemies.  (4)  Community  of  privileges.  It  is  His 
privilege  to  be  omnipotent,  and  the  saint  Paul  glories  that  he  can  do  all  things, 
Christ  strengthening  him.  It  is  the  Lord's  privilege  to  be  omniscient,  yet  He 
vouchsafes  some  shadow  of  this  to  us,  when  He  promiseth  the  Spirit  shall  lead  us 
into  all  truth  (chap.  ii.  20).  It  is  His  privilege  to  be  all-sufficient.  And  what  does 
He  promise  less  to  us,  when  He  assures  us  we  shall  want  no  good  thing  ?  (2  Cor. 
ix.  8).  And  as  we  partake  of  the  privileges  of  the  Father,  so  also  of  the  Son.  (He 
/Is  king,  priest,  and  prophet,  and  so  are  we.  Again,  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  and 
(so  are  we.  What  honour  is  this!  (chap.  iii.  1).  Christ  is  the  heir  of  all  things, 
/and  we  are  heirs  of  God  and  co-heirs  with  Christ  (Kom.  viii.  17).  Christ  is  the 
Nobject  of  His  Father's  love,  and  so  are  we  (Lev.  xxvi.  11).  Christ  is  the  glory  of 
iGod,  the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  we  are  the  glory  of  God  (Psa.  xi.  10).  Christ 
/^a  a  judge,  and  so  are  we  (1  Cor.  vi.  2, 3).^  3.  Familiar  converse.  (1)  The  Lord  visits 
I  us,  and  we  visit  Him  (Rev.  iii.  20).  (2)  A  saint  walks  with  God,  and  God  with  him ; 
so  He  promises  (2  Cor.  vi.  16  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  12  ;  Isa.  xliii.  2).  The  familiarity  of  this 
walking  is  held  forth  in  this  expression  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  23).  (3)  The  Lord  talks  with 
us,  and  we  with  Him  ;  He  speaks  to  us  by  His  Word,  by  His  providence,  by  the 
sweet  whisperings  of  the  Holy  Ghost — that  still  voice  comforts,  directs,  encourages. 
(4)  The  Lord  feasts  the  saints,  and  they  feast  Him  (Isa.  xxv.  6).  And  what  is  that 
wnich  the  Lord  counts  a  feast?  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  Use  1.  If  believers  have  communion 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  then  unbelievers  hath  communion  with  the  devil  and 
his  angels.  Use  2.  An  exhortation  to  get  this  fellowship,  and  continue  it.  (1)  It 
is  most  for  God's  glory.  (2)  It  is  best  for  us.  (D.  Clarkson,  B.D.)  The  nature 
of  communion : — Men  are  formed  for  society.  To  social  enjoyments  religion  is  no 
enemy.  On  the  contrary,  it  sanctifies  friendship,  and  renders  it  subservient  for 
promoting  our  best  interests.  No  society  among  men  can  be  compared  with  the 
fellowship  which  every  genuine  believer  enjoys  "  with  the  Father,  and  with  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ."  This,  in  so  far  as  it  is  enjoyed,  is  a  source  of  pure  and  exalted 
happiness.  Its  pleasures  are  not  accompanied  with  the  alloy  of  disappointment. 
The  strong  asseveration  "  truly,"  here  used,  points  out  the  importance  and  certainty 
of  what  is  affirmed.  The  men  of  the  world  are  apt  to  call  in  question  the  reahty 
of  such  an  intercourse.  In  this,  however,  they  are  much  mistaken.  The  pleasures 
which  the  saints  enjoy  are  the  genuine  pleasures  of  life,  and  the  only  enjoyments 
that  deserve  that  name.  I.  The  nature  of  that  fellowship  which  believers  havb 
WITH  THE  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Union  to  His  person  is  part  of  that  fellowship 
which  believers  have  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  So  long  as  they  continue  in  their 
natural  state,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  they  can  have  no  fellowship  with  Jesus. 
2.  Reciprocal  communion  is  included  in  the  fellowship  which  believers  have  with 
Christ.  There  is  nothing  that  can  be  properly  called  His  in  which  they  have  not 
an  interest,  nor  are  they  possessed  of  anything  which  He  does  not  consider  as  Hia 
own.  Are  they  men  ?  He  too  has  assumed  the  human  nature.  Is  He  God  ?  They 
also,  in  consequence  of  His  Spirit  dwelling  in  them,  are  in  some  measure  "  made 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  19 

partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  Their  poverty  is  His,  and  His  riches  are  theirs. 
If  they  bear  His  reproach,  they  share  also  in  His  honour ;  if  they  be  conformed 
unto  His  death,  they  have  also  a  part  in  His  resurrection.  3.  The  fellowship  with 
Christ  which  believers  enjoy  includes  in  it  every  species  of  friendly  and  familiar 
intercourse.  4.  The  last  thing  included  in  the  fellowship  believers  have  with 
Christ  is  an  interchange  of  good  offices.  To  Him  they  are  indebted  for  all  the 
blessings  they  possess,  and  for  all  that  they  hope  to  enjoy.  Their  health,  their 
strength,  their  time,  their  talents,  their  substance,  and  their  influence,  when  they 
act  in  character,  are  all  employed  to  promote  the  interest  of  His  kingdom  in  the 
world,  n.  Some  of  the  advantages  which  believebs  deeive  fbom  thelb 
FELLOWSHIP  WITH  Cheist.  1.  In  consequcnce  of  this  fellowship,  they  have  the 
best  instruction.  (1)  The  wonders  He  reveals.  (2)  He  opens  their  dark  under- 
standings, removes  their  unfounded  prejudices,  and  enables  them  to  embrace 
redeeming  truth  in  all  its  beauty  and  simplicity.  2.  This  fellowship  is  a  source  of 
the  most  refined  delight.  They  walk  in  the  light  of  His  countenance,  in  the  joy  of 
heaven.  3.  The  fellowship  of  believers  with  Christ  is  a  source  of  the  highest 
honour.  AU  His  companions  are  "kings  and  priests  unto  God  "  ;  more  honourable 
than  the  most  exalted  among  men.  4.  Believers  derive  many  great  and  precious 
benefits  from  fellowship  with  Christ.  5.  This  fellowship  is  in  every  respect  a  source 
of  the  most  exalted  happiness.  Lessons :  1.  See  and  admire  the  condescension 
and  kindness  of  the  Son  of  God,  2.  Let  believers  learn  to  esteem  and  rejoice  in 
this  precious  privilege.  3.  From  this  subject  let  believers  learn  their  duty.  This 
will  be  found  always  to  correspond,  in  some  measure,  to  the  privileges  they  enjoy. 
(Gf.  Campbell.)  On  communion  with  God : — I.  Fellowship  with  God  impUes 
CONVERSE  with  Him.  Who  does  not  feel  the  charm  of  those  hours  which  are  spent 
in  the  society  of  a  friend  ?  Of  our  converse  with  God,  a  prominent  example  is  the 
ordinance  of  prayer.  II.  The  fellowship  implies  in  it  besemblance  to  God.  In 
confidential  intercourse  there  must  be  agreement  on  the  great  principles  of  human 
conduct.  The  fellowship  also  which  we  have  with  God  implies,  as  indispensable  for 
its  first  formation,  a  desire  to  resemble  Him.  The  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature 
are  offered  to  our  imitation  with  softened  glory  in  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ. 
ni.  This  fellowship  implies  a  paeticipation  in  all  the  fulness  of  the  Diyinb 
BOUNTY.  Every  noble  purpose,  every  generous  resolution  that  man  can  form,  is 
given  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Highest.  If,  then.  He  hath  enabled  human  friend- 
ship to  think  thus  disinterestedly,  and  to  act  thus  nobly,  much  more  wiU  He 
manifest  the  riches  of  His  own  love  toward  those  whom  He  honours  in  fellowship 
with  Himself.  "  We  are  filled,"  saith  the  apostle,  "  with  all  the  fulness  of  God." 
{A.  Brunton,  D.D.)  Fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son  : — Do  the  saints 
above  enjoy  a  most  intimate  fellowship  or  communion  with  God  and  His  Son?  Saints 
on  earth  enjoy  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  I.  At.t. 
TEUE  Christians  enjoy  a  kind  of  fellowship  ob  communion  with  God  and 
Christ,  to  which  mankind  aee,  in  theib  natural  state,  totai,  steangees.  The 
High  and  Holy  One,  who  inhabits  eternity,  condescends  to  dwell  with  those  who 
are  of  a  humble  and  contrite  spirit,  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite  ones.  The 
inspired  writers  invariably  use  the  strongest  language  when  they  would  show  the 
intimate  union  which  subsists  between  Christ  and  His  Church.  He  is  the  Shepherd, 
and  they  the  sheep  ;  He  is  the  Vine,  and  they  are  the  branches ;  He  is  the  Head, 
and  they  are  His  members  ;  He  is  the  Soul,  and  they  are  the  body.  H.  What  this 
communion  implies  and  in  what  it  consists.  The  original  word,  which  is  here 
rendered  fellowship,  and  which  is  elsewhere  rendered  communion,  signifies  that 
reciprocal  intercourse,  or  communion,  which  subsists  between  beings  who  are 
partakers  of  the  same  nature,  whose  moral  characters  are  similar,  and  who 
mutually  know  and  esteem  each  other.  It  is  an  observation  no  less  just  than 
common,  that  like  rejoices  in  like,  and  where  there  is  no  likeness  there  can  be  no 
communion.  Thus,  for  instance,  there  can  be  no  communion  between  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  water  and  those  of  the  air  ;  for  what  is  life  to  the  one  is  death  to  the 
other.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  when  persons  meet  who  resemble  each  other  in 
temper,  character,  age,  and  situation,  who  love  and  hate  the  same  things,  and 
pursue  and  avoid  the  same  objects,  they  readily  unite,  Uke  drops  of  dew  when 
brought  into  contact,  and  appear  to  compose  but  one  soul  in  different  bodies. 
Similitude,  similarity  of  nature,  of  character  and  pursuits,  must  therefore  be  the 
basis  of  all  true  fellowship  or  communion.  Hence  it  appears  that  no  creatures  can 
enjoy  communion  with  God  and  His  Son  but  those  who  are  partakers  of  His  Divine 
nature,  who  resemble  Him  in  their  moral  character,  and  who  love,  hate,  and  pursue 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  I. 

those  things  which  are  respectively  the  objects  of  His  love,  hatred,  and  pursuit.  1. 
Christians  enjoy  communion  with  God  in  the  works  of  creation.  They  contemplate 
the  universe  as  a  temple  in  which  the  Most  High  sits  enthroned ;  as  a  body,  of 
which  God  is  in  a  certain  sense  the  soul ;  and  as  we  love  the  bodies  of  our  friends 
for  the  sake  of  the  souls  which  inhabit  them,  as  we  are  peculiarly  pleased  with  the 
works  of  our  friends  for  the  sake  of  the  hands  which  formed  them,  so  Christians 
are  ineffably  pleased  and  delighted  with  the  great  work  of  creation,  because  it  was 
formed  and  is  filled  by  their  Father  and  their  God.  2.  The  Christian  enjoys 
communion  with  God  in  all  the  dispensations  of  His  providence.  3.  The  Christian 
enjoys  communion  with  God  in  His  Word,  read  and  preached.  4.  Christians 
enjoy  communion  with  God  and  His  Son  in  the  public  exercises  of  religious 
worship.  5.  Christians  enjoy  communion  with  God  and  Christ  in  the 
exercise  of  private  meditation,  prayer  and  praise.  As  children,  they  have 
liberty  of  access  to  God  at  all  times.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Felloioship  : — I. 
_The  declaration  expressed  in  my  text,  which  contains  the  whole  subject  of 
the  apostles'  ministry.  Beyond  which  they  could  not  go.  Nor  could  greater 
things  be  expressed.  Our  apostle,  using  the  plural  number,  shows  that  the  whole 
testimony  borne  by  all  the  apostles,  was  one  and  the  same.  It  was  one  and 
the  same  gospel  in  each  of  their  mouths.  The  communion  they  had  with  Him 
they  made  known.  The  declaration  which  they  made  of  this,  was  to  saints.  Not 
to  others.  No.  "  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you." 
Who  are  holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling.  A  most  noble  instance 
of  spiritual  generosity.  Worthy  of  imitation  by  the  servants  and  ministers  of 
Christ  in  every  age.  To  utter  forth  the  memory  of  His  great  goodness.  They 
cannot  but  act  thus,  if  they  have  conversed  with  Him,  if  they  have  heard  Him. 
n.  The  end  and  design  of  the  apostle  in  this.  "  That  ye  also  may  have  fellowship 
with  us."  Church  fellowship,  which  is  the  communion  of  saints,  is  an  inexpressible 
blessing.  It  consists  in  imparting  to  each  other  an  account  of  what  the  Lord  hath 
done  for  our  souls.  We  have  fellowship  with  each  other  in  the  same  Spirit ;  with 
the  same  Christ ;  in  the  same  salvation ;  with  the  same  God  and  Father  ;  in  the 
same  ordinances.  We  are  one  family  to  the  Lord.  I  conceive  we  may  distinguish 
the  real  fellowship  the  apostles  had  with  Christ  from  what  other  saints  have. 
They  were  favoured  with  personal  converses  with  Christ.  They  received  their 
knowledge  of  Him,  more  immediately  and  intuitively,  from  the  Holy  Spirit.  In 
consequence  of  which  their  faith  was  more  simple.  All  other  saints,  and  we  with 
them,  receive  the  grace  of  faith  and  the  subject  of  faith  from  the  written  word. 
That  is  the  glass,  and  the  ordinance  of  worship,  in  which  we  behold  the  Lord. 
There  was  an  absolute  necessity  it  should  be  thus  with  them.  They  were  to  speak 
and  write  on  every  article  of  faith,  and  state  the  same  as  exactly  as  it  was  stated  in 
the  mind  and  will  of  God.  III.  Those  with  whom  the  apostles  had  fellow- 
ship. In  the  first  place,  the  apostle  speaks  in  a  very  positive  manner,  and  asserts, 
"  Truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ." 
Communion  with  God — it  must  be  the  supreme  corner-stone  of  Christianity.  I 
would  here  ask,  what  is  communion  with  the  Father  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  ? 
The  answer  is  this.  It  is  an  unity  of  mind.  So  as  for  God  to  let  in  Himself  upon 
our  minds,  as  to  give  us  such  apprehensions  of  His  love,  as  afford  us  a  real, 
spiritual  knowledge  of  and  acquaintance  with  the  same,  so  as  for  us  to  partake  of 
the  reality  thereof  (chap.  xiv.  20).  There  is  a  variety  of  unions  in  which  Christ 
and  His  Church  are  related  to  each  other.  There  is  first  an  election  union,  which  is 
that  comprehensive  one  by  which  Christ  and  His  Church  were  united  together  from 
everlasting.  He  the  Head,  and  they  His  members.  On  this  followed  a  marriage 
union.  Christ  and  His  Bride  were  set  up  in  heaven  from  eternity  (Pro v.  viii. 
30,  31).  There  is  also  a  representative  union  between  Christ  and  the  Elect.  He 
represented  them  and  acted  for  them,  as  their  Head  and  Surety,  in  the  everlasting 
covenant.  This  He  gave  full  evidence  of  in  the  fulness  of  time,  when  He  came 
into  our  world,  and  became  thereby  one  with  His  people  (Heb.  ii.  11-14).  There 
is  also  a  grace  union.  Mr.  Joseph  Hussey  says,  "  There  are  three  unions  in 
Christ,  suited  to  the  three  operations  of  the  three  persons  in  God.  I  mean  three 
unions  of  God's  children,  and  aU  of  them  before  faith,  viz.,  election  union, 
representation  union,  and  regeneration  union.  Out  of  all  these  ariseth  a  fourth 
union,  which  is  a  union  with  Christ,  distinct  from  union  in  Christ ;  this  consists  in 
union  and  cleaving  to  Him  by  faith."  There  is  also  a  glory  union  (John  xvii. 
22,  23).  This  glory  union  will  break  forth  upon  the  Church  in  her  resurrection 
state.    Now  in  consequence  of  all  these  unions,  there  is  a  proportional  oommunioa 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  21 

•with  all  the  Persons  in  Godhead,  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  with  the  Church. 
IV.  The  truth  and  reality  of  this,  which  la  thus  confirmed.  "  And  truly 
our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  Communion 
with  the  Father  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwells 
personally  in  the  saints,  is  a  most  glorious  mystery  of  grace.  Nature  cannot 
apprehend  it.  Sense  must  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  None  can  have  the  least 
conception  of  the  nature,  the  importance,  the  excellency,  the  blessedness  of  the 
same,  but  such  as  are  born  from  above.  No.  Nor  these  either,  but  as  enlightened, 
inspii'ed,  and  supernaturally  lifted  up  into  the  true  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of 
the  same.  Spkitual  life  is  a  great  mystery,  the  whole  essence  of  which  consists  in 
communion  with  God.  The  Father  is  He  with  whom  we  have  this  communion. 
The  God-Man  is  the  Mediator  of  all  our  union  and  communion  with  God.  The 
more,  therefore,  we  eye  Him,  and  have  our  hearts  drawn  out  after  Him,  and  fixed 
on  Him  as  our  centre,  so  we  the  more  clearly  understand  the  grace  of  fellowship 
with  God.  (S.  E.  JPierce.)  Communion  with  God :  I.  This  communion  pre- 
supposes MUCH.  It  takes  for  granted  that  the  suspicions  and  doubts  which  by 
nature  encompass  us  have  been  removed  by  the  work  of  the  Spirit.     II.    The  ways 

IN   WHICH    WE    HAVE    THIS    FELLOWSHIP     ARE     INNUMERABLE.        In    the     silcUCe     of     the 

individual  heart,  in  the  secrecy  of  the  closet,  in  the  social  circle  where  the  brethren 
meet  for  prayer,  in  the  churches,  &c.  III.  The  consequences  of  this  fellowship 
ARE  blessed  and  SATISFACTORY  IN  THE  HIGHEST  DEGREE.  Sin  bccomes  more  and 
more  hateful:  the  world  loses  its  charm  over  us,  and  the  flesh  its  power. 
{W.  Graham.)  Fellowship  with  God : — I.  First,  let  us  see  if  it  be  not  so,  that  we 
have  had,  and  do  have  real  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ.  Now,  we  have  had  fellowship  with  the  Father.  1.  In  order  to  have  fellow- 
ship with  any  man  there  must  be  a  concord  of  heart.  "Can  two  walk  together 
unless  they  be  agreed  ?  "  2.  Again,  we  have  fellowship  with  God  in  the  object  for 
which  the  purpose  was  first  formed,  namely,  His  own  glory.  The  highest  aspiration 
of  our  spirit,  when  it  is  most  enlarged,  is  that  He  ija  all  things  may  be  glorified. 
3.  And  have  we  not  fellowship  with  Him  in  the  plan  by  which  He  effects  that 
purpose  ?  Does  it  not  strike  you  as  being  the  wisest,  the  most  gracious,  the  most 
glorious  scheme  that  could  have  been  devised  ?  4.  And  I  think  we  may  add,  we 
have  fellowship  with  God  in  the  most  prominent  characteristics  of  that  plan. 
Throughout  the  whole  way  of  salvation  you  have  seen  displayed  the  justice  and 
the  mercy  of  God,  each  with  undimmed  lustre.  You  have  seen  His  grace  in 
forgiving  the  sinner,  but  you  have  seen  His  holiness  in  avenging  sin  upon  the 
substitute.  You  have  seen  His  truthfulness  acting  in  two  ways  ;  His  truth  in 
threatening— by  no  means  sparing  the  guilty  ;  His  truth  in  the  promise — "passing 
by  transgression,  iniquity,  and  sin."  And  do  not  you  and  I  feel  we  have  fellowship 
with  God  in  this  ?  5.  We  have  a  most  Divine  and  precious  communion  with  the 
Father  in  the  objects  of  His  love.  When  two  persons  love  the  same  thing,  their 
affection  becomes  a  tie  between  them.  Now,  there  is  a  tie  between  God  the  Father 
and  our  souls,  for  did  not  He  say,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased  "  ?  And  cannot  you  and  I  add,  "  Yes,  He  is  our  beloved  Saviour,  in  whom 
we  are  well  pleased  "  ?  6.  But  the  word  "  fellowship  "  not  only  signifies  concord 
of  heart,  but  it  implies  a  carrying  out  of  that  concord  a  little  further,  in  converse 
or  mutual  communication.  Furthermore,  we  can  say  we  have  had  fellowship  with 
God  in  this  respect,  that  the  very  thing  which  is  His  happiness  has  been  our 
happiness.  That  which  has  been  the  delight  of  His  Holy  Being  has  been  a  dehght 
to  us.  "  And  what  is  that  ?  "  say  you.  Why,  doth  not  God  deUght  in  holiness,  in 
goodness,  in  mercy,  and  in  lovingkindness,  and  has  not  that  been  our  delight  too? 
7.  And  so,  also,  that  which  is  the  Father's  employment  is  our  employment.  He 
doeth  good  to  all  His  creatures,  and  we  can  do  good  also.  He  beareth  witness  to 
His  Son  Jesus,  and  we  can  bear  witness  too.  "The  Father  worketh  hitherto" 
that  His  Son  may  be  glorified,  and  we  work  too.  0  thou  Eternal  Worker !  it  is 
thine  to  save  souls,  and  we  are  co-workers  with  Thee.  And  now  I  must  affirm  the 
fact,  that  we  have  fellowship  with  the  Son  as  well  as  with  the  Father.  In  both 
these  matters  we  are  like  little  children  that  have  begun  to  speak  or  learn  their 
letters.  We  have  not  yet  attained,  though  I  say  we  have  fellowship  with  the  Father ; 
yet  how  little  we  have  of  it  compared  with  what  we  hope  to  have !  Well,  now  we 
have  fellowship  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  think  we  can  say,  for  our  hearts  are 
united  to  Him.  "  Yea,  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things,  Thou  knowest  that  I  lovo 
Thee."  At  any  rate,  it  is  strange  that  I  should  never  be  happy  without  Thee,  it  is 
singular  that  I  can  find  no  peace  anywhere  but  in  Thee.     If  I  did  not  love  Thee, 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  l. 

should  I  have  such  longings  after  Thee  ?  Further,  we  have  had  some  small  degree 
of  fellowship  with  Him  in  His  sufferings.  We  have  not  yet  "  resisted  unto  blood 
striving  against  sin,"  but  we  have  carried  His  cross,  and  we  have  suffered  His 
reproach.  But  our  fellowship  has  assumed  also  a  practical  form,  in  that  the  same 
desires  and  aspirations  which  were  in  Christ  when  He  was  on  the  earth  are  in  us 
now.  Oh  1  we  have  uttered  feelingly  the  very  words  of  Christ,  "  Wist  ye  not  that 
I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business  ?  "  And  when  there  seemed  to  be  some 
insuperable  obstacle  in  the  path  of  our  usefulness,  we  have  nevertheless  said,  "  My 
meat  and  my  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  me."  And  yet,  further,  as  I 
have  said,  fellowship  requires  converse.  Oh !  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  have  we 
not  had  converse  with  Him?  U.  There  is,  secondly,  an  affectionate  desibe, 
LEADING  TO  APPROPRIATE  EFFORT.  1.  This  affcctionate  desire  is  that  others  might 
have  fellowship  with  us.  Having  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  it  is  one  of  the 
first  instincts  of  the  new-born  nature  to  send  us  out  crying,  "  Ho,  every  one  that 
thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,"  &c.  We  wish  to  gather  up  all  in  one,  that  in  every- 
thing which  is  lovely  and  of  good  repute,  in  everything  which  is  happy,  ennobling. 
Divine,  and  everlasting,  you  might  be  made  partakers  and  have  fellowship  with  us ! 

2.  And  this  desire  leads  the  child  of  God  to  make  use  of  an  appropriate  effort,  and  what 
is  that  ?  It  is  to  tell  to  others  what  he  has  seen  and  what  he  has  heard.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon). 
Fellowship  with  God: — I.  The  nature  of  this  fellowship.  1.  Partnership,  a 
sharing  with  another  in  anything,  the  possessing  of  it  in  common  with  him.  In 
this  sense  we  have  all  fellowship  one  with  another  ;  as  Englishmen  we  participate 
together  in  the  many  blessings  a  bountiful  Providence  has  showered  down  on  our 
native  land.  In  this  sense  the  merchant  too  has  fellowship  with  his  partners  in 
business — he  has  the  same  interests  with  them,  he  shares  with  them  in  the  same 
gains  and  losses.  Now  transfer  this  idea  to  the  text.  What  a  lofty  declaration 
does  it  in  one  moment  become !  There  is  a  fellowship,  it  tells  us,  between  the  great 
God  and  us,  a  partnership,  a  sharing  together  of  the  same  things.  And  what 
things  are  tliese?  There  is  no  limit  to  this  partnership,  except  that  which  our 
finite  nature  makes  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  which  His  holy  nature  makes  on  the 
other.  He  sends  His  Spirit  down  into  our  hearts  to  regenerate  them ;  and  then  not 
to  leave  our  hearts,  but  to  dwell  and  rule  in  them.  We  are  raised  in  the  scale  of 
being  or  soon  shall  be,  we  know  not  how  high,  nearer  to  God  than  any  other 
creatures,  and  made  more  like  Him.  And  with  His  nature  He  gives  us  an  interest 
in  aU  His  glorious  perfections.  Not  only  are  His  mercy  and  love  ours,  we  may  look 
on  His  wisdom,  and  power,  and  greatness,  as  ours.  They  are  aU  pledged  for  our 
everlasting  happiness.  2.  It  signifies  intercourse,  converse,  and  a  free  and  familiar 
converse.  We  make  known  our  thoughts  and  feelings  one  to  another  by  outward 
signs,  chiefly  by  words.  We  have  no  other  way  of  making  them  known.  But 
suppose  any  one  to  possess  the  power  of  looking  into  our  hearts,  and  seeing  every 
thought  there  as  it  rises  up,  and  this  whether  he  is  present  with  us  or  not,  then 
words  and  outward  signs  would  not  be  needed  ;  we  could  speak  to  him  within  our 
own  minds,  and  he  would  understand  us  better  than  any  one  besides,  more  readily 
and  fully.  Now  God  does  possess  this  power,  and  the  Christian  knows  that  He 
possesses  it ;  and  he  acts  like  one  who  knows  it.  This  fellowship  consists,  on  his 
part,  in  the  turning  of  his  soul  to  God,  in  a  habit  he  has  acquired  of  speaking 
within  himself  to  God,  just  as  another  man  speaks  by  outward  expressions  to  his 
neighbour  or  friend.  3.  And  these  two  things  are  never  separated.  There  can  be 
no  real  communion  between  Him  and  us  till  we  are  spiritually  united  to  Him,  and 
this  union  with  Him  is  never  real  without  leading  at  once  to  this  intercourse  and 
communion.  And  for  both  these  things  we  are  indebted  altogether  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  In  His  human  nature  He  stands  nearer  to  us  than  His  Father,  and 
His  Father  has  ordained  Him  to  be  the  one  great  Mediator  between  Himself  and  us. 
«« Through  Him  we  have  access  to  the  Father."  II.  The  ends  this  apostle  has 
m  VIEW,  IN  speaking  to  tjs  so  assuredly  of  his  possessing  this  blessed  fellowship. 
1.  That  we  may  desire  to  have  our  portion  with  him  and  the  real  followers  of  oar 
Lord.  And  what  a  stamp  of  dignity  this  puts  on  the  disciples  of  Christ  and  their 
condition  1  2.  That  his  fellow-believers  in  Christ  may  be  happier  in  Him.  He 
thinks  first  of  those  who  are  far  off  from  Christ.  "  We  teU  you,"  he  says,  "  of  this 
happy  fellowship  to  bring  you  to  desire  it ;  "  and  then  he  turns  round  to  those  who 
are  already  near  Christ,  and  says,  "  We  tell  you  of  it,  that  your  joy  may  be  fuU." 

3.  To  save  us  from  self-deception.  Almost  in  the  same  sentence  in  which  he  tells 
us  that  we  have  fellowship  with  Christ,  he  warns  us  against  thinking  it  ours  while 
we  have  fellowship  with  sin.     "  God  is  light,"  he  says,  "  and  in  Him  is  no  dark- 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  23 

ness,"  Ac.  "  And  is  there  nothing  in  this  text,"  some  of  you  may  say,  "  for  us  who 
long  for  a  share  in  this  heavenly  fellowship  and  cannot  obtain  it  ?  "  Yes,  there  is. 
It  bids  you  dismiss  from  your  miuds  the  thought  that  you  carmot  obtain  it.  Why 
are  you  told  of  it?  {C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  doctrine  and  fellowship  of  the 
apostles : — I.  The  knowledge.  "  That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we 
unto  you ;  "  that  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  of  the  "  Word  of  life  " ;  "  the 
Life  " ;  which  "  was  manifested  "  ;  "  that  Eternal  Life  which  was  with  the  Father, 
and  was  manifested  unto  us  "  (vers.  1,  2).  These  names  and  descriptions  of  the 
Son  undoubtedly  refer,  in  the  first  instance,  to  His  eternal  relation  to  the  Father ; 
of  whose  nature  He  is  the  image,  of  whose  will  He  is  the  expression,  of  whose  Ufe 
He  is  the  partner  and  the  communicator.  But  this  eternal  relation — what  He  is  to 
the  Father  from  everlasting — must  be  viewed  now  in  connection  with  what  He  is  as 
He  dwells  among  us  on  the  earth.  It  is  "the  man  Christ  Jesus"  who  is  the 
"  manifested  Ufe."  In  the  midst  of  all  the  conditions  of  our  death  this  life  is  thus 
manifested.  For  He  who  is  the  life  takes  our  death.  Not  otherwise  could  "  that 
eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father  be  manifested  unto  us."  For  we  are  dead. 
If  it  were  not  so,  what  need  would  there  be  of  a  new  manifestation  of  life  to  us? 
So  He  who  is  "  the  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father  "  is  "  manifested  to  us  " 
as  "  destroying  this  death."  He  destroys  it  in  the  only  way  in  which  it  can  be 
destroyed  righteously,  and  therefore  thoroughly :  by  taking  it  upon  Himself,  bearing 
it  for  us  in  our  stead,  dying  the  very  death  which  we  have  most  justly  deserved  and 
incurred.  So  He  gives  clear  and  certain  assurance  that  this  death  of  ours  need  not 
stand  in  the  way  of  our  having  the  life  of  God  manifested  to  us — and  that  too  in 
even  a  higher  sense  and  to  higher  ends  than  it  was  or  could  be  manifested  to  man 
at  first,  n.  The  communicated  fellowship — "  that  ye  may  have  fellowship  with 
us."  1.  The  object  of  this  fellowship  is  the  Father  and  the  Son.  As  Christ  is  the 
way,  the  true  and  living  way,  to  the  Father,  so  fellowship  with  Him  as  such  must 
evidently  be  preparatory  to  fellowship  with  the  Father.  But  it  is  not  thus  that 
Christ  is  here  represented.  He  is  not  put  before  the  Father  as  the  way  to  the 
Father,  fellowship  with  whom  is  the  means,  leading  to  fellowship  with  the  Father 
as  the  end.  He  is  associated  with  the  Father.  Together,  in  their  mutual  relation 
to  one  another  and  their  mutual  mind  or  heart  to  one  another,  they  constitute  the 
one  object  of  this  fellowship.  2.  The  nature  of  the  fellowship  can  be  truly  known 
only  by  experience.  (1)  It  implies  intelligence  and  insight.  No  man  naturally  has 
it ;  no  man  naturally  cares  to  have  it.  (2)  There  must  be  faith,  personal, 
appropriating,  and  assured  faith,  in  order  that  the  intelligence,  the  insight,  may 
be  quickened  by  a  vivid  sense  of  real  personal  interest  and  concern.  (3)  This 
fellowship  is  of  a  transforming,  conforming,  assimilating  character.  In  it  you 
become  actually  partakers  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  nature  and  in  counsel. 
(4)  It  is  a  fellowship  of  sympathy.  Being  of  one  mind,  in  this  partnership,  with 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  you  are  of  one  heart  too.  (5)  The  fellowship  is  one  of  joy. 
Intelligence,  faith,  conformity  of  mind,  sympathy  of  heart,  all  culminate  in  joy ; 
joy  in  God ;  entering  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord.  (JR.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Fellow- 
ship with  God  : — I.  The  believer's  fellowship  with  God  is  an  actual  and  litekal 
THING,  an  unfigurative  fact,  a  reality ;  it  is  not  an  idea,  an  imagination  merely. 
Between  God  and  the  believer  there  is  an  intercourse  of  spirit,  an  interchange  of 
spiritual  thought,  a  community  of  spiritual  feeling,  actual,  though  unseen ;  a 
communication  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  reception  on  the  other,  of  positive  spiritual 
influences,  comforting,  strengthening,  and  purifying.  The  mode  of  this  spu'itual 
intercourse  we  do  not  profess  to  describe.  But  our  inability  to  do  this  affords  no 
presumption  against  the  fact.  We  know  not  even  how  our  own  spirits  operate 
upon  each  other ;  much  less,  therefore,  how  the  Divine  spirit  acts  upon  ours.  Nor 
do  we  profess  to  demonstrate  even  the  fact  of  this  fellowship  by  any  sensible 
evidence  or  logical  proof  ;  it  is  a  matter  of  pure  consciousness,  concerning  which 
we  can  only  testify.  H.  Wherein  does  this  fellowship  consist?  The  most 
prominent  idea  of  "  fellowship  "  is  that  of  mutual  sympathy,  reciprocal  affection. 
Yea,  just  in  proportion  to  the  affection  of  the  one  party  will  fellowship  be  disabled, 
and  anguish  increased,  by  the  apathy  of  the  other.  In  order  to  be  fellowship  there 
must  be  interchange — a  reciprocity  of  thought  and  affection.  Nothing  can  con- 
stitute fellowship  but  this  :  nothing  can  compensate  for  the  lack  of  it :  not  even  the 
most  familiar  knowledge  of  God.  Take  the  man  who  knows  Him  best,  who  has 
come  nearest  to  God  in  the  sense  of  understanding  His  works  and  ways :  if  he  have 
no  love  for  God,  however  minute  and  accurate  his  knowledge,  he  has  no  fellowship 
with  Him.     To  give  then  a  practical  application  to  this  thought,  you  see  the  great 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  only  requirement  for  your  individual  fellowship  with  God.  You  cannot  doubt 
affection  on  His  part,  and  therefore  the  only  necessity  is  a  reciprocal  love  on  yours. 
Would  you  but  love  God,  an  instant  and  intimate  fellowship  with  Him  might  even 
now  commence.  III.  On  what  grounds  must  such  fellowship  of  sinnkrs  with  a 
HOLY  God  proceed?  Will  the  holy  God  advance  to  sinful  man?  or  must  sinful 
man  advance  to  the  holy  God  ?  In  other  words,  must  God  compromise  His 
holiness  and  accommodate  it  to  the  moral  degeneracy  of  man  ?  or  must  man 
abandon  his  sinfulness  and  render  fellowship  possible  by  a  conformity  to  the 
holiness 'of  God  ?  and  in  either  case,  how  is  the  common  character  and  sympathy 
to  be  produced  ?  And  here  we  point  to  the  Saviour's  mediation  as  the  indispensable 
means  of  our  fellowship  with  God.  "  In  Him  we  have  access  with  confidence 
through  the  faith  of  Him."  And  it  is  easy  to  see  how,  through  Him,  this  fellow- 
ship is  rendered  possible.  Before  there  can  be  fellowship  there  must  be  peace, 
reconciliation.  But  how  is  this  to  be  accomplished?  "God  was  in  Christ, 
reconciling  the  world  to  Himself."  But  still  the  question  returns.  How  shall  man 
have  fellowship  with  God  ?  Here  is  reconcihation  and  pardon ;  but  there  must 
also  be  congruity  of  disposition ;  a  reciprocal  aiJection ;  a  common  sympathy. 
Here  then  is  the  remedy,  the  Holy  Spirit  renev^s  our  moral  nature,  gives  us  new 
principles  and  new  dispositions,  the  possession  of  which  assimilates  us  to  God,  and 
thus  enables  communion  with  Him.  IV.  How  is  it  to  be  cultivated  ?  We  see 
that  all  preventing  hindrances  have  been  removed,  now  point  out  the  appropriating 
means.  It  is  evident  that  all  our  intercourse  with  God  must  be  by  faith ;  we 
have  no  sensible  vision  of  Him  ;  we  come  into  no  palpable  contact  with  Him  ;  He 
is  the  invisible,  the  spiritual  God.  Faith  therefore  is  the  only  faculty  by  which  we 
can  recognise  Him  and  lay  hold  upon  Him — "  the  life  that  we  live  in  the  flesh  is  a 
life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God."  We  believe,  and  through  our  faith  we  realise,  the 
thoughts  and  feelings  which  conscious  presence  produces  and  which  constitute 
fellowship ;  fellowship  is  nothing  more  than  the  interchange  of  thoughts  and 
feelings  ;  and  that  which  produces  them,  which  makes  the  intercourse  real,  which 
distinguishes  it  from  mere  imagination  or  sentiment,  is  faith.  But  while  the  holy 
feelings  which  constitute  fellowship  with  God  are  exclusively  dependent  upon  faith, 
they  are  capable  of  various  excitements.  To  produce  these  is  the  purpose  of  the 
various  means  of  grace.  Constituted  as  we  are,  we  are  peculiarly  susceptible  of 
sensible  impressions ;  and  the  means  of  grace  are  intended  to  aid  or  to  occasion 
holy  thoughts,  by  appealing  to  our  senses.  We  have  the  Bible  to  supply  by  its 
teachings  material  for  our  communion  with  God.  It  is  the  record  which  furnishes 
all  our  ideas  of  God,  and  which  faith  believes,  and  by  believing  which  gratitude 
and  love  are  excited.     V.  The  advantages  and  issue  of  this  fellowship  with  God. 

1.  Perhaps  the  most  obvious  is  the  promotion  of  holy  aifections.  It  is  the  pecuUar 
characteristic  and  glory  of  Christianity  that  it  provides  for  the  right  adjustment 
and  balancing  of  our  feelings.  The  emotions  excited  by  its  truths  and  privileges 
are  alike  removed  from  fanaticism  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  indifference  on  the 
other.  And  this  cannot  be  said  of  other  religious  systems.  The  believer's  fellow- 
ship, while  it  is  the  intimate  intercourse  of  the  most  endeared  friendship,  is  not  a 
rude  familiarity.  The  solemn  and  subduing  sense  of  God  is  inseparable  from  it. 
It  alone  exhibits  the  compatibility  of  the  profoundest  reverence  and  the  most 
trusting  confidence;  it  is  reverence,  but  without  dread — it  is  confidence,  but  without 
familiarity — it  is  awe,  but  without  coldness — it  is  warmth,  but  without  freedom. 

2.  Fellowship  with  God  will  tend  to  soothe  our  anxieties,  and  to  inspire  our 
confidence  in  the  arrangements  of  His  providence.  Fellowship  implies  mutual 
confidence,  and  it  necessarily  ceases  when  we  begin  to  distrust.  Again :  Fellowship 
supposes  sympathy,  interest  in  our  well-being,  and,  assured  of  this,  we  can 
communicate  our  sorrows  and  unburden  our  hearts ;  and  who  can  tell  the 
inestimable  advantage  of  this  ?  3.  Fellowship  with  God  is  a  most  eminent  and 
essential  preparative  for  heaven.  It  is  in  part  an  anticipation  of  its  blessedness : 
and  who  shall  say  that  without  such  foretaste  of  heaven  the  soul,  new  burst  from 
its  mortality,  would  not  be  dazzled  and  overpowered  by  it?  {H.  Allan,  D.D.) 
Fellouship  with  God : — Is  this  not  too  good  to  be  true  ?  Is  it  not  exaggerated  ?  Is 
it  possible  for  a  man  to  have  heaven  with  him  while  on  earth,  and,  amid  the  bustle 
and  cares  of  life,  to  realise  close  communion  with  God  ?  I  can  understand  how,  in 
times  of  deep  sorrow,  something  of  true  fellowship  may  be  enjoyed,  in  answer  to  the 
heart's  need.  The  sound  of  the  tempest  may  make  a  man  take  shelter  in  the  cleft 
of  the  rock.  But  this  constant  communion,  this  realisation  at  all  times,  this  Uving 
in  God,  many  of  you  cannot  see  how  it  can  be  compassed.    How,  you  ask  again, 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  25 

can  such  fellowship  be  continued  in  the  outer  world,  when  one  is  distracted  by  a 
thousand  cares  ?  Perhaps  an  illustration  or  two  will  help  us  to  understand  how 
fellowship  with  God  is  not  only  possible,  but  a  Christian  necessity.  Think  of  the 
public  speaker.  In  order  to  impress  his  audience  with  his  subject,  many  processes 
are  carried  on  within  his  mind  while  he  is  speaking :  memory  in  recalling, 
abstraction  in  arranging,  judgment  in  delivering;  yet  not  for  a  moment  does  he 
let  go  his  argument,  not  for  a  moment  does  he  forget  his  audience,  and  if  he  is 
a  skilful  orator,  he  adapts  his  words  to  the  effect  he  is  producing.  Now,  what  the 
presence  of  an  audience  is  to  the  speaker,  is  there  any  extravagance  in  supposing 
the  presence  of  God  may  be  to  a  believer  ?  With  our  whole  heart  in  our  business, 
we  may  yet  be  conscious  of  the  presence  of  Him  who  knows  our  every  thought  and 
sees  our  every  action,  so  that  all  we  do  may  be  influenced  by  Him.  The  working 
man,  toiling  for  his  family,  often  has  them  in  his  thoughts,  and,  instead  of  being  a 
hindrance  to  his  work,  his  thoughts  help  him  to  ply  his  task  the  busier.  The 
servant  may  always  have  the  remembrance  of  his  master  in  his  mind,  even  though 
that  master  is  not  present.  So  thoughts  of  God  may  run  like  golden  threads 
through  the  web  of  our  life.  It  is  a  good  thing  at  times  to  force  ourselves,  as  it 
were,  to  think  of  God's  presence.  When  we  are  about  to  enter  on  a  duty  let  us  pray 
that  we  may  do  this  duty  as  unto  God,  and  say.  Lord,  direct  us  ;  and  as  we  join  in 
some  innocent  pleasure,  say.  Lord,  let  me  use  this,  as  not  abusing  it.  Even  our 
commonest  work  will  then  have  something  of  God  in  it,  the  outcome  of  dwelling  in 
Him  and  working  with  Him.  Believing  in  a  loving  Saviour,  you  wiU  come  in  time 
to  give  Him  the  strong  attachment  of  personal  friendship,  and  amid  the  shifting 
scenes  of  life  wiU  but  grasp  His  arm  the  closer.     {J.  C.  Lees,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  That  your  joy  may  be  full — The  joy  of  the  Lord,  and  its  fulness  : — I. 
The  natdee  of  this  jot  as  primarily  Christ's.  Joy,  as  commonly  understood  and 
exemplified  among  men,  is  a  tumultuous  feeling ;  a  quick  and  lively  passion  or 
emotion,  blazing  up  for  the  most  part  upon  some  sudden  prosperous  surprise,  and 
apt  to  subside  into  cold  indifference,  if  not  something  worse,  when  fortune  threatens 
change  or  custom  breeds  familiarity  (Eccles.  vii.  6).  Even  what  must  in  a  sense 
be  called  spiritual  joy  may  be  of  that  sort.  There  may  be  joyous  excitement  when 
the  glad  jubilee-trumpet  fills  the  air  with  its  ringing  echoes,  and  an  enthusiastic 
multitude  are  hastening  to  keep  holiday.  There  may  be  a  real  elevation  of  spirit 
when  some  affecting  scene  of  spiritual  awakening  is  witnessed,  or  some  gracious 
ordinance  is  celebrated,  or  some  stirring  voice  is  heard.  Such  joy  is  hke  the  good- 
ness which  as  a  morning  cloud  and  as  the  early  dew  goeth  away.  11.  This  joy, 
"  His  jot,"  is  to  become  ouks  ;  it  is  to  "  remain  in  us."  "  Our  joy  is  to  be  full  " 
by  "  His  joy  being  fulfilled  in  us."  1.  Christ  would  have  His  joy  to  be  really  ours. 
In  all  that  constitutes  the  essence  of  His  own  joy  the  Lord  associates  us  in  intimate 
union  with  Himself.  (1)  In  His  standing  with  the  Father,  and  before  the  Father, 
He  calls  us  to  share.  (2)  He  makes  us  partakers  of  the  very  same  inward  evidence 
of  acceptance  and  sonship  which  He  Himself  had  when  He  was  on  earth.  (3)  We 
have  the  same  commission  with  Christ,  the  same  trust  reposed  in  us,  the  same  work 
assigned  to  us.  Accepted  and  adopted  in  Him,  sealed  as  He  was  sealed  by  the 
Spirit,  we  are  sent,  as  He  was  sent,  into  the  world.  (4)  He  is  "  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart,"  and  therefore  "  His  yoke  is  easy  and  His  burden  is  Ught " ;  so  easy,  so 
light,  that  He  may  count  it  joy  to  bear  them.  In  His  case,  as  in  Jacob's,  the 
charm  is  love;  love,  rejoicing  in  His  Father,  whose  wiU  He  is  doing;  love, 
rejoicing  over  us,  whom  He  is  purchasing  to  be  His  spouse.  We,  like  Him,  must 
be  emptied  of  self.  2.  The  reahty  of  this  joy — Christ's  own  joy  remaining  in  us — 
may  now  be  partly  apparent.  But  who  shaU  venture  to  describe  its  fulness  ?  In 
the  45th  Psahn  the  Messiah,  rejoicing  over  His  Church  as  a  bridegroom  over  His 
bride,  is  thus  saluted:  "Thou  lovest  righteousness  and  hatest  wickedness;  there- 
fore God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee,"  &c.  This  gladness  of  the  anointing  oil 
and  the  sweet-smeUing  spices  is  all  associated  with  His  loving  righteousness  and 
hating  wickedness.  The  secret  of  His  full  joy  Ues  in  His  being,  as  His  Father  is, 
the  holy  one  and  the  just.  To  one  who  is  at  once  a  servant  and  a  son  that  is 
"fuhiess  of  joy."  Is  it  attainable  by  us  here?  Yes,  in  measure,  and  in  growing 
measure.  Let  our  nature  be  assimilated  to  that  of  God,  our  mind  to  His,  our 
heart  to  His.  Let  our  souls  learn  the  lesson  of  seeing  as  He  sees  and  feeUng  as  He 
feels.  HI.  The  propriety  of  this  "  jot  of  the  Lord  " — this  "  jot  in  the  Lord  " 
— IS  not  merelt  a  privilege,  but  a  ddtt.  "  Bejoice  in  the  Lord  ;  and  again  I  say 
unto  you  rejoice."    For  this  joy  is  not  anything  like  that  sort  of  mysterious, 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

incomprehensible  rapture  into  which  the  spirits  may  be  occasionally  thrown  under 
some  sudden  and  irresistible  impulse  from  without  or  from  within.     It  is  a  calm 
and  sober  frame  of  mind,  suited  for  everyday  wear  and  everyday  work.     Its 
elements  and  causes  can  be  specified.    Its  rise  and  progress  can  be  traced.    We 
have  it  in  us,  the  germ  of  it,  the  essence  of  it,  if  we  have  Christ  in  us ;  if  we  have 
the  Spirit  of  Christ.     Stir  up,  then,  the  gift  that  is  in  you.     Do  you  ask  how? 
Observe  the  different  connections  in  which  your  sharing  the  Lord's  joy  stands  in 
the  farewell  discourses  and  the  farewell  prayer ;  as  first,  with  your  keeping  His 
commandments  and  abiding  in  His  love,  as  He  kept  the  Father's  commandments 
and  abode  in  the  Father's  love  (John  xv.  10,  11) ;  secondly,  with  your  asking  in 
His  name  as  you  have  never  asked  before  (xvi.  24) ;  and,  thirdly,  with  your  being 
kept  in  the  Father's  name  in  ever-brightening  disclosures  of  the  Father's  glorious 
perfections  (xvii.  11,  13).    And  observe,  in  the  fourth  place,  the  beloved  apostle's 
warm  appreciation  of  this  joy  as  realised  in  the  communion  of  saints  (2  John  12). 
(R.  S.  Gandlish,  D.D.)        Our  happiness  : — I.  What  we  mean  by  it.     Not  com- 
fortable circumstances.     If  we  did  the  counsel  would  hardly  suit  anybody  for  long. 
Nor  Stoicism.     Some  people  are  almost  irritated  by  any  reference  to  joy  or  even 
peace.     To  "  rejoice  evermore  "  is  a  precept  which  comes  to  us  not  as  an  addition 
to  our  suffering,  but  as  an  anodyne  to  enable  us  to  bear  it.     For  whatever  is  taken 
away  we  may  "  joy  in  God,"  and  therefore  our  resources  are  never  exhausted.    II. 
What  we  gain  by  it.     Souls  immortal  and  capable  themselves  of  these  feelings  of 
joy.     The  world  is  like  Leander  in  the  old  Greek  story,  swimming  for  bare  life 
across  from  Sestos  to  Abydos  by  night,  his  only  attraction  being  the  love  of  Hero, 
his  only  means  of  assuring  himself  that  he  was  in  the  right  course  being  her  torch. 
While  that  lamp  was  throwing  its  light  upon  the  Hellespont  he  knew  that  his 
beloved  was  there,  and  the  hope  and  certainty  of  welcome  bore  him  through  the 
waves.     There  is  many  "  a  strong  swimmer  in  his  agony  "  buffeting  the  billows  of 
this  world's  temptations  who  looks  to  you  for  light.     He  wants  not  only  the  love, 
but  the  lamp,  remember.    Not  only  your  compassion,  but  your  joy.    Let  it  burn 
bright  and  clear,  and  many  a  poor  soul  may  find  grace  and  courage  to  swim  on. 
Fulness  of  joy  will  not  only  help  you  to  win  other  souls,  it  will  help  you  as  to  your 
own.     "In  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls,"  said  the  Master.     We  cease  to 
possess  them  when  we  become  impatient.    That  patience,  and  its  twin  sister  peace 
and  their  daughter  joy,  are  essential  to  our  obedience  to  Christ.    And  besides  the 
Bouls  of  others  and  your  own,  the  soul  of  Christ  will  be  gladdened  by  your  gladness. 
•'  He  meeteth  him  that  rejoiceth."    III.  How  we  come  by  it.     When  we  see  Jesus 
and  know  that  He  hath  loved  us,  when  we  see  that  through  Htm  we  are  treading  a 
pathway  of  promise,  then  the  common  stones  of  life's  causeway  become  changed 
into  chalcedony  and  jacinth  and  emerald,  and  the  gates  through  which  we  go  in 
and  out  are  transmuted  into  pearls.     (J.  B.  Figgis,  M.A.)        Joy  in  believing  : — I. 
Its  natube.     1.  As  predicted  (Isa.  Ivi.  7).     What  folly  it  is  to  seek  pleasure  other- 
wise than  in  God  I     2.  As  encouraged.     When  the  angel  came  to  the  shepherds  he 
brought  tidings  of  joy.    According  to  St.  Paul,  the  great  end  of  the  ministry  is  to 
assist  believers  to  realise  this  joy.     "  We  are  helpers  of  your  joy."     3.  As  illus- 
trated.    Samaria  received  the  gospel,  and  "  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city."     The 
Ethiopian  received  the  gospel  and  went  on  his  way  rejoicing.     St.  Peter,  in  speak- 
ing of  tribulation,   adds,   "  wherein  we  greatly  rejoice " ;    "  ye  rejoice   with  joy 
unspeakable."    II.  The  use  and  advantages  of  this  joy.     1.  The  principal  graces 
can  only  exist  in  the  preserver  of  Christian  joy.     2.  The  praise  of  God  can  only  be 
properly  expressed  in  the  presence  of  Christian  joy.     What  the  heart  does  not  feel 
it  cannot  speak,  what  the  mind  does  not  realise  it  cannot  express.     3.  We  cannot 
honour  our  Master  without  feeling  Christian  joy.     4.  We  cannot  exercise  becoming 
strength  without  Christian  joy.     "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."     Sorrow 
makes  the  hands  hang  down  and  the  knees  become  feeble.     5.  We  can  only  realise 
the  blessedness  of  heaven  by  the  exercise  of  Christian  joy.    Heaven  will  be  the 
consummation  of  the  present,  and  unless  the  seed  is  sown  here  it  can  never  blossom 
hereafter.     6.  We  can  only  be  kept  from  error  and  sin  when  feeling  the  power  of 
Christian  joy.     If  we  wish  to  make  a  flower  droop,  and  wither,  and  fade,  and  die, 
what  do  we  do?    We  remove  it  from  the  sunlight.     The  plant  will  make  an  effort 
to  grow,  but  it  will  soon  die  away.     It  is  so  with  the  soul.     In  the  atmosphere  of 
darkness  and  desolation  it  must  droop  and  eventually  die.     It  will  be  liable  to  dis- 
ease and  to  be  eaten  with  cankerworm.    (Humilist.)       The  joyfulness  of  a  Christian 
life  : — Nothing  is  more  familiar  to  us  in  life  than  the  different  feelings  with  which 
the  same  object  of  pursuit  is  regarded  by  different  persons.     To  some  it  is  attrac- 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  JOHN.  27 

tive  and  delightful,  to  others  it  is  a  matter  of  entire  indifference,  or  is  even 
repulsive.  We  see  this  in  childhood.  Of  the  children  in  the  same  household  not 
infrequently  it  will  be  true  that  to  one  the  schoolroom  is  full  of  invitation  and  of 
dehght,  while  to  others  it  is  simply  repellent.  We  see  the  same  thing  in  mature 
life  continually,  so  that  a  form  of  business  which  to  one  is  delightful  to  another 
presents  no  attractiveness.  The  same  law  holds  in  the  department  of  religious 
activity.  To  most  men  the  religious  life  on  earth  appears  like  a  tedious  journey  to 
a  distant  mine.  They  hope  to  find  great  riches,  but  instead  of  that  the  journey  is 
merely  one  of  fatigue  and  discomfort.  To  others  the  religious  life  on  earth  for  its 
own  sake  is  delightful  and  precious,  containing  in  itself  riches  and  rewards  which 
belong  to  no  other  form  of  human  activity.  When  we  look  carefully  into  the 
elements  of  this  peculiar  and  rich  experience  in  the  religious  life,  they  are  not 
difficult  to  ascertain.  1.  There  is  a  sense  of  worth  in  character  which  comes  with 
the  fuU  and  vivid  experience  of  the  life  of  God,  manifested  in  Christ  and  wrought 
in  us  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This,  in  itself,  is  an  element  of  gladness 
and  delight.  A  man  when  he  has  overcome  a  temptation  and  conquered  a  passion 
feels  himself  eimobled  in  a  measure  by  that  fact.  When  he  has  cherished  in  him- 
self and  brought  to  supremacy  a  trait  difficult  to  be  attained,  and  to  which  his 
nature  seemed  averse  at  the  outset,  he  feels  that  he  has  gained  in  dignity  and 
sweetness  and  strength  of  spirit.  He  rejoices  in  the  fact.  When  the  Christian 
feels  that,  by  his  consecrating  faith  toward  the  Divine  Master,  he  has  reached  a 
point  of  moral  supremacy  which  before  he  had  not  gained,  he  cannot  help  having 
the  sense  of  a  new  birth  in  himself.  There  is  nothing  of  self -righteousness  in  this. 
It  has  not  come  from  his  own  endeavour,  except  as  that  endeavour  has  co-operated 
with  the  grace  and  power  of  the  Most  High  working  in  him  by  the  energy  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  2.  Then  there  is  a  sense  of  his  holy  relationship  to  God — a  sense  by 
which  He  who  builded  and  guides  the  universe  becomes  the  guardian  of  our 
interests ;  His  power,  wisdom,  universal  presence  and  universal  government 
become  the  guarantee  of  our  security.  Sometimes  there  is  a  sweet  and  triumphant 
sense  of  this  in  the  midst  of  the  utmost  perU  and  sorrow.  There  is  a  consciousness 
that  He  who  governs  all  things  from  the  infinite  throne  will  make  our  very  sorrow 
work  for  our  glory,  work  for  the  welfare  of  others  through  us,  work  for  our  own 
more  triumphant  peace  and  more  happy  and  holy  vision  in  the  world  beyond.  3. 
Then,  beyond  this,  there  is  a  sense  of  intimate  fellowship  with  God  ;  not  merely  of 
external  relationship,  which  comes  in  intervals  at  least  of  Christian  experience,  and 
in  which  there  is  a  thrilling  and  unspeakable  delight.  In  that  is  joy,  surpassing  all 
joy  of  music,  all  delights  of  friendship ;  surpassing  aU  other  joys  known  on  the 
earth,  a  gleam  of  the  celestial  breaking  into  the  darkness  of  the  world.  4.  And 
then  there  is  the  consciousness  of  gladness  in  doing  the  work  of  God  on  earth,  in 
co-operating  with  Him  in  our  small  measure,  yet  with  a  true  consecration  of  the 
spirit  to  Him,  which  He  accepts  and  blesses,  and  the  result  of  which  He  secures 
and  furthers  by  His  providence  and  the  energy  of  His  Spirit.  So  it  is  that  the 
grandest  workers  have  been  the  happiest  Christians.  Luther,  how  he  sings  in  his 
conversations  and  in  his  letters !  5.  Then  there  comes  a  joy  in  all  that  helps 
toward  this,  which  makes  this  state  of  experience  and  effort  possible  to  man — joy  in 
the  Word  of  God ;  not  merely  because  it  is  full  of  interesting  narrative,  charming 
biography,  marvellous  prophecy,  grand  argument  of  doctrine,  grand  revelation  of 
the  future,  but  because  here  God  meets  the  human  spirit  which  has  been  seeking 
Him,  and  has  found  it  in  order  to  lift  it  nearer  Himself,  to  give  it  His  own  secret 
thought,  if  we  may  say  so.  The  soul  feels  itself  brought  by  the  Word  into  feUow- 
ship  with  the  Divine  mind.  It  has  an  intense  gladness  of  heart  meditating  upon 
the  Word,  whose  mysteries  then  become  to  it  arguments  for  its  Divine  origin, 
whose  transcendent  promises  flash  before  it  as  with  the  effulgence  of  the  Divine 
mind.  So  with  the  Church.  How  sacred  and  lovely  it  is  when  it  contributes  to 
these  results !  (R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  Fulness  of  joy  : — "  These  things."  What 
things  ?  The  mediatorial  person  and  office  of  Christ  and  the  fellowship  to  which 
they  lead.  It  is  assumed  that  the  fulness  of  joy  arises  out  of  the  fellowship  which 
is  produced  by  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  I.  The  fulness  of  jot  springs  out  op 
•'  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  THE  Fathee."  This  is  seLf-evidcnt.  Suppose  a  sinner  so  to 
Bee  and  confide  in  God  as  his  Father  that  he  may  be  said  to  have  fellowship  with 
Him,  enjoying  a  sense  of  His  favour,  and  reciprocating  it  with  a  feeling  of  love,  it 
is  plain  he  must  be  happy  in  God.  It  is  ever  so  regarded  in  the  Scriptures.  When 
God  invites  sinners  to  forsake  the  fellowship  of  the  ungodly  and  to  come  into  com- 
zaunion  with  Himself,  it  is  in  these  words  (2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18).     The  promise  by 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  -  [cH.iP.  t. 

which  the  invitation  is  enforced  is  supposed  to  secure  true  blessedness  to  all  who 
shall  enjoy  it.  A  brief  contemplation  of  what  may  be  expected  from  God  as  a 
Father  will  make  this  statement  plain.  A  father  is  ready  to  pardon  his  children. 
A  father  has  tender  sympathy  with  his  children.  Their  joys  and  sorrows  are  all  his 
own.  A  father  teaches  his  children.  What  he  knows  himself  he  makes  known  to 
them.  He  does  so  that  they  may  know  how  to  choose  the  good  and  refuse  the  evil. 
A  father  corrects  his  children.  Observe,  then,  how  an  inspired  apostle  applies  this 
thought  (Heb.  xii.  9).  A  father  encourages  his  children.  A  father  protects  his 
children.  A  father  provides  for  his  children.  Suppose,  now,  that  this  view  of  God 
is  reahsed.  What,  then,  ought  to  be  his  joy  ?  II.  Fulness  of  joy  springs  out  of 
"  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  His  SoN,  Jesus  Christ."  Besidcs  the  happiness  thus  derived 
from  God,  however,  there  is  a  fresh  source  of  joy  opened  up  to  the  believer  in  Christ 
Himself.  1.  First,  His  person  is  such  as  to  call  forth  this  affection.  He  is  "  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh."  He  has  become  such  for  the  very  purpose  of  being  a 
Saviour  of  men.  2.  Again,  the  work  of  Christ  affords  matter  of  joy.  "  He  died 
the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God."  "  Christ  hath  redeemed 
us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  been  made  a  curse  for  us."  His  work  is 
perfect,  and  the  sinner  who  is  willing  to  accept  it  is  presented  with  a  full  and  free 
salvation.  3.  His  gracious  ofi&ces,  still  continued,  must  farther  heighten  the  joy  of 
all  who  have  fellowship  with  Him  in  them.  4.  Once  more  we  have  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  and  the  blessed  promises  of  which  He  is  the  fulfiller.  5.  To  all  this  must  be 
added  His  everlasting  covenant.  All  the  blessings  He  bestows  are  secured  by 
covenant,  and  nothing  is  omitted  which  is  needful  for  His  people.  III.  The  ful- 
ness OF  JOT  IS  GREATLY    CONFIRMED    BY    FELLOWSHIP    WITH    BELIEVERS.       They  iuStrUCt 

one  another.  How  much  we  owe  to  the  society  of  the  wise  and  good !  The  inter- 
change of  thought  is  a  principal  means  of  advancement  in  knowledge.  Behevers 
encourage  one  another.  We  should  aim  at  being  useful  to  those  with  whom  we  are 
associated.  Believers  should  warn  one  another.  "  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  sin  upon 
thy  brother,  but  rebuke  him."  By  pursuing  such  a  course  it  is  easy  to  see  how  the 
fellowship  of  Christians  would  tend  to  the  fulness  of  their  joy.  {Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
The  full  joy  of  Christian  fellowship : — 1.  The  joy  which  believers  have  for  the  pre- 
sent in  this  fellowship  is  a  full  joy,  it  being  true  of  this  joy,  and  no  other,  that  it  is 
a  full  joy.  (1)  There  are  two  adjuncts  peculiar  to  this  joy  which  demonstrate  its 
fulness,  to  wit,  the  sincerity  and  the  permanency  of  it.  This  joy  is  a  sincere, 
cordial  joy.  A  full  shower  of  rain  is  that  which  doth  not  only  wet  the  sur- 
face, but  sink  into  the  ground,  bedew  the  branches,  but  go  down  to  the 
root.  That  is  a  full  joy  which  doth  not  only  fill  the  face  with  laughter  but 
the  heart  with  comfort,  and  such,  yea,  such  alone  is  joy.  The  joy  of  religion 
is  not  a  light  joy,  which  only  swimmeth  at  the  top,  but  weighty,  and  sinks 
down  to  the  bottom  of  the  heart,  so  that  it  exhilarateth  the  inmost  parts.  This  joy 
is  a  permanent,  lasting  joy.  That  is  most  truly  said  to  be  full  which  doth  not  fail, 
and  such  only  is  this  Divine  joy.  Other  joys  are  such  as,  before  they  come,  we 
make  great  account  of,  but  when  they  are  come  we  cannot  keep,  nay,  we  quickly 
grow  weary  of,  and  as  the  flower  often  sheds  before  the  leaf  fade,  so  the  joy 
vanisheth  while  yet  the  thing  remaineth.  In  this  respect  we  may  say  of  worldly 
joy  it  is  satiating  but  not  satisfying,  glutting  and  yet  not  filling  ;  but  Christian  joy 
is  that  which  we  can  never  have  enough  of.  (2)  Not  only  the  adjuncts,  but  the 
effects  commend  this  joy,  it  being  deservedly  called  a  full  because  a  strong  joy,  able 
to  sustain  the  spirit  under,  and  bear  it  up  against  affliction.  Other  joys  at  best 
carry  in  them  only  a  partial  emolument,  and  therefore  it  is  the  joy  of  wealth  is  no 
antidote  against  sickness,  nor  can  the  joy  of  health  cure  the  sorrow  of  poverty,  but 
this  joy  is  the  universal  medicine,  the  catholic  remedy  against  all  sorts  of  miseries. 
It  maketh  a  prison  sweet  and  pain  easy,  it  maketh  a  man  cheerful  in  want  and 
comfortable  in  losses,  it  turneth  a  wilderness  into  a  garden,  and  finally,  it  supports 
in  life,  yea,  it  comforts  in  death.  (3)  The  fulness  of  this  joy  chiefly  depends  on 
the  ground  and  object  whereabout  it  is  conversant.  It  is  an  undoubted  maxim  that 
the  object  of  all  joy  is  good,  and  therefore  such  as  is  the  good  such  is  the  joy.  If 
the  good  be  only  so  in  appearance  the  joy  must  needs  be  false  and  empty,  but  if  it 
be  a  real,  full  good,  the  joy  must  needs  be  both  true  and  full.  Now,  as  for  worldly 
joy,  it  is  only  in  vain,  empty  things  (Eccles.  i.  2),  whereas  this  joy  is  fixed  on  God 
our  Creator,  Christ  our  Redeemer,  and  so  is  a  true  and  solid  joy.  2.  Though  this 
joy  we  have  for  the  present  be  a  full  joy  in  opposition  to  carnal  and  worldly  joy, 
yet  in  comparison  of  that  celestial  joy  it  is  but  empty,  and  rather  filling  than  full ; 
a  ad  therefore  some  conceive  joy  here  to  be,  by  a  metonymy  of  the  effect  for  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  29 

cause,  put  for  blessedness,  because  then  alone  it  is  that  we  shall  have  full  and 
perfect  joy.  (N.  Hardy,  D.D.)  Religion  a  joy  : — I  remember  a  friend  of  mine 
who  had  gone  far  into  what  is  called  "  a  life  of  pleasure  "  telling  me,  when  he 
became  a  Christian,  that  what  surprised  him  most  of  all  was  this — he  had  always 
looked  on  religion  as  a  burden  which  he  knew  he  ought  to  carry,  but  he  found  that 
it  was  something  that  carried  him  and  his  burden  too.  He  said  also  that  he  had 
enjoyed  in  a  single  week  after  he  was  a  Christian  more  real  pleasure  than  in  all  the 
years  he  had  devoted  to  what  is  termed  the  pursuit  of  pleasure.  I  am  convinced 
this  is  the  view  of  religion  needed  in  a  great  city  where  the  individual  is  lost  in  the 
great  multitude.  {James  Stalker,  D.D.)  Open  the  heart  to  joy  : — God  offers  to 
fiU  our  homes  and  our  hearts  with  joy  and  gladness  if  we  will  only  let  Him  do  it. 
We  cannot  create  the  canary  birds,  but  we  can  provide  cages  for  them  and  fill  our 
dwellings  with  their  music.  Even  so  we  cannot  create  the  heavenly  gifts  which 
Jesus  offers,  but  they  are  ours  if  we  provide  heart-room  for  them.  The  birds  of 
peace,  and  contentment,  and  joy,  and  praise  wiU  fly  in  fast  enough  if  we  wiU  only 
invite  Jesus  Christ  and  set  the  windows  of  our  souls  open  for  His  coming.  (T.  C. 
Cuyler.)  Joy  givers  : — The  world  has  a  right  to  expect  a  great  many  things  from 
all  of  us  who  call  ourselves  Christians.  It  is  the  business  of  a  Christian  not  to 
smoke  but  to  shine.  The  dark-lantern  religion  that  never  makes  itself  visible  to 
others  will  never  guide  you  or  me  to  heaven.  We  ought  to  reflect  our  Saviour  as 
light-givers.  We  ought  to  live  above  the  fog-belt.  The  higher  up  the  holier,  the 
higher  up  the  happier.  A  churlish,  croaking,  gloomy  professor  of  gospel-religion 
is  a  hving  libel ;  he  haunts  society  like  a  ghost.  But  there  is  One  who  says  to  us, 
"I  am  come  that  your  joy  may  be  full."  Let  us  open  our  souls  to  Him  and  our 
faces  wiU  shine  ;  He  can  make  even  tears  to  sparkle ;  we  shall  carry  sunshine  into 
the  darkest  hours;  we  shall  catch  instalments  of  heaven  in  advance.  (Ibid.) 
Happiness  helpful  to  holiness : — There  is  an  intimate  connection  between  happiness 
and  holiness.  If  you  are  striving  to  attain  the  other  port  to  which  John  would  pilot 
you,  that  port  of  "  Sin  not,"  remember  that  patience  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Lord 
are  sailors  of  which  it  is  hardly  too  much  to  say,  "  Except  these  abide  in  the  ship 
ye  cannot  be  saved."  At  aU  events,  full  salvation  demands  fulness  of  joy.  (J.  B. 
Figgis,  M. A.)  Knowledge  of  Christ  the  foundation  of  joy  : — High  thoughts  of 
Christ  constitute  the  essentials  of  a  sinner's  religion.  They  are  the  foundation  of 
his  hopes  and  the  materials  of  his  happiness.     (C.  Bradley.) 

Vers.  5-10.  This  then  is  the  message  .  .  .  that  God  is  light. — The  clergy  God's 
messengers : — All  rightly  ordained  ministers  of  Christ  are  God's  messengers.  Our 
office  is  not  merely  of  man's  appointment ;  we  hold  it  from  the  Lord.  We  are  sent 
to  remind  you  of  God's  wiU,  to  be  His  witnesses  unto  you  (Heb.  ii.  1-4).  Consider, 
then,  the  message  which  we  bring  unto  you,  whence  it  comes,  and  upon  what 
authority.  "  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee."  That  message  began  to  be 
preached  by  the  Lord  Himself,  by  Him  who  said,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen 
the  Father."  The  apostles,  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  His  majesty  and  glory,  have 
handed  down  His  words  to  us  in  the  New  Testament.  To  show  that  they  were 
sent  by  God  they  wrought  miracles  (Mark  xvi.  16).  We  are  invested  with  God's 
authority  to  warn,  to  teach,  to  rebuke,  to  comfort  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  And  as  our 
message  is  from  God,  so  we  must  be  faithful  in  delivering  it.  Christ's  ministers 
are  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel,  and  they  must  fulfil  that  trust  (Exek.  iii.  11). 
They  who  refuse  to  hear  the  messenger  refuse  to  hear  Him  who  sent  him  (Matt.  x. 
40).  It  remains  for  me  to  say  what  my  message  is  to  each  of  you.  1.  And,  first, 
I  speak  to  those  who  are  careless,  thoughtless,  and  unconcerned  about  religion. 
You  have  not  known  God  as  a  Father,  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  the  Holy  Spirit  as 
a  Sanctifier.  I  have  a  message  from  God  to  you.  He  says,  "  Awake,  thou  that 
sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead."  "  Consider  your  ways."  "  Boast  not  thyself  of 
to-morrow  :  for  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth."  Remember  that 
■word,  "Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  He  will  draw  nigh  to  you."  2.  Next,  I  speak  to 
those  who  are  living  in  known  sin.  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  you.  Break 
off  your  sin  by  repentance,  turn  to  God  through  Christ  earnestly,  seriously,  and  at 
once ;  for  remember  that  the  unbelieving  must  have  their  portion  in  the  lake  that 
burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone.  We  beseech  you,  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye 
reconciled  to  God.  3.  But  is  there  one  here  who  is  humbly  desiring  to  learn  the 
way  of  salvation,  who  is  sorry  and  ashamed  to  have  lived  so  long  without  God,  and 
to  have  so  grievously  provoked  Him  by  sin  and  folly  ?  I  have  a  message  from  God 
unto  thee,  and  it  is  one  full  of  love  and  fuU  of  comfort — '•  Be  of  good  cheer  " ; 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

••  They  that  seek  shall  find."  4.  But  there  may  also  be  some  who,  having  once 
known  the  way  of  righteousness,  have  since  fallen  away  and  gone  backwards.  I 
have  a  message  from  God  to  you  also.  "  If  any  man  draw  back,"  He  says,  ''  My 
Boul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him.  "  Bemember  from  whence  thou  art  fallen  and 
repent,  and  do  thy  first  works."  "  Eeturn  unto  Me,  and  I  will  return  unto  you."  6. 
Or  is  there  one  amongst  us  whose  heart  is  troubled  with  a  sense  of  sin  and  guilt  ? 
who  is  asking  in  sorrow.  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  There  is  a  message  from 
God  to  you.  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He  came  into  the  world  to  save 
siimers.  6.  There  are  yet  some  to  whom  I  may  especially  say  I  have  a  message 
from  God  unto  you — you  who  have  fled  to  Christ,  who  are  Uving  a  Christian  life 
in  communion  with  God  and  hope  of  heaven.  You  are  still  surrounded  with 
temptations  from  within  and  from  without.  Therefore  be  sober,  be  vigilant.  Walk 
humbly  with  God,  pray  without  ceasing.  Abound  in  all  good  works.  God  expects 
you  to  attend  to  what  He  says,  to  give  earnest  heed  to  the  things  which  you  have 
heard,  lest  at  any  time  you  should  let  them  slip.  {E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  A  glorioiu 
message : — I.  A  message.  1.  How  was  this  message  obtained  ?  "  We  have  heard  it, 
and  disclose  it  unto  you,"  says  John.  Heard  it;  from  whom?  Unquestionably 
from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  faithful  witness,  the  Great  Teacher  sent  from  God. 
He  delivered  it  to  His  disciples,  and  they  to  others.  2.  What  does  this  message 
express  ?  God  is  Light,  He  makes  us  wise  unto  salvation.  3.  What  does  this  light 
exclude?  It  excludes  all  darkness,  for  "  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at 
all."  This  shows  the  supremacy  of  God,  and  His  sovereign  perfection  in  distinction 
from  all  orders  of  His  creatures.  II.  The  awfuIi  decision.  "  If  we  say  we  have 
fellowship  with  Him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth."  1.  Now 
men  may  say  this  by  profession  of  it  to  others  ;  and  they  may  say  it  to  their  own 
souls,  persuading  themselves  that  they  are  real  Christians,  when  they  have  "  no  part 
or  lot  in  the  matter,"  their  hearts  not  being  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  Con- 
geniality must  precede  "fellowship,"  and  resemblance  must  precede  fellowship. 
And  therefore  it  wiU  follow  that  a  change  of  heart  is  necessary,  for  without  this 
change  we  can  neither  enjoy  God,  nor  serve  Him  acceptably.  HI.  The  glorious 
PRIVILEGE.  1.  It  takes  in  fellowship.  "  We  have  fellowship  one  with  another." 
There  is  a  fellowship  belonging  to  all  the  people  of  God  wherever  they  live.  But 
this  is  not  the  fellowship  referred  to  here.  Here  the  "  fellowship  one  with 
another  "  means  the  fellowship  that  exists  between  God  and  us.  He  is  their  God, 
and  they  are  His  people.  2.  The  other  article  here  is  the  assurance  of  pardon. 
"  And  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  (1)  Observe 
the  procurer,  the  Son  of  God.  However  this  term  may  be  explained,  it  always  in 
Scripture  means  dignity.  (2)  Mark  the  efficacy  of  His  death:  "His  blood 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  It  delivers  us  from  the  heinousness  of  it,  however 
offensive  it  is  in  the  eyes  of  a  holy  God ;  and  from  the  love  of  sin,  and  make  as 
•'  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God."  (8)  Then  mark  the  extent  of  it :  it 
"  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  " — from  original  sin  and  actual  sin;  from  all  sin,  however 
aggravated.  His  blood  cleanseth  perfectly  from  all  sin,  and  completely  from  all 
transgression.  (W.Jay.)  The  conditions  of  Divine  fellowship  : — I.  A  lesson  of 
rNSTRTJCTioN  (vcr.  5).  Both  the  manner  and  the  matter  of  this  lesson  are  very 
impressive.  1.  The  apostle  adopts  the  manner  of  the  deliverer  of  Israel  (Judges 
iii.  20).  It  is  indeed  the  style  of  our  Lord  Himself  (John  vii.  16).  It  is  in- 
tended to  remind  us  that  the  word  and  ministry  are  to  be  understood  and 
treated  as  a  message  from  God  (1  Thess.  iv.  8).  It  is  observable  that  no 
mention  is  here  made  by  name  of  the  Being  from  whom  the  message  comes. 
"  We  have  heard  of  him."  Of  whom  ?  No  doubt  the  glorious  Being  described 
in  the  previous  verses.  It  is  Jesus  the  Mediator.  2.  Impressive,  however, 
as  is  the  manner  of  the  lesson  before  us,  its  matter  is  of  far  higher  moment. 
(1)  "  God  is  light."  Its  simplicity  and  comprehensiveness  are  amazing.  There  are 
three  principal  ideas  suggested  by  the  figure,  (a)  Light  is  the  emblem  of  knowledge. 
God  is  omniscient.  He  sees  all  things  as  they  are,  in  their  true  nature  and  real 
influence.  He  cannot  be  deceived.  Matter  and  mind  are  alike  plain  to  His 
perception.  Our  motives  and  feelings  and  purposes  are  as  palpable  to  Him  as  our 
bodies,  (b)  So  also  is  light  the  emblem  of  holiness.  God  is  "the  Holy  One," 
implying  tnat  none  but  He  is  absolutely  and  infinitely  holy.  All  He  does  is  in 
nndeviating  correspondence  with  perfect  purity,  (c)  Light  is  the  emblem  of 
happiness.  Infinite  knowledge  and  holiness  must  be  productive  of  infinite 
happiness.  He  possesses  within  Himself  all  the  sources  of  unmingled  blessedness. 
His  perfections  are  never-failing  springs  of  joy.    (2)  "  And  in  Him  is  no  darkness 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  31 

at  all."  Nor  is  this  without  its  meaning.  It  is  designed  to  teach  us  that  no 
element  enters  into  His  light  to  obscure  it.  He  is  intellectually  and  morally 
perfect.  U.  A  warning  against  self-deception  (ver.  6).  1.  "  If  we  say  that  we 
have  fellowship."  We  say  it,  but  we  may  herein  be  uttering  what  is  untrue. 
Profession  is  not  principle.  We  may  be  self -deceived,  or  we  may  be  hypocrites.  2. 
"And  walk  in  darkness."  Darkness  is  the  emblem  of  ignorance,  error,  and  sin. 
And  so  far  may  the  spirit  of  self-deception  or  hypocrisy  prevail,  that  with  the 
highest  professions  on  our  lips,  our  walk  may  be  utterly  inconsistent  with  them.  It 
is  not  merely  that  we  may  be  betrayed  by  the  force  of  temptation  into  some 
inconsistent  action,  but  that  our  habit  of  life  is  contrary  to  sound  principle  and  true 
godliness.  3.  "  We  lie  "  in  such  a  case.  Our  outward  profession  is  contrary  to  the 
inward  reaUty.  4.  "  And  do  not  the  truth."  If  such  be  our  deportment,  we  are 
disobedient  to  the  truth.  The  language  reminds  us  of  the  words  of  Christ  (John  iii. 
19-21).  5.  It  is  plain  that  the  warning  of  the  apostle  is  designed  to  stand  in 
contrast  to  the  lesson  which  he  had  just  delivered.  Looking  at  it,  then,  in  this 
light,  how  powerful  is  his  appeal !  God  is  light.  Who,  then,  can  have  fellowship 
with  such  a  Being?  Is  it  he  who  is  walking  in  darkness,  which  is  the  emblem  of 
ignorance,  and  error,  and  sin?  Impossible!  "And  what  communion  hath  light 
with  darkness  ?  "  6.  With  these  solemn  words  before  us,  let  us  inquire  who  they 
are  that  belie  their  profession  of  fellowship  with  God?  (1)  The  ignorant  do 
so.  They  have  no  adequate  conception  of  sin,  or  of  themselves,  or  of  the  Saviour, 
or  of  God,  or  of  the  world,  or  of  eternity.  They  are  walking  in  darkness,  yet  they 
have  no  fear.  (2)  The  erroneous  present  a  more  aggravated  case.  What  a 
description  does  Isaiah  (xliv.  20)  give  of  such  !  St.  Paul  describes  the  same  (Eom. 
X.  3).  The  forms  in  which  they  do  so  are  very  various,  and  sometimes  the  very 
opposite  of  one  another.  One  trusts  in  his  innocence  or  righteousness.  He  does 
not  see  anything  in  himself  why  God  should  cast  him  off,  but  thinks  he  has  done 
much  to  commend  himself  to  His  fellowship.  Another  relies  not  on  himself  at  all, 
but  in  the  creed  which  he  has  learned  from  his  youth,  and  which  he  holds 
tenaciously  in  the  letter,  while  a  stranger  to  its  power  and  spirit.  Many  more  rest 
in  the  formality  of  outward  rites  and  ceremonies  (Matt.  xv.  8).  (3)  Above  all,  they 
who  allow  themselves  in  sin,  fall  under  the  censure  of  the  apostle.  Nor  are  such 
always  sensible  of  their  own  inconsistencies.  It  is  to  be  feared  many  are  going  to 
the  judgment  with  their  sins  without  alarm.  HI.  The  seasonable  and  en- 
couraging DIRECTION  which  the  apostle  gives  to  those  who  would  have  the  enjoy- 
ment and  advantage  of  real  fellowship  (ver.  7).  1.  A  clear  apprehension  of  the 
truth  is  essential  to  fellowship.  No  one  can  have  solid  and  permanent  enjoyment 
of  God  who  does  not  well  understand  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  2.  The 
believer,  thus  enlightened  and  brought  into  fellowship  with  God,  must  exercise  the 
utmost  watchfulness  against  sin.  Whatever  sin  is  allowed,  and  in  whatever 
measure,  it  will  obscure  the  object  of  faith,  and  darken  the  evidence  of  his  interest 
in  it.  3.  He  who  would  walk  in  the  light  and  enjoy  the  fellowship  of  God  must 
abound  in  well-doing.  This  is  the  secret  of  religious  enjoyment.  "  He  that 
watereth  others,  shall  himself  be  watered."  Exercise  is  essential  to  health. 
{Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Light   the  nature  and   dwelling-place   of  God  : — I.  The 

form  of  THE  ANNOUNCEMENT  in  the  fifth  verse  is  very  peculiar :  "  This,  then,  is  the 
message,"  &c.  It  is  not  a  discovery  which  we  make  concerning  God,  an  inference  or 
deduction  which  we  draw  for  ourselves  from  observation  of  His  works  and  ways,  and 
which  we  pubUsh  in  that  character,  and  with  that  weight  of  influence,  to  our 
fellow-men.  It  is  an  authentic  and  authoritative  communication  to  us  from  Him- 
self. And  it  is  to  be  accepted  as  such.  1.  Positively,  "  God  is  light."  Let  these  two 
thoughts  be  fixed  in  our  minds  ;  first,  the  thought  of  perfect  openness  ;  and  secondly, 
the  thought  of  perfect  inviolability.  2.  Negatively,  "  In  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all." 
I  connect  this  part  of  the  statement  with  that  saying  of  John  in  his  Gospel  (chap.  i. 
5).  In  the  light  itself,  in  Him  who  is  the  light — even  when  shining  in  darkness, 
the  darkness  which  comprehendeth  it  not — there  is  still  no  darkness  at  aU.  "  The 
light  shineth  in  darkness."  He  who  is  the  light  comes,  in  the  person  of  His 
Son,  to  seek  and  to  save  us  who  are  in  darkness  ;  who,  as  to  our  character,  and  state, 
and  prospects,  are  darkness  itself.  For  our  sakes,  in  our  stead,  in  our  nature.  He 
who  is  light  is  identified  with  our  darkness.  And  yet  "  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  aU." 
In  the  very  heat  and  crisis  of  this  death-struggle,  there  is  no  surrender  of  the  Ught 
to  the  darkness ;  no  concession,  no  compromise ;  no  allowance  of  some  partial 
shading  of  the  light  on  which  the  darkness  presses  so  terribly.  AU  still  is  clear, 
open,   transparent,   between  the   Son  and  the  Father.     In  the  interest  of  hght 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

triumphing  over  darkness,  not  by  any  plausible  terms  of  accommodation,  but  before 
the  open  face  of  eternal  righteousness,  pure  and  untainted,  the  Father  gives  the  cup 
and  the  Son  drains  it  to  the  dregs.  In  that  great  transaction,  thus  consummated, 
before  all  intelligences,  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  it  is  clearly  seen  and 
conclusively  proved  that  "  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  II. 
Such  being  the  message  in  the  fifth  verse,  the  warning  in  the  sixth  verse  becomes 
simply  a  self-evident  inference :  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  Him,  and 
walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth."  What  is  this  walking  in  darkness  ? 
Our  answer  is  simple  enough.  All  unholy  walking  is  walking  in  darkness  (Eph.  v. 
3-11 ;  Gal.  v.  19-21).  But  the  matter  must  be  pressed  a  little  more  closely  home. 
The  characteristics  of  light  are  clearness,  openness,  transparency,  and  inviola- 
bility, retaining  and  preserving  its  own  pure  nature,  unmodified,  unmingled, 
unsullied  by  external  influences.  Now  darkness  is  the  opposite  of  this  light. 
Instead  of  openness  there  is  concealment  and  disguise ;  instead  of  inviolability  there 
is  facile  impressibility.  Ah !  this  walking  in  darkness !  Is  it  not  after  all  just 
walking  deceitfully  ?  Is  it  not  simple  insincerity,  the  want  of  perfect  openness  and 
transparent  honesty  in  our  dealings  with  God  and  with  ourselves  as  to  the  real 
state  of  our  hearts  towards  God,  and  the  bias  of  our  affections  away  from  God  towards 
selfishness  and  worldliness  ?  Is  it  not  that  we  have  in  us  and  about  us  something 
to  conceal ;  something  that  does  not  quite  satisfy  us ;  something  about  which  we 
have  at  least  occasional  misgivings  ;  something  that,  when  we  think  seriously,  and 
confess,  and  pray,  we  slur  over  and  do  not  like  to  dwell  upon ;  something  that  we  try 
to  represent  to  ourselves  as  not  so  bad  as  it  seems — as  indeed,  in  the  circumstances, 
excusable  and  unavoidable  ?  III.  From  the  solemn  message  in  the  fifth  verse,  and 
the  faithful  warning  in  the  sixth,  the  geacious  assurance  in  the  seventh  fitly 
follows :  "  We  have  fellowship  one  with  another  "  ;  God  with  us  and  we  with  God. 
The  expression  may  seem  to  savour  of  familiarity.  The  explanation  may  be  found 
in  the  conditional  clause — "  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light."  We 
walk  in  the  light  in  which  God  is.  It  is  the  light  of  His  own  pure  truth.  His  own 
holy  nature.  In  that  light  He  sees  and  knows  and  judges  all  things.  And  now  the 
supposition  is  that  we  walk — as  He  is — in  that  light.  To  us  the  light  in  which  we 
walk  is  identically  the  same  as  the  light  in  which  He  is.  The  same  lustrous  glory 
of  holiness  shines  on  our  walk  and  on  His  throne.  The  very  same  pure  medium 
of  vision  is  common  to  us  both.  "  We  see  light  in  His  light."  {R.  S.  Candlish, 
D.D.)  God  is  light: — 1.  When  the  source  of  light  is  considered  we  have  an 
emblem  of  the  vastness,  the  ubiquity  of  God.  How  insignificant  is  man  in  his  lofty 
aspirations  and  his  feeble  powers  as  he  walks  in  the  midst  of  this  vastness  !  2.  The 
analysis  of  the  spectrum  imfolds  to  us  the  fact  that  a  ray  (called  white)  is  made  up 
of  a  number  of  coloured  rays ;  and  further  observations  show  that  combined  with 
this  white  ray  there  is  also  a  ray  of  heat,  and  the  chemical  ray  called  actinism, 
which  gives  vitality  and  paints  the  lines  of  life  and  beauty.  The  natural  and  moral 
attributes  of  God,  such  as  His  omnipresence,  eternity,  spirituality,  and  His 
benevolence,  justice,  truth,  and  others,  form  to  us  the  only  conceptions  of  God's 
character  which  we  can  realise.  Without  a  knowledge  of  these  God  has  no 
appreciable  relation  to  us,  and  we  fail  in  our  attempt  to  conceive  it.  But  as  we 
look  to  the  analysis  of  the  white  light,  and  of  the  combined  ray,  to  tell  us  of  the 
physical  properties  of  the  sun's  rays,  so  we  need  such  intermediate  knowledge  of 
God's  attributes  to  realise  a  knowledge  of  the  perfections  of  His  character,  and  of 
the  unity  of  the  mysterious  persons  in  One,  that  God  may  be  known  to  us.  3. 
When  the  diffusion  of  light  is  considered,  we  have  the  most  perfect  illustration 
which  nature  can  afford  of  the  immediateness  of  God's  communications  with  us. 
John  here,  when  the  undulatory  theory  was  unknown,  and  any  notion  of  the 
velocity  of  its  influence,  conceived  light  as  emanating  from  the  sun — "shining 
forth,"  filling  the  heavens  and  pervading  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  at  times 
intercepted  and  darkness  intervened.  But  how  much  higher  than  this  are  our 
conceptions  of  this  diffusion  raised,  under  more  exact  knowledge,  when  we  learn 
that  the  actual  velocity  of  light  in  its  passage  from  the  sun  to  the  earth  is  at  the  rate 
of  one  hundred  and  ninety-three  thousand  miles  per  second,  a  speed  which  would 
belt  the  earth  in  the  space  of  one-eighth  of  a  second.  Yet,  quick  as  this  velocity 
may  appear,  it  is  tardy  in  comparison  with  God's  communications  with  us.  "  When 
they  call  I  will  answer  !  "  Here  is  no  waiting,  no  passage  through  an  intercepting 
medium.  4.  With  equal  force  does  the  figure  unfold  to  us  a  view  of  God's 
universal  knowledge.  Light  is  like  God,  inasmuch  as  it  reveals  and  exposes  to 
view  every  object   upon  which  it  falls.     "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  83 

throughout  the  whole  earth."  "  His  eyes  behold,  His  eyelids  try  the  children  of 
men."  "For  the  Lord  God  is  a  sun,"  discovering,  enlightening,  and  cheering 
the  whole  created  universe.  5.  But  the  most  prominent  feature  in  this  analogy 
is  the  relation  of  light  with  God's  infinite  purity  and  goodness.  6.  But  the 
teaching  of  the  text  is  not  all  hidden  under  these  material  comparisons  and 
contrasts ;  for,  hfting  us  to  a  higher  view,  the  relation  in  which  God  stands 
to  the  Christian  in  his  daily  course  of  spiritual  life — a  Ufe  of  purity — is  directly 
intimated.  (1)  The  Christian  is  here  supposed  to  be  walking  before  God  in 
harmony  and  perfect  confidence  with  Him,  in  a  walk  comprising  the  sum  of 
his  motives,  his  aspirations,  his  actions.  (2)  Not  only  does  he  walk  with  God  in 
the  light  of  Divine  knowledge,  but  also  in  that  of  Divine  purity.  (3)  This  walk 
is,  like  light,  to  be  constant  and  unvarying,  as  the  little  intruding  preposition 
"  if  "  preceding  the  sentence  implies — "  if  we  walk  in  the  hght."  (D.  Smith.) 
God  is  light : — 1.  In  this  view,  are  we  not  warranted  in  laying  stress  on  the  fact 
that  Mght  is  an  entirely  open  thing  ?  It  is  the  first  property  of  light  to  manifest 
itseK  and  all  else  on  which  it  rests.  It  is  here  the  direct  antithesis  of  darkness. 
Darkness  hides ;  but  hght  lays  bare  everything  it  reaches.  Moreover,  its  whole 
tendency  is  to  expand  its  influence  all  around  the  source  whence  it  proceeds.  Here, 
I  think,  we  have  set  before  us,  first  of  all,  the  blessed  fact  that  God  is  the  God  of 
revelation.  He  has  not  hid  Himself  from  us  as  in  our  sin  we  deserved.  But  He 
has  unveiled  Himself  to  us  that  we  may  know  His  nature  and  character.  His 
method  of  dealing  with  us  now,  and  His  plans  for  our  destiny  hereafter.  This  was 
done  in  many  different  ways  from  the  beginning  of  the  world ;  it  reached  its  chmax 
in  the  advent  of  Christ.  The  sun  is  set  on  high  for  the  illumination  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth.  No  portion  of  our  globe  is  exempted  from  his  beams.  So  the  Lord 
manifestly  intends  to  diffuse  the  knowledge  of  Himself  over  the  whole  world.  It  is 
His  very  nature  to  penetrate  by  His  Word  into  the  remotest  corners  of  human 
existence.  Yet  wherever  His  Word  does  penetrate,  He  is  found  true  to  Himself.  As 
Light  alone.  He  has  the  power  of  distinguishing  betwixt  truth  and  falsehood,  purity 
and  impurity.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  is  not  light  also  an  inviolable  thing  ?  This 
tells  us  that  the  nature  of  God  also  is  inviolably  pure.  As  the  light  streams  into 
contact  with  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it,  so  God  is  now  by  His  Spirit  alike  in 
providence  and  redemption  in  the  closest  contact  with  the  heart  and  life  of  men. 
But  in  this  action  on  His  creatures  He  never  catches  anything  of  the  moral  corrup- 
tion by  which  the  world  is  saturated.  3.  But,  last  of  all,  is  not  hght  also  a  glorious 
thing  ?  Thus  it  suggests  to  us  the  moral  and  spiritual  glory  of  the  Divine  nature. 
{J.  P.Lilley,  M.A)  God  is  light : — I.  We  look  at  the  text  as  an  illusteation  op 
THE  Divine  character,  1.  Light  is  perhaps  the  nearest  approach  of  anything  with 
which  we  are  acquainted  to  immateriaUty.  It  seems  to  fill  all  nature,  to  surround  all 
worlds,  and  so  to  bear  a  fit  resemblance  to  its  glorious  Maker,  who  says,  "  Do  not  I 
ifill  heaven  and  earth,  saith  the  Lord  ?  "  2.  Then,  again,  how  fine  an  emljlem  is  it  of 
the  Divine  purity !  3.  Does  it  not  also  portray  to  our  minds  His  all-searching  know- 
ledge ?  4.  It  is  important  also  to  observe  that  hght  is  exhibited  to  us  in  the  text 
as  the  emblem  of  the  essential  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature.    11.  Oxtb  text  may 

KOW  BE  contemplated  AS  CONTAINING  AN   INTIMATION  OF  WHAT  GoD  DOES  FOR  MAN.      1. 

Light  is  a  revealer.  2.  Light  communicates  enjoyment;  for  a  "pleasant  thing  it 
is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun."  3.  Light  clothes  aU  things  with  beauty.  Dark 
providences  brighten  when  God  shines  upon  them,  and  the  manifestation  of  TTia 
wisdom  and  love,  His  faithfulness  and  power,  please  our  eyes  and  comfort  our 
hearts.  4.  Light  purifies  the  atmosphere  in  which  we  Uve,  which  without  it  would 
be  but  ill  adapted  to  sustain   our  existence  in   comfort.    HI.  The   subject  is 

ADAPTED   TO  FmiNISH  US  WITH  A  FEW  SERIOUS  AND   PRACTICAL   SUGGESTIONS.      1.   HoW 

blind  are  men  that  do  not  see  God  in  all  things  I  The  hght  of  heaven  shines  aU 
a^romid  them.  2.  How  great  are  our  obligations  to  God  for  the  hght  which  He  has 
given  us  1  3.  How  great  the  duty  which  rests  upon  us,  to  pity  and  endeavour  to 
enhghten  those  who  are  sitting  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death  1  (The 
Evangelical  Preacher.)  The  perfect  light  of  God : — It  seems  a  very  simple  thing 
to  say  that  *'  God  is  light,"  <fec.  We  almost  wonder  at  the  Bible  taking  so  much 
trouble  to  say  it.  For,  we  might  think,  how  could  God  be  otherwise  ?  How  could 
■we  imagine  God  to  be  imperfect,  wanting  in  goodness,  and  holiness,  and  wisdom, 
and  truth  ?  How  could  God  be  God  unless  He  were  all-perfect — hght  without  a 
Bhade  of  darkness  ?  And  this  is  true.  But  how  is  it  that  we  have  come  to  have 
these  thoughts  of  God  ?  It  is  that  the  gospel  has  become  so  much  a  matter  of 
course  to  as,  that  its  truth  has  come  to  seem  to  ns  our  own  thoughts.    But  it  was  by 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

no  means  so  plain  a  truth  to  the  world  when  St.  John  wrote  his  Epistle.  He 
wrote  when  the  world  believed  in  idols  and  false  gods  without  number.  And  those 
false  gods  were  not  thought  of  as  we  think  of  God.  They  were  believed  to  be  not 
more  perfect,  not  more  holy,  not  more  good,  than  the  men  who  worshipped  them. 
But  those  days  of  idolatry  and  ignorance  are  past ;  and  perhaps  we  think  that  we  do 
not  need  to  be  reminded  that  God  is  light — perfectly  pure  and  holy  and  true  and 
good.  We  do  want  to  be  reminded  that  there  are  those  still  who  do  not  in  their 
hearts  believe  that  God  is  light ;  for  is  it  not  so,  that  instead  of  really  belieH^ing  that 
God  is  light,  without  stain,  or  shade  of  sin,  we  often  make  Him  out  in  our  thoughts 
to  be  what  we  like  and  wish  Him  to  be  ?  What  does  the  siimer  wish  God  to  be  ? 
He  wishes  God  to  be  kind  and  indulgent  to  his  sin  ;  to  be  a  God  who  always  rewards 
and  never  punishes  ;  who  will  do  good  to  us,  whether  we  obey  Him  or  not.  Do  we 
never  sin,  hoping  that  after  all  God  will  not  think  so  severely  of  our  sin  as  the  Bible 
seems  to  make  out  that  He  will  ?  Do  we  never  comfort  and  flatter  ourselves  with  such 
general  excuses  as  that  God  is  merciful,  and  will  not  be  hard  upon  us  ?  Do  we  not, 
instead  of  taking  the  Bible,  and  reading  there  the  true  character  of  the  God  whom  we 
worship,  make  an  image  according  to  our  own  imperfections  and  sins,  and  call 
it  God?  Is  this  the  God  who  "is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness"?  Can  we 
be  said  really  to  believe  in  Him  when  we  treat  Him  as  if  He  were  foolish,  and 
could  not  see  through  our  cunning  devices,  and  could  be  flattered  into  good 
humour  with  us,  and  be  prevailed  upon  to  treat  us  as  favourites  ?  Again,  what 
a  sad  show  of  our  real  thoughts  about  God  is  to  be  found  in  the  manner  of 
our  worship  and  in  our  prayers !  If  He  "  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness 
at  all,"  what  must  He  think  of  worship  which  only  pretends  to  worship  and 
honour  Him  ?  of  prayer  which  does  not  really  ask  in  spirit  for  the  thing  it 
speaks  about?  God  is  what  He  is,  whatever  we  may  think;  and  earnestly 
ought  we  to  strive  and  pray  that  we  may  know  Him  as  He  is,  and  always 
think  of  Him  as  He  is.  (Dean  Church.)  No  substitute  for  light : — Clear  and 
brilliant  light  often  brings  out  exquisite  colours,  as  happens  among  the  Alps 
and  also  in  the  north  frigid  zone,  where  the  humble  little  plants  called  lichens 
and  mosses  are  in  many  cases  dyed  of  the  most  brilliant  hues,  purple  and  gold 
predominating.  Warmth,  in  like  manner,  will  stimulate  vegetable  growth  in 
the  most  astonishing  manner,  but  it  is  growth  not  necessarily  accompanied  by 
the  secretion  of  valuable  substances,  such  as  give  quality  and  real  importance 
to  the  plant.  In  English  hothouses,  for  example,  we  have  plenty  of  spice-trees, 
those  generous  plants  that  yield  cirmamon  and  cassia,  the  nutmeg  and  the  clove ; 
but  although  healthy  and  blossoming  freely,  they  never  mature  their  aromatic 
secretions.  Though  they  have  artificial  heat  equal  to  that  of  their  native  islands, 
which  burn  beneath  the  sun  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  we  cannot  supply  them  with 
similar  and  proportionate  solar  light.  God  the  satisfying  light : — Suppose  the 
case  of  a  cripple  who  had  spent  his  life  in  a  room  where  the  sun  was  never 
seen.  He  has  heard  of  its  existence,  he  believes  in  it,  and,  indeed,  has  seen 
enough  of  its  light  to  give  high  ideas  of  its  glory.  Wishing  to  see  the  sun,  he 
is  taken  out  at  night  into  the  streets  of  an  illuminated  city.  At  first  he  is 
delighted,  dazzled ;  but  after  he  has  had  time  to  reflect,  he  finds  darkness  spread 
amid  the  lights,  and  he  asks,  "  Is  this  the  sun  ?  "  He  is  taken  out  under  the 
starry  sky,  and  is  enraptured ;  but  on  reflection  finds  that  night  covers  the  earth, 
and  again  asks,  "  Is  this  the  sun  ?  "  He  is  carried  out  some  bright  day  at 
noontide,  and  no  sooner  does  his  eye  open  on  the  sky  than  aU  question  is  at 
an  end.  There  is  but  one  sun.  His  eye  is  content :  it  has  seen  its  highest 
object,  and  feels  that  there  is  nothing  brighter.  So  with  the  soul :  it  enjoys  all 
lights,  yet  amid  those  of  art  and  nature  is  still  inquiring  for  something  greater. 
But  when  it  is  led  by  the  reconciling  Christ  into  the  presence  of  the  Father,  and  He 
lifts  up  upon  it  the  hght  of  His  countenance,  all  thought  of  anything  greater 
disappears.  As  there  is  but  one  s'm,  so  there  is  but  one  God.  The  soul  which  once 
discerns  and  knows  Him,  feels  that  greater  or  brighter  there  is  none,  and  that  the 
only  possibility  of  ever  beholding  more  glory  is  by  drawing  nearer.  {W.  Arthur.) 
Light  in  the  hour  of  darkness  : — When  Charles  Kingsley  was  dying  he  said,  "  It  ia 
not  darkness  I  am  going  to,  for  God  is  light."  {E.  W.  Bibb.)  No  dark- 
ness in  God : — Skotia  ouk  estin  oudemia  ("  no,  not  even  one  speck  of  darkness  ") ; 
no  ignorance,  error,  untruthfulness,  sin,  death.  {A.  R.  Fausset,  M.A.)  If  we 
say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  Him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie. — Light 
and  darkness:  siti  arid  imrification : — "Light"  and  "Darkness"  are  very  living 
expressions.    They  belong  to  the  life  of  us  all.     Moreover,  these  expressions  were 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  35 

wonderfully  suitable  for  those  to  whom  St.  John  wrote.  The  Ephesians  had  paid 
an  especial  worship  to  Artemis  or  Diana.  They  connected  her  with  the  moon,  the 
night-ruler.  They  had  paid  a  worship,  in  common  with  the  other  Greeks,  to 
Apollo ;  him  they  connected  with  the  sun,  that  rules  the  day.  They  connected 
them,  I  say,  with  these  beautiful  objects  ;  but  they  were  never  satisfied  with  doing 
so.  The  god  of  hght  was  the  god  whom  they  went  to  consult  how  they  should 
manage  states,  conduct  wars,  make  peace.  They  felt  that  a  higher  light  than  the 
light  which  the  eyes  could  see  must  proceed  from  him.  So  these  old  Greeks 
thought.  They  were  continually  exalting  the  lower  light  above  the  higher  light, 
and  supposing  the  higher  to  come  from  the  lower.  This  was  their  idolatry.  They 
worshipped  the  visible  things  from  which  they  thought  that  the  light  proceeded. 
St.  John  had  been  taught  almost  from  his  birth  that  he  was  not  to  worship  things 
in  heaven,  or  on  earth,  or  under  the  earth,  or  the  works  of  his  own  hands.  He 
bad  been  taught  that  the  Lord  his  God  was  one  Lord,  that  He  was  the  Unseen 
Deliverer,  Guide,  Teacher,  King  of  Israel.  He  had  clung  to  this  teaching.  Now 
he  had  believed  that  this  God  had  revealed  Himself  to  them,  not  in  the  sun  or  in 
the  moon,  but  in  a  humble  and  crucified  Man.  With  this  conviction  becoming 
every  hour  deeper  and  deeper  in  his  mind,  he  had  settled  in  the  city  where  Apollo 
and  Diana  were  worshipped.  He  saw  the  mischiefs  and  dangers  of  that  worship 
more  clearly  and  fully  than  he  did  when  people  told  him  about  it  on  the  Lake  of 
Galilee.  But  he  did  not  think  that  these  Ephesians  had  been  wrong  because  they 
had  dreamt  of  a  God  of  Light.  That  was  a  true  dream.  Christ  had  come  to  fulfil 
it.  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  whom  Jesus  had  revealed,  was 
this  God  of  Light.  But  there  is  another  reason  closely  connected  with  this,  why 
St.  John  could  not  abandon  the  wotd  "  light  "  for  any  that  was  more  formal  and 
less  living.  A  man  may  easUy  fancy  that  goodness,  wisdom,  truth,  are  possessions 
of  his  own.  Whether  he  thinks  he  has  got  them  for  himself,  or  that  some  god 
has  given  them  to  him,  he  may  stUl  believe  that  he  holds  them  just  as  he  holds  a 
freehold  house  or  a  purse  of  money.  But  you  can  never  suppose  that  you  hold 
hght  in  this  way.  That  I  can  never  boast  that  I  possess.  Now  the  message  which 
St.  John  brought  to  the  Ephesians  was  not  concerning  a  blessing  of  the  first  kind, 
but  of  this  last  kind.  He  did  not  teU  them  that  God  had  given  them  certain 
possessions  here,  or  had  promised  them  certain  possessions  hereafter,  which  they 
could  call  theirs.  That  is  the  subject  of  the  next  verse — "  If  we  say  that  we  have 
fellowship  with  Him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth."  Walking 
in  darkness  is,  alas  !  the  phrase  about  which  we  have  the  least  need  of  an  inter- 
preter. Every  one  interprets  it  himself.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  be  in  this  dark 
selfish  state,  and  yet  to  say  that  he  has  fellowship  with  God.  He  may  repeat 
prayers,  he  may  offer  sacrifices,  he  may  pass  for  a  religious  man.  But  his  life,  the 
apostle  says,  is  a  Ue.  It  is  not  only  that  he  speaks  a  he ;  he  acts  a  lie.  He  does 
not  the  truth.  This,  indeed,  he  would  have  us  to  understand  is  falsehood — the  very 
root  of  falsehood.  "  But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light,  we  have 
fellowship  one  with  another."  The  darkness  of  which  St.  John  speaks  is  an  utterly 
unsocial  condition.  A  man  thinks  about  himself,  dwells  in  himself ;  the  rest  of  the 
universe  Hes  in  shadow.  What,  then,  is  the  opposite  state  to  this?  "  If  we  walk 
in  the  hght,  as  He  is  in  the  hght,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another."  The 
light  is  all  around  us,  while  we  are  most  dark.  I  cannot  extinguish  the  creation 
because  I  do  not  think  about  it  or  care  about  it.  But  this  recollection  is  not 
enough  to  bring  me  out  of  my  dark  pit.  My  selfishness  is  too  strong  for  aU,  how- 
ever bright,  in  earth,  and  sea,  and  air  to  overcome.  It  is  not  too  strong  for  God  to 
overcome.  All  those  strange  intimations  which  come  to  me  that  I  am  not  what  I 
am  meant  to  be,  must  be  flashes  of  light  from  the  source  of  light.  They  are  painful 
flashes.  They  are  just  what  men  have  tried  by  their  false  rehgions — by  their 
insincere  professions  of  fellowship  with  God — to  drive  away.  But  if,  instead  ol 
doing  that,  we  wUl  hail  them,  if  we  wiU  receive  them  as  His  messengers,  we  may 
enter  into  His  true  order.  The  proper  social  life  is  restored  to  us,  even  if  we  are 
far  away  from  our  brethren.  "And  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  ua 
from  all  sin."  St.  John  appeals  to  our  experience.  You  desire  to  be  true  yourself ; 
you  desire  to  have  fellowship  with  other  men.  The  moment  that  first  desire  is 
awakened  in  me,  then  arises  along  with  it  a  sense  of  falsehood  :  "  I  have  done  false 
acts.  I  have  been  false.  I  have  an  inclination  to  do  false  acts  and  to  be  false  now. 
I  have  something  in  me  which  violently  resists  my  craving  to  be  true."  And  about 
the  seriousness,  the  terribleness  of  this  fact  there  is  no  doubt.  It  must  be  at  the 
bottom  of  the  insincerity,  discord,  and  hatred  of  the  world.    But  how  shall  I 


V 


36  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

describe  this  fact?  I  am  at  a  loss;  I  cannot  find  a  name.  But  I  discover  some- 
thing more  about  the  strange  fact.  "  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness" ; 
I  am  intended  to  walk  in  this  light.  This  inchnation  not  to  be  true,  not  to  have 
fellowship  with  my  fellow-men,  is  an  inclination  not  to  walk  in  this  light,  not  to  be  in 
that  state  in  which  He  has  intended  men  to  be.  Now  I  am,  perhaps,  better  able  to 
express  this  inclination  of  mine,  and  what  has  been  the  fruit  of  it.  One  name, 
however,  does  not  satisfy  me.  I  try  several.  I  call  it  transgression ;  that  is,  the 
passing  over  a  boundary  which  was  marked  out  for  me.  I  call  it  iniquity  ;  that  is, 
an  uneven,  zigzag  course,  a  departure  from  the  straight,  even  course.  I  call  it  sin; 
♦hat  is,  the  missing  cf  an  aim  ;  the  going  aside  from  the  goal  which  I  was  intended 
to  reach.  All  these  words  imply  that  there  is  One  who  has  marked  the  boundary 
for  me,  who  has  drawn  the  line  for  me,  who  has  fixed  the  goal  or  aim  for  me.  All 
imply  a  disobedience  to  a  Will  which  I  am  meant  to  obey.  Now,  the  message 
which  St.  John  brought  to  the  Ephesians  was,  "  God  has  revealed  Himself  to  us  in 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  perfect  Truth.  God  has  revealed  Himself  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the 
God  who  has  created  men  to  be  one.  Therefore  it  is  a  revelation  to  us  of  our  sin  ; 
for  it  shows  us  how  we  have  fought  and  do  fight  against  this  mind  and  purpose  of 
God ;  how,  in  doing  so,  we  fight  against  our  own  proper  state,  our  own  proper 
blessedness."  I  do  not  mean  that  this  sense  of  sin  did  not  exist  before  that  full 
revelation  of  God  in  Christ.  But  how  much  deeper  did  it  become  in  those  who 
learnt  that  God  was  light,  and  in  Him  was  no  darkness — that  He  had  sent  His 
Son  to  bring  them  into  His  light !  What  a  sense  of  sin  must  have  been  in  them  1 
How  they  must  have  felt,  "  It  is  our  own  fault,  our  own  choice,  that  we  have  been 
walking  in  darkness.  We  have  been  striving  against  a  God  who  has  been  at  every 
moment  plotting  for  our  good !  "  If,  then,  the  men  in  the  tunes  of  old  cried  out 
for  a  purification,  those  who  heard  this  revelation  must  have  felt  the  need  of  it 
immeasurably  more.  But  what  kind  of  purification  could  they  have  ?  "  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  There  is  a  new  life- 
blood  put  into  this  nature  of  ours.  God  Himself  has  infused  it.  The  Son  of  God 
has  taken  our  flesh  and  blood.  He  is  the  Head  of  our  race.  When  we  seek  to  rise 
out  of  ourselves — to  be  delivered  from  our  falsehood — to  have  fellowship  with  God, 
and  fellowship  with  our  brother,  then  His  blood  is  an  assurance  that  we  have  that 
fellowship.  It  removes  the  sense  of  sin  against  God  which  is  in  us  ;  it  removes  the 
sense  of  sin  against  men.  It  gives  that  atonement  and  that  purification  which 
nothing  else  in  earth  and  heaven  can  give.  "If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  Instead  of  this  fancy  that  you  are 
without  sin  being  a  proof  how  clearly  the  hght  is  shining  into  you,  it  is  a  proof  that 
you  are  shutting  out  the  light,  for  that  would  reveal  to  you  your  own  inclination  to 
fly  from  it  and  to  choose  the  darkness.  The  truth  makes  us  aware  of  our  false- 
hoods. Is  that  hard  doctrine  ?  No ;  for  "  if  we  confess  our  sins,  He  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  His 
faithfulness  and  justice  are  the  enemies  of  our  sins  ;  therefore  to  them  we  may  turn 
from  our  sins.  They  are  the  refuges  from  the  darkness  that  is  in  us.  A  faithful 
and  righteous  Being  is  "  therefore  "  a  forgiving  Being.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have 
not  sinned,  we  make  Him  a  liar,  and  His  Word  is  not  in  us."  If  we  will  not 
confess  the  evil  in  us,  we  impute  that  evil  to  Him.  We  thrust  away  that  Word 
which  is  shedding  abroad  His  light  in  us ;  we  bury  ourselves  in  our  own  darkness. 
This  is  the  effect  of  trying  to  make  out  a  good  case  for  ourselves,  when  it  is  our 
interest,  our  privilege,  our  blessedness,  to  justify  God  and  to  condemn  ourselves ;  to 
Bay,  "  Thou  hast  been  true,  and  we  have  been  liars.  Deliver  us  from  our  lies  I 
Help  us  to  walk  in  Thy  truth  !  "  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  child  of  light 
walking  in  light : — The  apostle  warns  us  against  saying  more  than  we  have  made 
our  own  by  experience.  To  have  fellowship  with  God  is  a  great  matter;  but 
merely  to  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  Him  is  a  totally  different  thing.  John 
varns  us  that  if  we  say  that  which  our  characters  do  not  support,  we  lie.  He 
leaves  it  just  so,  without  a  word  of  softening  or  excuse.  Let  us  now  speak  of  the 
real  thing — the  fellowship  with  God,  which  comes  of  walking  in  the  light.  The 
Christian  life  is  described  as  walking,  which  implies  activity.  Chiefly  in  tii9 
character  of  active  workers,  or  in  that  of  willing  sufferers,  we  must  maintain 
fellowship  with  God.  Walking  implies  activity;  but  it  must  be  of  a  continuous 
kind.  Neither  this  step,  nor  that,  nor  the  next,  can  make  a  walk.  Not  he  that 
begins,  but  he  that  continues,  is  the  true  Christian ;  final  perseverance  enters  into 
the  very  essence  of  the  believer's  life  ;  the  true  pilgrims  of  Zion  go  from  strength  to 
strength.    This  suggests  that  walking  implies  progress.    He  that  takes  one  step  and 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  37 

another  step,  and  still  stands  where  he  was,  has  not  walked.  I.  Consider,  first, 
THE  LIGHT  OF  OUR  WALK.  Truc  believers  do  not  walk  in  darkness ;  they  have 
found  the  road,  and  they  see  it  before  them.  Moral  darkness  is  contrary  to  their 
new-born  nature :  they  cannot  endure  it.  What  is  this  light,  then,  in  which  the 
Christian  walks  ?  1.  I  answer,  first,  it  is  the  light  of  grace.  The  Holy  Spirit  brings 
us  out  from  under  the  dominion  of  the  old  nature  by  creating  within  us  a  new  life, 
and  He  brings  us  out  from  under  the  tyranny  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness  by  opening 
our  eyes  to  see  and  our  minds  to  understand  celestial  truth.  The  result  of  this 
light  is  seen  in  various  ways.  It  causes  deep  sorrow  in  the  beginning,  for  its  first 
discoveries  are  grievous  to  the  conscience.  Light  is  painful  to  eyes  long  accus- 
tomed to  darkness.  Anon  the  light  brings  great  joy,  for  the  soul  perceives 
deliverance  from  the  evils  which  it  mourned.  "  Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous, 
and  gladness  for  the  upright  in  heart."  2.  Ever,  in  each  condition,  you  observe 
conspicuously  that  the  light  of  grace  is  seen  as  the  light  of  sincerity.  Hypocrisy 
and  pretence  fly  before  sincere  belief  and  feeling.  3.  Next  to  sincerity  I  regard  a 
willingness  to  know  and  to  be  known  as  an  early  result  of  walking  in  the  light  of 
God.  A  religion  which  we  will  not  submit  to  the  test  of  self-examination  cannot  be 
worth  much.  No  one  is  afraid  to  have  a  genuine  sovereign  submitted  to  any  test : 
it  is  the  coiner  who  is  afraid.  We  must  build  on  truth,  and  nothing  else  but  truth. 
4.  A  still  surer  evidence  of  grace  is  the  mind's  perception  of  revealed  truth  and  its 
obedience  to  it.  Are  the  doctrines  of  grace  essential  verities  with  thee  ?  Whatever 
God  has  said  about  sin,  righteousness,  judgment  to  come,  art  thou  ready  to  accept 
it  at  once  ?  Whatever  He  has  revealed  concerning  Himself,  His  Son,  His  Holy 
Spirit,  the  Cross,  life,  death,  hell,  and  the  eternal  future,  dost  thou  believe  it 
unfeignedly  ?  This  is  to  walk  in  the  light.  5.  This  leads  to  a  transparency  and 
simplicity  of  character.  The  man  who  does  in  reality  what  he  seems  to  do ;  the 
man  who  says  what  he  means,  and  means  what  he  says ;  the  man  who  is  truthful, 
artless,  and  sincere  in  all  his  general  dealings  both  before  God  and  man,  he  it  is 
whose  conduct  leads  us  to  hope  that  the  light  of  grace  shines  within.  6.  This 
is  very  evident  in  the  man's  cessation  from  all  guile  towards  himself.  Kemember 
how  David  pronounces  him  blessed  "  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile."  He  knew 
painfully  what  it  was  to  be  full  of  guile.  "  Deliver  me  from  bloodguiltiness,  O 
God,  thou  God  of  my  salvation."  He  is  in  the  light  now,  for  deceit  has  gone,  and 
now  God  can  speak  comfortably  to  him,  and  wash  him  and  make  him  whiter  than 
snow.  7.  The  man  who  is  walking  in  the  light,  as  God  is  in  the  light,  is  full  of 
abhorrence  of  sin.  Sin  is  practical  falsehood ;  it  is  moral  darkness.  "  Little 
children,  let  no  man  deceive  you  :  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous,  even  as 
he  is  righteous."  Forget  not  this  practical  truth.  II.  I  come,  secondly,  to  thb 
COMMUNION  OF  ouB  WALK.  Thoso  who  are  in  the  light  shall  not  be  alone. 
God  Himself  will  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.  What  honour  1  What  joy  ia 
this  !  Thus  is  the  mischief  of  the  Fall  removed,  and  Paradise  is  restored.  God  in 
the  light  and  man  in  the  light  have  much  in  common.  Now  are  they  abiding  in 
one  element,  for  they  are  dwelling  in  one  light.  Now  are  they  both  concerned  about 
the  same  thing,  and  their  aims  are  undivided :  God  loves  truth,  and  so  do  those 
who  are  renewed  in  heart.  Now  we  partake  with  God  in  sympathy,  having  a 
fellow-feeling  with  Him.  Does  the  great  Father  mourn  His  prodigal  child  ?  So 
do  we  mourn  over  sinners.  Do  we  see  Jesus  weeping  over  Jerusalem  ?  So  do  we 
mourn  for  the  perishing  who  will  not  be  saved.  Again,  as  God  rejoices  over  sinners 
that  repent,  so  do  we  rejoice  in  sympathy  with  Him.  III.  The  glory  of  this 
COMMUNION.  "  We  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,"  I  gather  from  the  way  in  which  this  sentence 
grows  out  of  the  text  that  this  very  thing,  which  looks  as  if  it  were  the  death  of  all 
communion  with  God,  is  made  by  infinite  grace  to  be  a  wide  and  open  channel  of 
communion  with  Him.  This  stone  is  rolled  away  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre, 
and  the  angel  of  communion  sits  down  upon  it  as  on  a  throne.  1.  To  begin  with, 
here  is  sin  1  What  an  evil  thing  it  is !  How  our  soul  hates  it  1  "  0,  wretched 
man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  ?  "  Listen !  You  are  having  fellowship  with 
God  in  this.  God  hates  it  also ;  and  herein  you  are  agreed.  2.  Sin  being  once 
perceived,  the  next  step  is  that  it  should  be  got  rid  of.  "  Ah !  "  say  you,  "  I  wish  I 
could  be  cleansed  from  it — cleansed  from  all  of  it ;  but  how  can  this  be  ?  It  is  not 
possible  for  me  to  purge  away  my  sin."  The  sacrifice  of  the  Only-Begotten  is  the 
unique  hope  of  sinners.  The  laying  of  our  iniquity  upon  Him  who  deigned  to  be 
the  great  scape-goat  of  His  people  is  the  sole  means  for  the  taking  away  of  the  sins 
of  the  world.     That  inward  persuasion  of  the  impossibility  of  the  purgation  of  sin 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  1. 

hy  any  doings  or  feelings  of  our  own,  and  the  consequent  perception  that  in  Christ 
only  lies  the  help  of  men,  has  brought  us  through  the  light  of  truth  to  walk  in 
fellowship  with  the  thrice  holy  God.  3.  The  glorious  Son  of  God  condescends  to 
become  the  atonement  for  sin.  Standing  by  the  tree  of  doom,  we  look  up  to  that 
blessed  Saviour  with  all-absorbing  admiration  and  love.  In  the  putting  away  of 
Bin  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  the  Father  has  an  infinite  content,  and  so  have  we.  A 
Btep  further.  4.  Many  of  us  have  come  to  Jesus  Christ  by  faith ;  we  have  looked 
to  Him,  and  have  accepted  Him  as  our  Saviour  cleansing  us  from  all  sin.  We 
rejoice  in  perfect  whiteness,  for  the  Lord  has  made  us  whiter  than  snow.  Yes, 
■we  have  fellowship  with  God  in  this  cleansing,  for  God  accepts  us  in  the  Beloved. 
God  that  made  Him  to  be  the  Lord  our  Bighteousness,  God  Himself  justifies  us  in 
His  Son.  He  will  in  the  last  great  day  make  the  whole  universe  a  witness  to  the 
righteousness  of  the  salvation  of  believers.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Communion  with 
God : — I.  The  nature  and  the  means  of  communion  with  God.  1.  We  have 
communion  with  God  in  personal  intercourse.  2.  We  have  communion  with  God 
in  the  exercise  and  interchange  of  mutual  thoughts  and  affections.  3.  We  have 
communion  with  God  in  the  reception  of  His  gifts  and  blessings.  4.  We  have  com- 
munion with  God  in  the  exercise  of  mutual  love  to  Christ.  The  heart  of  God  and 
our  hearts  unite  in  their  affections,  and  fix  them  on  the  Lamb.  5.  We  have 
communion  with  God  in  His  works  of  nature.  Never  does  the  face  of  nature 
appear  so  lovely  as  when  we  thus  behold  in  it  the  beauty  of  the  Lord.  6.  We  have 
communion  with  God  in  the  dispensations  of  His  providence.  II.  The  connection 
WHICH  exists  between  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD  AND  HOLINESS.  1.  A  man  may  say 
that  he  has  communion  with  God  whilst  he  is  walking  in  darkness  and  living  in 
Bin,  He  may  say  it  literally  with  his  lips,  or  he  may  say  it  by  assuming  the 
external  forms  of  religion.  He  is  a  liar  against  his  own  experience,  which  has 
never  enjoyed  the  communion  he  professes ;  he  is  a  liar  against  his  own  affections, 
which  are  holding  communion  with  sin  and  Satan  and  the  world  ;  and  he  is  a  liar 
against  God  Himself,  who  declares  that  He  has  no  communion  with  darkness  and 
with  sin.  2.  "  But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship 
one  with  another."  Such  persons  have  communion  with  their  God.  God  Himself 
is  light,  and  they  are  children  of  light — and  as  the  sun  has  communion  with 
surrounding  stars,  because  their  beams  of  light  resemble  each  other  in  nature, 
though  they  differ  in  degrees  of  glory,  so  there  is  a  similarity,  and  a  sympathy, 
and  a  harmony  of  character  and  pursuit,  between  God  and  His  people,  which  is  the 
origin  and  the  means  of  their  communion  with  each  other.  The  holiness  of 
the  one  attracts  the  holiness  of  the  other.  Their  holy  minds,  their  holy  thoughts, 
their  holy  affections,  and  their  holy  pursuits  meet  and  mingle.  III.  The  impor- 
tance   AND    SOME    OP    THE    ADVANTAGES    OF    COMMUNION    WITH    GOD.       1.    CommUUion 

with  God  is  connected  with  an  interest  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  Even  the  man  who 
holds  communion  with  God  needs  and  finds  a  refuge  in  the  great  atonement.  He 
does  indeed  walk  in  the  light ;  but  that  very  light  discovers  to  him  more  and  more 
clearly  his  numerous  imperfections  and  sins,  and  his  abundant  need  of  pardoning 
mercy.  2.  Communion  with  God  is  the  means  of  promoting  our  holiness.  Those 
who  most  associate  with  God  most  resemble  Him,  and  partake  most  fully  of  the 
Divine  nature.  3.  Communion  with  God  is  a  source  of  the  sweetest  pleasure. 
Those  who  walk  with  God  in  the  light  of  purity,  walk  with  Him  also  in 
the  light  of  joy.  Matthew  Henry,  just  before  he  expired,  declared,  as  hia 
dying  testimony,  that  "a  life  spent  in  the  service  of  God,  and  in  com- 
munion with  Him,  is  the  happiest  life  that  any  one  can  live  in  this 
world."  And  it  must  be  so.  There  are  no  intelligent  beings  in  the  universe, 
whether  men  or  angels,  who  can  find  true  happiness  in  any  place  where  God 
is  not,  or  in  any  communion  from  which  God  is  excluded.  (J.  Alexander.) 
The  rifjht  way  of  obtaining  and  maintaining  communion  with  God : — "  Why  is  God 
called  '  Light  without  Darkness  '  ?  And  what  is  this  Light  ?  "  1.  Wisdom  is  light, 
and  folly  is  darkness.  2.  Knowledge  is  light,  and  ignorance  is  darkness.  3.  Truth 
is  light,  and  error  is  darkness.  4.  Holiness  is  light,  and  sin  and  wickedness  are 
darkness.  I.  What  this  communion  with  God  is.  1.  Active  on  our  part,  which 
consisteth  in  the  Divine  operations  of  our  souls  toward  God ;  when  the  mind  is 
exercised  in  the  contemplation  of  Him,  the  will  in  choosing  and  embracing  Him  ; 
when  the  affections  are  fixed  upon  Him  and  centre  in  Him;  when  by  our  desires 
we  pursue  after  Him,  by  our  love  we  cleave  to  Him,  and  by  delight  we  acquiesce 
and  solace  ourselves  in  Him.  2.  Passive  on  God's  part.  This  communication  of 
God  to  us  in  our  communion  with  Him  is  specially  in  these  three  things.     (1)  In 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  39 

light  (2  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  Psa.  xxxvi.  9).  (2)  In  life  (Eph,  iv.  18).  (3)  In  love  (Eom. 
V.  5).  II.  Some  distinctions  about  communion  with  God.  1.  Communion  with 
God  may  be  considered  either  with  respect  to  this  world,  or  the  world  to  come ;  the 
one  is  imperfect,  the  other  is  perfect ;  one  is  mediate,  the  other  immediate ;  the 
one  is  inconstant,  the  other  without  any  interruption  for  ever.  2.  This  communion 
■with  God  hath  higher  and  lower  degrees  ;  both  among  the  saints  here  below,  and 
the  saints  and  angels  above.  3.  This  communion  with  God  is  either  internal  or 
external ;  by  internal  I  mean  that  sacred  intercourse  between  God  and  the  soul 
which  is  managed  only  in  the  inward  man ;  and  by  external  I  mean  this 
communion  with  God  managed  in  some  external  ordinance  of  His  worship  in  the 
communion  of  saints.  III.  How  this  communion  with  God  is  attained  and 
THEN  maintained.  1.  By  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  By  virtue  of  His  incarnation.  (2)  By 
virtue  of  His  life  which  He  lived  here  in  the  world.  Considered  either  in  the  holy 
example  that  He  has  left  us  to  walk  by,  or  the  doctrine  that  He  here  preached — 
by  both  which  He  did  guide  and  lead  men  in  the  right  way  to  fellowship  with  His 
Father.  (3)  By  virtue  of  His  death,  and  making  reconciliation  for  us  by  His 
blood.  Without  agreement  made  between  God  and  us,  we  could  never  have  had 
communion  with  Him.  (4)  By  virtue  of  His  resurrection,  whereby  believers  come 
to  be  raised  up  to  newness  of  life  (Eom.  vi.  4).  (5)  By  virtue  also  of  His  ascension 
into  heaven  (Col.  iii.  1).  (6)  By  virtue  of  His  intercession.  For  this  is  one  great 
thing  that  He  intercedes  for  with  His  Father  in  heaven,  that  His  people  might  have 
union  and  communion  with  them  (John  xvii.  21).  2.  This  communion  with  God  is 
also  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  As  the  apostle  speaks  of  "the  communion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost"  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  Now  the  Spirit  doth  effect  this  communion  with  God. 
(1)  By  sanctifying  our  hearts,  and  assimilating  our  natures  to  the  nature  of  God. 
For  there  can  be  no  communion  where  there  is  no  likeness  of  nature.  (2)  By 
elevating  and  raising  the  soul  above  its  natural  power  and  reach.  3.  These  are  the 
principal  ways  for  communion  with  God.  But  then  there  are  subordinate  ways, 
which  are  the  ordinances  and  institutions  of  God  for  that  end.  For  God  hath  in 
all  ages  been  training  up  His  people  to  have  communion  with  Himself,  and 
therefore  He  did  appoint  ordinances  for  that  end  under  the  law.  There  were 
sacrifices,  and  altars,  and  solemn  feasts  appointed  of  God,  all  for  this  end.  And  so, 
in  the  New  Testament,  God  hath  His  ordinances  also  appointed  for  this  end ;  as 
prayer,  hearing  the  Word,  &c.  (M.  Barker,  M.A.)  Fellowship  with  God : — I. 
What  is  the  nature  of  this  fellowship?  II.  What  is  the  geeat  hindrance 
TO  this  fellowship  ?  It  is  here  described  as  walking  in  darkness.  III.  What  are 
THE  CONDITIONS  OP  THIS  FELLOWSHIP  ?  "  If  we  Walk  in  the  light  we  have  fellow- 
ship with  Him."  This  implies — 1.  Activity.  2.  Progress.  There  is  no  finahty  in 
the  experience  of  holiness.  3.  Definiteness.  4.  Completeness.  5.  Pleasantness. 
"In  the  light."  6.  Safety.  He  that  walketh  in  the  darkness  stumbleth  (John  xi. 
10).  IV.  What  is  the  result  of  fellowship?  It  is  evidently  cleansing.  [H. 
Thome.) 

Ver.  7.  But  if  we  walk  in  the  light  ...  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another. 

The  Christian  life  a  walk : — 1.  The  first  aspect  of  the  Christian  life  which  this 
figure  suggests  is  that  it  is  a  life  begun  in  connection  with  a  public  profession.  A 
man  who  goes  out  to  walk  does  something  in  the  face  of  the  world.  The  eye  of 
man  can  watch  your  steps,  and  observe  your  gait  and  your  whole  demeanour. 
Thus  also  is  it  in  relation  as  Christian  disciples.  From  the  moment  we  take  the 
side  of  Christ  the  eye  of  the  world  is  upon  us.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  this  figure 
also  reminds  us  that  the  Christian  life  is  a  life  with  a  definite  goal  in  view.  You 
consider  it  hardly  worthy  of  you  to  be  seen  wandering  about  aimlessly  and 
listlessly.  3.  Not  less  distinctly,  however,  does  this  phrase  remind  us  that 
the  Christian  life  is  to  be  a  life  of  dauntless  spirit  and  self-girt  energy.  When 
a  man  sets  a  walk  before  him,  he  goes  out  with  the  air  of  one  who  has  a 
task  to  accomplish  and  is  determined  to  carry  it  through.  No  other  spirit 
will  sufiice  in  the  course  of  the  Christian  life.  (J.  P.  Lilletj,  M.A.)  Christian 
fellowship  tvith  God : — It  is  here  explained  that  a  Christian  man  is  enabled 
to  maintain  that  habitual  fellowship  with  God  which  is  the  very  life  of  his 
spirit.  The  apostle  thus  speaks  as  one  who  pursues  a  great  end,  and  seeks  to  attain 
it  by  two  specified  means.  I.  The  end — fellowship  with  God.  This  is  described 
in  the  text  as  "fellowship  one  with  another."  The  fellowship  of  which  the  apostle 
speaks  is  not  that  between  Christian  and  Christian,  but  rather  that  between  the 
individual  believer  and  his  God.     In  the  previous  verse  fellowship  with  God  is  the 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Bubject  of  remark,  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  subject  is  the  same  in  the 
following  sentence,  which  is  simply  a  continuation  of  the  train  of  thoughts.  Then 
it  ■will  be  observed  that  all  the  parties  mentioned  in  the  first  clause  of  the  text  are 
Christians  who  walk  in  the  light,  and  God  who  is  in  the  light.  It  is  reasonable  to 
assume  that  it  is  of  these  same  parties  fellowship  is  predicated  in  the  second  clause 
of  the  sentence.  Finally,  the  expression  "  His  Son  "  in  the  last  clause  points  to 
the  same  conclusion.  Were  the  fellowship  spoken  of  that  between  Christians,  the 
pronoun  "  His  "  would  be  inappropriate.  Instead  of  "  His  Son,"  it  should  have 
read  "  God's  Son."  The  expression  "  one  with  another,"  used  with  reference  to 
the  Christian's  fellowship  with  God,  conveys  the  idea  that  this  fellowship  is  not 
a  one-sided  aiSair',  of  man  with  God,  but  mutual,  of  man  with  God  and  of  God 
with  man.  To  aspire  to  fellowship  with  God,  therefore,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the 
word,  is  not  presumption ;  it  is  simply  seeking  to  live  up  to  our  privilege  as 
children  of  the  era  of  grace.  The  aim  set  before  us  here,  however,  is  too  high  for 
the  taste  of  many.  They  are  content  with  a  more  distant  relation.  They  would 
have  God  be  only  "  the  high,  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose  name  is 
holy,"  and  desire  not  to  know  Him  as  one  who  dwelleth  "  with  him  also  that  is  of 
a  contrite  and  humble  spirit."  Such  awe-struck  reverence,  when  sincere,  is  not  to 
be  condemned ;  on  the  contrary,  it  may  be  admitted  to  be  an  essential  element  of 
Christian  piety.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must  equally  be  on  our  guard  against 
ignoring  the  gracious,  social  side  of  the  Divine  nature.  We  have  to  remember  that  God 
desireth  not  to  dwell  alone  in  solitude,  however  august ;  that  He  is  a  Father  as  weU  as 
a  King,  that  He  is  as  gracious  as  He  is  mighty,  as  loving  as  He  is  holy.  Then  shall  we 
trust  in  and  converse  with  God,  as  a  man  trusts  in  and  converses  with  a  fellow-man 
who  is  a  bosom  friend,  and  be  able  to  say  without  presumption,  "  we  have  fellow- 
ship one  with  another."  II.  The  means  towards  this  high  end.  1.  "  If  we 
walk  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship."  Walking  in  the  light  means  living  holily. 
Light,  in  the  vocabulary  of  the  apostle  John,  is  the  emblem  of  holiness,  and  dark- 
ness of  sin.  (1)  Obviously,  on  good  grounds,  fellowship  is  based  on  congeniality 
of  spirit.  Eighteous  beings  have  fellowship  with  each  other  as  soon  as  they  under- 
stand each  other.  No  being  is  indifferent  to  his  kind,  least  of  all  a  good,  holy 
being.  Good  men  are  lovers  of  good  men.  As  good  men  have  fellowship  with 
each  other,  so  have  they  one  and  all  fellowship  with  the  one  absolutely  good  Being. 
With  God  alone  is  perfect  fellowship  possible.  Why  ?  Because  God  alone  is  light, 
without  any  admixture  of  darkness.  There  is  perfect  moral  simplicity  and  purity 
in  Him.  For  this  reason  He  can  be  better  known  than  any  brother  man  can  be, 
and  we  can  be  better  known  by  Him.  (2)  Another  important  condition  of  abiding 
fellowship  is  satisfaction  in  each  other's  character  and  company.  Fellowship  with 
friends  is  very  refreshing.  Yet  there  is  a  limit  to  the  joy  to  be  found  in  human 
fellowship.  The  most  gifted  man's  stock  of  thought  is  apt  to  become  exhausted, 
the  most  affectionate  man's  love  may  have  too  great  a  strain  put  upon  it,  and 
human  tempers  are  often  frail.  But  there  is  One  whose  mind  hath  inexhaustible  riches 
whose  love  can  bear  the  heaviest  burden,  who  knows  nothing  of  moods  and  tempers 
and  caprices;  in  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning.  That 
unique  Being  is  God.  In  Him  is  no  satiety,  no  disappointment.  You  can  ever 
lift  up  to  Him  your  soul  in  meditation,  praise,  or  prayer,  and  find  ever  new  delight, 
and  a  satisfaction  to  the  heart  you  seek  in  vain  elsewhere.  2.  The  other  means 
for  maintaining  fellowship  with  God  is  habitual  recourse  to  the  blood  of  Christ. 
"And  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  Of  no  child  of 
light  can  it  be  affirmed,  as  of  God,  that  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all.  It  is  in 
truth  a  part  of  our  holiness  (as  distinct  from  that  of  God)  to  see  and  acknowledge 
our  sinfulness.  Such  owning  of  darkness  is,  in  its  own  way,  light ;  it  is  the  light 
of  truthfulness,  sincerity,  guilelessness.  This  is  always  a  prominent  feature  of 
saintly  character,  because,  though  the  quantity  of  sin  may  be  steadily  diminishing, 
the  saint  sees  his  sin  in  its  darkness,  with  ever-increasing  clearness,  as  he  advances 
in  the  way  of  light,  and  hates  it  with  ever-increasing  intensity.  How,  then,  is  the 
sin  that  cleaveth  to  the  Christian,  and  mars  his  fellowship  with  God,  to  be  dealt 
with  so  that  fellowship  may  not  be  disturbed  thereby  ?  The  answer  of  the  text  is, 
it  is  to  be  cleansed  away  by  habitual  recourse  to  the  blood  of  Christ.  Consider  the 
tendency  of  sin,  of  every  single  sin  we  commit.  It  is  to  make  us  plunge  again  into 
the  darkness.  An  evil  conscience  very  readily  puts  a  man  on  one  or  other  of  two 
courses,  both  fatal — hiding  his  sin,  or  hiding  himself  from  God.  In  the  one  case 
he  virtually  says  he  has  no  sin,  that  he  may  have  boldness  before  God  ;  in  the  other 
he  admits  his  sin,  and  flees,  like  Adam,  from  the  presence  of  God.     Christ's  blood, 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  41 

regarded  by  the  eye  of  faith,  keeps  a  Christian  from  both  these  bad  courses.  It 
keeps  from  denying  sin  by  removing  the  temptation  to  do  so.  What  tempts  man  to 
deny  sin  is  fear.  One  who  keeps  his  eye  ever  fixed  on  the  Cross  of  Christ  has  no 
need  to  fear.  Faith  in  the  power  of  Christ's  death  to  cancel  much  guilt  keeps  his 
soul  free  from  guile.  The  same  faith  preserves  the  Christian  from  the  other  fatal 
course,  that  of  hiding  himself  from  God,  and,  so  to  speak,  breaking  of  all  fellow- 
ship with  Him.  There  is  great  danger  in  this  direction.  Evil  habits  are  a  fruitful 
source  of  apostasy  and  irreligion.  The  sinner  is  too  honest  to  deny  his  guilt,  but 
he  makes  the  acknowledgment  in  a  wrong,  ruinous  way — by  ceasing  from  faith, 
prayer,  and  all  profession  of  piety.  The  Christian  who  has  sinned  does  not  act 
thus.  Faith  enables  him  to  solve  a  very  difficult,  delicate  problem,  that  of  steering 
safely  between  hypocrisy  and  irreligion ;  the  denial  of  sin  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
denial  of  God  on  the  other.  Through  faith  he  can  at  once  confess  sin  and  hope 
for  mercy.  Every  new  application  to  the  merits  of  Christ  makes  him  more  tender 
in  conscience,  more  anxious  to  sin  no  more,  were  it  only  to  avoi4  the  scandal  and 
disgrace  of  even  seeming  to  trample  under  foot  the  Son  of  God  and  to  treat  the 
blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  was  sanctified  as  a  common  thing.  3.  These, 
then,  are  the  appointed  means  for  maintaining  a  close  fellowship  with  God.  The 
combination  is  not  to  be  mistaken  for  legalism.  Legalism  means  the  practical 
abandonment  of  Christ's  merits  as  an  aid  to  sanctification,  and  the  substitution  in 
its  place  of  painful  ascetic  efforts  at  self-sanctification.  Finding  himself  exposed 
to  new  visitations  of  sinful  desire  after  conversion  and  initial  forgiveness,  the  young 
Christian  draws  the  conclusion  that  while  he  must  depend  on  Christ  for  justification 
he  must  look  to  himself  for  sanctification.  It  is  another  by-path  leading  into  dark- 
ness, into  which  earnest  souls  are  strongly  tempted  to  err,  after  first  fervours  and 
joys  are  past.  The  very  emphatic  language  used  by  the  apostle  in  appraising  the 
merits  of  Christ's  blood  supplies  a  valuable  antidote  against  the  delusion.  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  he  declares,  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  He  would  have  every 
one  hope  for  forgiveness,  for  Christ's  sake,  of  whatever  sin  or  crime  he  may  have  been 
guilty.  Then  he  represents  Christ's  blood  as  possessed  of  a  continuous  cleansing  power. 
The  fountain  is  ever  open  for  sin  and  for  uncleanliness.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 
Walking  in  the  light : — 1.  We  are  to  live  under  the  abiding  impression  of  God's 
HOLINESS  (ver.  8).  Other  lights  than  that  from  God  might  not  show  us  how 
spotted  we  are.  Here,  then,  is  the  first  evidence  that  we  are  living,  not  in  the  Hght 
of  our  own  conceit,  but  in  that  which  comes  from  without  and  above  our  lives — 
the  God-light :  we  wiU  be  very  humble  and  penitent  sort  of  people.  But  this  light 
of  holiness  of  God,  if  it  really  falls  upon  us,  will  show  itself  in  another  way 
besides ;  it  will  stir  us  up  to  a  resolution  to  cease  from  sin.  Kead  chap.  ii.  3-5. 
A  man  who  is  contented  with  any  negligence  of  duty  is  not  in  the  light. 
Light  is  poured  through  the  universe  not  merely  as  a  luminator,  that  eyes  may  see 
in  it ;  it  has  also  a  chemical  power.  It  bleaches  some  things,  it  quickens  others. 
Plants  that  would  be  but  dry  stalks  are  stirred  by  its  touch  in  their  finest  atoms, 
and  draw  up  nourishment  from  the  earth,  and  shoot  out  leaves  which  turn  as  in 
gratefulness  toward  their  benefactor,  the  quickening  ray.  So  the  light  of  God's 
holiness  quickens  the  soul  morally.  It  stirs  every  fibre  of  conscience.  It  makes 
it  rejoice  in  every  true,  noble,  pure  aspiration.  It  hungers  and  thirsts  after 
righteousness.  It  lifts  itself  up  toward  the  light.  II.  But  the  other  ray  of  the 
Divine  character  seems  to  have  more  impressed  the  mind  of  John — viz.,  that  of 
God's  love  and  grace,  or  we  mat  better  say  His  love  as  shown  in  His  grace. 
Here  is  the  sublimest  light  that  ever  fell  out  of  the  heavens  upon  men,  "And  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Light  is  cheering  to 
the  eye.  Some  men  are  miserable  without  a  flood  of  it.  Professor  Clifford,  the 
great  scientist,  used  to  draw  his  table  close  to  the  window ;  his  strong,  clear  eye 
delighted  in  the  day-radiance  almost  as  the  eagle's  does.  Augustine  tells  us  that 
he  had  the  same  passionate  fondness  for  it;  "This  queen  of  colours,  the  pure 
light,  bathing  all  I  behold,  soothes  me.  ...  If  absent,  it  saddens  my  mind  "  ;  and 
then  he  longs  for  the  soul-light  it  signified — the  light,  he  says,  "  which  Isaac  saw 
when  his  fleshly  eyes  were  heavy,  which  Jacob,  when  blind  through  great  age,  saw 
with  his  illumined  heart.  .  .  .  So,  O  aU-creating  Lord,  I  lift  mine  invisible  eyes  to 
Thee."  But  both  these  great  men  were  especially  enamoured  of  the  light  of  the 
Gross.  They  knew,  what  some  of  us  have  found  out,  that  the  darkest  spot  on  earth 
is  not  some  dungeon  or  cavern,  but  the  centre  of  our  moral  being  where  it  enwi-aps 
the  conscience.  You  can  get  rays  for  mental  satisfaction  by  studying  the  wonders 
of  the  world  about  you  ;  you  may  light  up  your  loneliness  by  the  beauty  of  loved 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

faces ;  but  no  crack  or  crevice  in  the  soul  lets  in  cheering  light  upon  the  natural 
man's  sense  of  sin.  Expedients  of  human  invention  for  the  enlightening  of  this 
dark  spot  are  as  ineffectual  as  the  candles  which  are  put  out  by  the  darkness  of  the 
cavern  into  which  they  are  dropped.  But  sunshine  is  not  put  out  if  its  ray  drop  into 
a  cavern.  Having  come  ninety  millions  of  miles  through  space,  it  could  gleam  on  to 
the  very  centre  of  the  earth  if  the  opening  were  straight  and  facing  the  sun  itself. 
So  the  God-light  gleaming  from  the  Cross  goes  to  the  innermost  and  darkest  spot  in 
a  man's  soul  if  only  the  soul  opens  straight  towards  the  Cross.  And  that  opening 
straight  towards  the  Cross  is  what  is  meant  by  faith ;  as  the  Bible  expresses  it, 
"whose  heart  is  perfectly  toward  Him."  Note,  by  the  way,  the  exact  meaning  of 
the  word  John  uses  here  to  express  the  cleansing  of  sin.  "The  blood  of  Jesus 
cleanseth  " ;  present  tense,  is  cleansing,  not  merely  has  cleansed.  We  are  being 
cleansed  continually.  This  is  just  the  very  ray  of  light  some  of  you  need  to  see. 
But  note  another  effect  of  this  grace-light.  It,  too,  like  the  light  of  righteous- 
ness, is  not  only  an  illuminator,  but  a  force,  making  a  change  in  the  heart  upon 
which  it  falls.  It  not  only  reveals  God's  love  and  grace  to  us,  but  makes  us  loving 
and  gracious  to  others  (ch.  ii.  9,  10).  No  Christian  can  be  a  hard  man,  a  cold 
and  indifferent  man,  a  proud  and  selfish  man,  any  more  than  ice  can  abide  in 
the  summer  sunshine.  Alas  for  those  about  whom  the  darkness  of  doubts, 
regrets,  remorse,  and  fears  is  gathering !  And  what  but  darkness  does  the  natural 
world  cast  about  the  soul?  Some  will  say  with  Tennyson's  Eizpah,  "The  night 
has  crept  into  my  heart,  and  begun  to  darken  mine  eyes."  But  think  not  of 
the  night.  The  day  bursts  above  you ;  the  heaven  is  breaking  through  the 
sky  which  shuts  down  so  closely  over  you.  Look  up  I  (J.  M.  Ludlow,  D.D.) 
Walking  in  the  light: — 1.  I  have  said  that  the  representation  of  the  nature  of  God 
as  light  set  Him  forth  to  us  as  the  God  of  revelation.  Hence  a  leading  element  of 
walking  in  the  light  must  be  the  subjection  of  our  own  spiritual  nature  to  the 
action  of  God's  Word.  2.  Another  feature  of  the  nature  of  God  as  light  was  seen 
to  be  His  absolute  purity.  This  also,  therefore,  must  be  a  characteristic  of  our 
walk  as  His  children.  3.  The  last  characteristic  of  the  Divine  nature  suggested  bj 
the  phrase  "  God  is  light  "  was  moral  and  spiritual  glory.  To  walk  in  the  light, 
then,  must  be  so  to  walk  as  that  this  glory  may  be  reflected  through  us  in  th» 
view  of  the  world.  In  other  terms,  every  element  of  the  moral  glory  of  God 
must  be  seen  in  our  life  and  conduct.  Hence,  for  instance,  we  are  to  wali 
in  wisdom.  We  have  also  to  walk  in  righteousness.  No  less  manifestly  art 
we  to  walk  in  love.  (J.  P.  Lilley,  M.A.)  Walking  in  the  light  and  washed 
in  the  blood : — You  perceive  in  the  text  that  the  Christian  is  spoken  of  as  a 
man  who  is  in  the  light;  but  there  is  somethbig  more  said  of  him  than  this. 
He  is  practically  in  the  light,  "  if  we  walk  in  the  light."  He  walks  in  the 
light  of  faith,  in  another  path  than  that  which  is  trodden  by  men  who  have 
nothing  but  the  light  of  sense.  He  sees  Him  who  is  invisible,  and  the  sight  of 
the  invisible  God  operates  upon  his  soul ;  he  looks  into  eternity,  he  marks  the 
dread  reward  of  sin,  and  the  blessed  gift  of  God  to  those  who  trust  in  Jesus,  and 
eternal  realities  have  an  effect  upon  his  whole  manner  and  conversation  :  hence  he 
is  a  man  in  the  light,  walking  in  that  hght.  There  is  a  very  strong  description 
given  here — "  If  we  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the  light."  When  a  schoolmaster 
writes  the  copy  at  the  head  of  the  page,  he  does  not  expect  that  the  boy  will  come 
up  to  the  copy ;  but  then  if  the  copy  be  not  a  perfect  one,  it  is  not  fit  to  be  imitated  by 
a  child  ;  and  so  our  God  gives  us  Himself  as  the  pattern  and  copy,  "  Be  ye  imitators 
of  God  as  dear  children,"  for  nothing  short  of  Himself  would  be  a  worthy 
model.  But  what  does  it  mean,  that  the  Christian  is  to  walk  in  the  light 
as  God  is  in  the  light?  We  conceive  it  to  import  likeness,  but  not 
degree.  We  are  as  truly  in  the  light,  we  are  as  heartily  in  the 
light,  we  are  as  sincerely  in  the  light,  though  we  cannot  be  there  in  the  same 
degree.  Having  thus  briefly  sketched  the  character  of  the  genuine  Christian, 
observe  that  he  is  the  possessor  of  two  privileges  ;  the  first  is,  fellowship  with  God. 
"  We  have  fellowship  one  with  another";  and  the  second  is,  complete  cleansing 
from  sin — "  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  The 
first  privilege  we  will  have  but  a  word  upon  ;  it  is  fellowship  with  God.  He  opens 
His  heart  to  us  and  we  open  our  heart  to  Him  ;  we  become  friends  ;  we  are  bound 
and  knit  together,  so  that  being  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  having 
escaped  the  corruption  which  is  in  the  world  through  lust,  we  live  like  Enoch, 
having  our  conversation  above  the  skies.  I.  The  first  thing  that  struck  me  was  thb 
GREATNESS  of  everything  in  the  text.     To  what  a  magnificent  scale  everything  is 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  43 

drawn.  1.  Think  how  great  the  sin  of  God's  people  is  1  2.  Then  observe  the  great- 
ness of  the  atonement  offered.  It  must  be  no  man,  merely ;  it  must  be  the  God-man 
mediator,  the  fellow  of  Jehovah,  co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  Him,  who  must  bear 
the  bitterness  of  Divine  wrath  which  was  due  to  sin.  3.  Think  again :  we  have 
here  great  love  which  provided  such  a  sacrifice.  11.  The  next  thing  which 
sparkles  in  the  text,  is  its  simple  solitariness,  "  We  have  fellowship  one  with 
another  ";  and  then  it  is  added,  as  a  gloriously  simple  statement,  "  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  1.  Observe,  here  is  nothing  said 
about  rites  and  ceremonies  or  about  Christian  experience  as  a  means  of  cleansing. 
2.  Observe,  again,  that  in  the  verse  there  is  no  hint  given  of  any  emotions,  feelings, 
or  attainments,  as  co-operating  with  the  blood  to  take  away  sLq.  The  blood  is  the 
alone  atonement,  the  blood  without  any  mixture  of  aught  beside,  completes  and 
finishes  the  work,  "  For  ye  are  complete  in  Him."  HI.  A  third  brilliant  flashes  in 
the  light,  viz.,  the  completeness  of  the  cleansing.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  aU  sin  " — not  from  some  sin,  but  "from  aU  sin."  IV.  The 
next  gem  that  studs  the  text  is  the  thought  of  presentness.  "  Cleanseth,"  says  the 
text,  not  "  shall  cleanse."  The  moment  a  sinner  trusts  Jesus,  that  sinner  is  as 
fully  forgiven  as  he  will  be  when  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God  shall  shine  upon  his 
resurrection  countenance.  V.  Now,  in  the  fifth  place,  the  text  presents  to  us  very 
blessedly  the  thought  of  cektaintt.  It  is  not  "  perhaps  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
cleanses  from  sin,"  the  text  speaks  of  it  as  a  fact  not  to  be  disputed — it  does  do  so. 
VI.  The  sixth  gem  which  adorns  the  text  is  the  Divinity  of  it.  Does  it  not  strike 
you  that  the  verse  is  written  in  a  God-like  style  ?  God  seems  to  put  away  His 
pearls  as  if  they  were  but  common  pebbles.  "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son 
cleanseth  us  from  aU  sin" — as  if  it  were  as  much  a  matter  of  every-day  work  as  for 
a  man  to  wash  his  hands.  VII.  In  the  last  place,  just  a  hint  upon  the  wisdom  of 
the  text.  I  cannot  see  sin  pardoned  by  the  substitutionary  atonement  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  without  dedicating  myself  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  the  great  God  of 
redeeming  love.  If  God  had  devised  a  scheme  by  which  sin  could  be  pardoned, 
and  yet  the  sinner  live  to  himself,  I  do  not  know  that  the  world  or  the  man  would 
be  advantaged.  Now  henceforth  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross  the  bands  which  bound 
our  soul  to  earth  are  loosened.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  supreme  importance  of 
moral  purity  : — First,  that  Christianity  is  based  upon  the  palpable  facts  in  the 
history  of  an  extraordinary  person.  The  person  is  here  said  to  be  "  from  the 
beginning  " — "  which  was  with  the  Father " ;  is  called  "  the  Word  of  life," 
"  Eternal  life."  Secondly,  that  these  palpable  facts  were  observed  by  competent 
witnesses,  who  have  transmitted  them  to  us  for  moral  ends.  The  apostles  were 
intellectually  and  morally  competent.  I.  Moral  purity  is  the  essence  of  the 
Divine  character.  "  God  is  light."  Light  is  mysterious  in  its  essence.  "  Who, 
by  searching,  can  find  out  God?"  Light  is  revealing  in  its  power;  through  it  we 
see  all  things.  The  universe  can  only  be  rightly  seen  through  God.  Light  is 
felicitating;  the  animal  creation  feels  it.  He  is  the  one  "blessed"  God.  Light  is 
pure,  and  in  this  sense  God  is  called  light.  There  are  three  things  which  distinguish 
God's  holiness  from  that  of  any  creature : — First,  it  is  absolutely  perfect.  Not  only 
has  He  never  thought  an  erroneous  thought,  felt  a  wrong  emotion,  performed  a 
wrong  act,  but  He  never  can.  In  Him  there  is  no  darkness  at  all.  Secondly,  it  is 
eternally  independent.  The  holiness  of  aU  creatures  is  derived  from  without,  and 
depends  greatly  upon  the  influences  and  aids  of  other  beings.  But  God's  holiness 
is  uncreated.  The  holiness  of  creatures  is  susceptible  of  change.  Thirdly,  it  is 
universally  felt .  Where  is  it  not  felt  ?  It  is  felt  in  heaven.  "  Holy,  holy,  holy, 
Lord  God  Almighty,"  is  one  of  the  anthems  that  resound  through  the  upper  world. 
It  is  felt  in  hell.  All  guilty  consciences  feel  its  burning  flash.  It  is  the  consuming 
fire.  It  is  felt  on  earth.  The  compunctions  of  conscience.  H.  That  moral 
PtFRiTY  is  the  condition  OF  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  GoD.  "  If  wc  Say  that  we 
have  fellowship  with  Him,"  &c.  Three  things  are  implied  here : — First,  that 
fellowship  with  God  is  a  possible  thing.  John  assumes  this  as  something  that  need 
scarcely  be  argued.  1.  That  the  fellowship  of  a  moral  being  with  its  Creator  is 
antecedently  probable.  God  is  the  Father  of  all  intelligent  spirits ;  and  is  it  not 
probable  that  the  Father  and  the  child  should  have  intercourse  with  each  other  ? 
2.  Man  is  in  possession  of  means  suited  to  this  end.  If  it  be  said  that  God  is 
invisible — that  we  cannot  commune  with  Him — we  may  reply  by  saying  that  man 
is  invisible,  and  we  do  not  commune  with  him.  The  spirit  with  which  we  com- 
mune in  man  we  see  not.  How  do  we  commune  with  man?  Through  his 
\forks.     Through  his  words.     Through  memorials.    We  have  something  in  our 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

possession  which  belonged  to  another  ;  given,  perhaps,  to  us  as  a  keepsake. 
Secondly,  that  fellowship  with  God  is  a  desirable  thing.  John  assumes  this. 
Nothing  is  more  desirable  for  man  than  this.  Thirdly,  that  this  fellowship  will 
ever  be  characterised  by  a  holy  life.  Purity  is  the  condition  of  fellowship.  TTT. 
That  mokal  pukity  is  the  end  of  Christ's  mediation.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  &e.  (Hotnilist.)  Children  of  light : — There  are  children  of  light  and 
children  of  darkness.  The  latter  shun  the  bright,  the  pure  azure  shining  sky  of 
truth  with  all  its  loving  beams.  Their  world  is  like  the  world  of  insects,  and  is  the 
world  of  night.  Insects  are  all  light-shunners.  Even  those  which,  like  the  bee, 
labour  during  the  daytime,  prefer  the  shades  of  obscurity.  The  children  of  light 
are  like  the  birds.  The  world  of  birds  is  the  world  of  light — of  song.  Nearly  all  of 
them,  says  Michelet,  live  in  the  sun,  fill  themselves  with  it,  or  are  inspired  by  it. 
Those  of  the  south  carry  its  reflected  radip^nce  on  their  wings  ;  those  of  our  colder 
climates  in  their  songs ;  many  of  them  follow  it  from  land  to  land.  {Scientifie 
Illustrations,  dtc.)  The  best  life  the  product  of  the  best  light  : — A  manufacturer  of 
carmine,  who  was  aware  of  the  superiority  of  the  French  colour,  went  to  Lyons  and 
bargained  with  the  most  celebrated  manufacturer  in  that  city  for  the  acquisition  of 
his  secret,  for  which  he  was  to  pay  one  thousand  pounds.  He  was  shown  all  the 
process,  and  saw  a  beautiful  colour  produced  ;  but  he  found  not  the  least  difference 
in  the  French  mode  of  fabrication  and  that  which  had  been  constantly  adopted  by 
himself.  He  appealed  to  his  instructor,  and  insisted  that  he  must  have  concealed 
something.  The  man  assured  him  that  he  had  not,  and  invited  him  to  see  the 
process  a  second  time.  He  minutely  examined  the  water  and  the  materials,  which 
were  in  every  respect  similar  to  his  own,  and  then,  very  much  surprised,  said,  '*  I 
have  lost  my  labour  and  my  money,  for  the  air  of  England  does  not  permit  us  to 
make  good  carmine."  "  Stay,"  said  the  Frenchman,  "  don't  deceive  yourself— 
what  kind  of  weather  is  it  now?  "  "  A  bright,  sunny  day,"  replied  the  Englishman. 
"  And  such  are  the  days,"  said  the  Frenchman,  "  on  which  I  make  my  colour. 
Were  I  to  attempt  to  manufacture  it  on  a  dark  or  cloudy  day  my  results  would 
be  the  same  as  yours.  Let  me  advise  you  always  to  make  carmine  on  bright, 
sunny  days."  Interrupted  fellowship  : — When  they  were  laying  the  Atlantic 
cable  the  engineers  found  the  communication  interrupted,  and  when  they  had  taken 
it  up  sufficiently  they  found  the  difficulty  was  occasioned  by  a  small  piece  of  wire, 
only  about  twice  the  length  of  a  pin,  which,  by  some  means,  had  been  driven 
through  the  covering  of  the  cable,  and  carried  ofif  the  electric  fluid.  So  a  very 
small  thing  will  put  us  out  of  fellowship  with  God,  and  interrupt  our  communion 
with  heaven,  and  the  only  secret  of  a  constant  communion  is  a  constant  cleansing 
from  all  sin.  (Fellowship.)  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from 
all  sin. — The  evil  and  its  remedy  (with  Ezek.  ix.  9) : — I  shall  have  two  texts  this 
morning — the  evil  and  its  remedy.  "  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  and  Judah 
is  exceeding  great " ;  and  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  aU 
sin."  I.  I  begin  with  the  first  doctrine,  "  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  and 
Judah  is  exceeding  great."  Some  men  imagine  that  the  gospel  was  devised,  in 
some  way  or  other,  to  soften  down  the  harshness  of  God  towards  sin.  There  is  no 
more  harsh  condemnation  of  sin  anywhere  than  in  the  gospel.  Moses  charges  you 
with  sin,  and  tells  you  that  you  are  without  excuse  ;  but  as  for  the  gospel,  it  rends 
away  from  you  every  shadow  of  a  covering.  Nor  does  the  gospel  in  any  way  what- 
ever give  man  a  hope  that  the  claims  of  the  law  will  be  in  any  way  loosened. 
What  God  hath  said  to  the  sinner  in  the  law,  He  saith  to  the  sinner  in  the  gospel. 
If  He  declareth  that"  the  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die,"  the  testimony  of  the  gospel 
is  not  contrary  to  the  testimony  of  the  law.  Do  you  reply  to  this,  that  Christ  has 
certainly  softened  down  the  law  ?  I  reply,  that  ye  know  not,  then,  the  mission  of 
Christ.  Before  Christ  came  sin  seemed  unto  me  to  be  but  little  ;  but  when  He  came  sin 
became  exceeding  sinful,  and  all  its  dread  heinousness  started  out  before  the  light 
But,  says  one,  surely  the  gospel  does  in  some  degree  remove  the  greatness  of  our  sin. 
Does  it  not  soften  the  punishment  of  sin  ?  Ah  !  no.  Moses  says,  "  The  soul  that 
sinneth,  it  shall  die."  And  now  comes  Jesus  Christ,  the  man  of  a  loving 
countenance.  What  other  prophet  was  the  author  of  such  dread  expressions  as 
these? — "He  shall  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable  fire,"  or,  "  Where 
their  worm  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  quenched."  The  proclamation  of  Christ 
to-day  is  the  same  as  the  utterance  of  Ezekiel,  "  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of 
Israel  and  Judah  is  exceeding  great."  One  sin,  remember,  destroyed  the  whole 
human  race.  Think  again  what  an  imprudent  and  impertinent  thing  sin  is.  It  ifl 
a  thing  so  audacious,  so  full  of  pride,  that  one  need  not  marvel  that  even  a  sin  in 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  45 

the  little  eye  of  man,  should,  when  it  is  looked  upon  by  the  conscience  in  the  light  of 
heaven,  appear  to  be  great  indeed.  But  think  again,  how  great  does  your  sin  and 
mine  seem,  if  we  wiU  but  think  of  the  ingratitude  which  has  marked  it.  Oh,  if  we  set 
our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  His  mercy,  if  our  transgressions  are  set  side  by  side 
with  His  favours,  we  must  each  of  us  say,  our  sins  indeed  are  exceeding  great !  H. 
'•  Well,"  cries  one,  "  there  is  very  little  comfort  in  that.  It  is  enough  to  drive  one 
to  despair."  Ah  !  such  is  the  very  design  of  this  text.  If  I  may  have  the  pleasure 
of  driving  you  to  a  despair  of  your  self-righteousness  and  a  despair  of  saving  i 
your  own  soul,  I  shall  be  thrice  happy.  We  turn,  therefore,  from  that  terrible ! 
text  to  the  second  one,  "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  usi 
from  aU  sin."  There  lies  the  blackness  ;  here  stands  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  What  will  He  do  with  it?  He  wiU  do  a  far  better  thing  than 
make  an  excuse  or  pretend  in  any  way  to  speak  lightly  of  it.  He  will 
cleanse  it  all  away.  Dwell  on  the  word  "all."  Our  sins  are  great;  every 
sin  is  great  ;  but  there  are  some  that  in  our  apprehension  seem  to  be  greater  than 
others.  There  may  be  some  sins  of  which  a  man  cannot  speak,  but  there  is  no  sin 
which  the  blood  of  Christ  cannot  wash  away.  Blasphemy,  however  profane  ;  lust, 
however  bestial ;  covetousness,  however  far  it  may  have  gone  into  theft  and  rapine  ; 
breach  of  the  commandments  of  God,  however  much  of  riot  it  may  have  run,  all 
this  may  be  pardoned  and  washed  away  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  Just 
take  the  word  "  all "  in  another  sense,  not  only  as  taking  in  all  sorts  of  sin,  but  as 
comprehending  the  great  aggregate  mass  of  sin.  Come  here,  sinner,  thou  with  the 
grey  head.  Couldst  thou  bear  to  read  thine  own  diary  if  thou  hadst  written  there 
aU  thy  acts  ?  No ;  for  though  thou  be  the  purest  of  mankind,  thy  thoughts,  if  they 
could  have  been  recorded,  would  now,  if  thou  couldst  read  them,  make  thee  startle 
and  wonder  that  thou  art  demon  enough  to  have  had  such  imaginations  within  thy 
soul.  But  put  them  all  here,  and  all  these  sins  the  blood  of  Christ  can  wash  away. 
Yet,  once  more,  in  the  praise  of  this  blood  we  must  notice  one  further  feature. 
There  be  some  of  you  here  who  are  saying,  "  Ah !  that  shall  be  my  hope  when  I 
come  to  die,  that  in  the  last  hour  of  my  extremity  the  blood  of  Christ  will  take 
'  my  sins  away ;  it  is  now  my  comfort  to  think  that  the  blood  of  Christ  shall  wash, 
and  purge,  and  purify  the  transgressions  of  Mfe."  But,  mark !  my  text  saith  not  so ; 
it  does  not  say  the  blood  of  Christ  shall  cleanse — that  were  a  truth — but  it 
says  something  greater  ■  than  that — it  says,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
His  Son  cleanseth "  —  cleanseth  now.  Come,  soul,  this  moment  come  to 
Him  that  hung  upon  the  Cross  of  Calvary  1  come  now  and  be  washed. 
But  what  meanest  thou  by  coming  ?  I  mean  this  :  come  thou  and 
put  thy  trust  in  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  atonement  of  Christ : — Let  us  view  the  text — I.  As  pointing  out  its  value.  It 
declares  the  way  of  pardon  to  be  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  It 
is  the  blood  of  Him  whose  name  is  Jesus  ;  a  name  which  causeth  those  who  know 
it  to  be  joyful  in  Him  that  bears  it.  It  is  the  blood  of  on'e  appointed  and  commis- 
sioned to  save  His  people  from  the  guilt,  the  power,  the  practice,  and  the  love  of  sin. 
n.  As  DECLAKiNG  ITS  CONTINUAL  EFFICACY.  The  blood  of  Jcsus  Christ  His  Son 
cleanseth  from  aU  sin ;  it  has  a  cleansing  quality.  Oh  1  what  great  reason  have  we 
all  to  lament  the  polluted  state  of  man.  When  the  apostle  says,  "  The  blood 
of  Christ  cleanseth,"  it  evidently  implies  that  His  blood  is  the  only  means  of 
obtaining  pardon.  And  this  efficacy  is  perpetual.  III.  As  asserting  its  universal 
INFLUENCE.  It  clcanscth,  not  all  persons,  but  from  all  sin.  Since  it  was  the  blood 
of  so  great  a  person  as  the  Son  of  God,  it  is  as  powerful  to  cleanse  us  from  the 
greatest  sin  as  from  the  least.  It  is  a  universal  remedy.  (F.  Spencer.)  The 
Passion  of  our  Lord  our  cleansing  : — I.  The  instrument  op  our  cleansing  is  said 
TO  BE  THE  blood  OF  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Now  the  blood  is  the  life  thereof,  and  there- 
fore, in  the  first  place,  we  obtain  the  idea  that  Christ's  life  has  been  given  in  expia- 
tion of  our  sins,  and  we  get  the  idea  of  satisfaction,  inasmuch  as  the  life  of  an 
innocent  person  has  been  taken  in  atonement  for  the  sins  of  those  of  whom  that 
innocent  person  is  a  constituent  member.  2.  But  next,  the  idea  of  blood  especially 
conveys  to  us  that  element  of  self-immolation  and  self-sacrifice  which  so  markedly 
distinguishes  tiie  work  of  Christ.  The  blood  is  the  most  intimate  and  precious  thing 
vhich  a  man  can  have.  3.  Again,  the  idea  of  blood  conveys  to  us  the  notion  of 
priestly  lustration  and  cleansing.  It  places  before  us  the  present  office  of  Christ, 
who,  having  entered  into  the  holy  place  once  for  all,  for  ever  appears  before  the 
celestial  altar  pleading  His  Passion  before  the  eternal  Father,  and  presenting  His 
perpetual  sacrifice.    II.  Whose  blood  it  is  that  cleanseth  ieom  all  sin.    Whose 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

blood  ?  It  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ !  The  apostle  speaks  of  the  Church  of 
God,  which  He  hath  purchased  with  His  own  blood.  God's  own  blood  !  What  an 
awful  and  wonderful  expression  !  and  yet  it  only  enunciates  the  truth,  that  God  the 
Son  has  taken  to  Himself  a  human  body,  not  to  reign  in,  but  to  suffer  in ;  not  to  be 
glorified  in,  but  to  die  in  ;  to  suiier  that  we  might  rejoice,  to  die  that  we  might  live 
for  ever.  HI.  The  effect  of  this  potent  outpouring  of  the  life  of  God.  It 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  It  is  not  mere  remission.  It  is  not  mere  averting  the 
punishment.  It  is  not  mere  pronouncing  man  just  when  he  is  in  fact  unjust.  It  is 
all  this  and  more.  By  cleansing  we  mean  making  that  pure  which  before  was  foul, 
and  this  is  what  we  attribute  to  the  blood  of  Christ.  We  believe  that  in  that  blood 
there  is  such  a  virtue  as  to  be  able  to  transform  the  sinful  nature  of  man  into  an 
imperfect  but  real  image  of  the  holiness  of  God ;  that  before  its  might  all  that  is  base 
and  unclean  fades  away,  and  that,  like  the  chemist's  potent  elexir,  it  transmutes 
the  baser  elements  with  which  it  comes  into  contact  into  a  new  and  more  perfect 
substance.  Again,  the  blood  of  Christ  suggests  to  us  such  cleansing  as  comes  from 
washing.  That  sea  of  blood  which  flowed  from  the  Saviour's  veins  is  the  laver 
wherein  our  souls  are  washed  from  all  the  soils  with  which  the  indulgence  of  sin 
defiles  them.  No  harboured  guilt,  no  vain  delight,  no  bosom  iniquity  can  withstand 
the  rushing  flood  of  grace  that  pours  into  the  soul.  God  wiU  not  save  us  without 
ourselves,  as  St.  Augustine  bears  witness  ;  and  therefore  the  efficacy  of  all  that  God 
has  done  for  us  depends  in  one  sense  upon  ourselves.  {Bp.  A.  P.  Forbes.)  The 
efficacy  of  the  Redeemers  blood : — I.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
cleanses  us  from  all  sin  by  making  an  atonement  for  all  the  guilt  of  sin  ;  by  pro- 
viding for  our  justification.  Pardon  is  never  partial ;  and  for  this  simple  reason — 
the  atoning  blood  of  Christ  reaches  to  one  sin  as  well  as  to  another  ;  it  is  satisfac- 
tion in  full,  and  therefore,  when  the  merit  of  it  is  received  by  faith,  aU  past  sin  is 
freely,  fully  forgiven.  II.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin,  by  procuring  for  us  that  measure  of  the  gracious  influence  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit,  which  may  deliver  us  from  all  the  power  and  from  all  the  principle  of 
sin.  In  other  words,  it  provides  for  our  sanctification.  1.  This  doctrine  of 
dehverance  from  all  sin  contains  nothing  more  than  what  the  nature  of  sin,  if 
properly  understood,  makes  imperatively  necessary.  The  evangelical  covenant  does 
not  speak  of  the  expulsion  of  degrees  of  sin,  but  of  the  expulsion  of  its  principle. 
2.  The  doctrine  in  question  contains  nothing  beyond  what  it  must  be  admitted  the 
Divine  Spirit  is  competent  to  perform.  3.  Whatever  exception  may  be  taken  to  this 
doctrine  of  deliverance  from  all  the  power  and  principle  of  sin,  the  thing  itself  is 
indispensably  necessary  to  our  happiness.  4.  We  say  nothing  but  what  all  orthodox 
Christians  admit  must  be  done  sometime.  The  controversy,  therefore,  only  turns 
upon  the  point  when  this  momentous  work  is  to  be  accomplished.  If  this  work  be 
done  at  all,  it  must  be  either  in  eternity  or  in  time.  If  the  work  cannot  take  place 
in  eternity,  then  it  must  in  time.  Shall  I  ask,  How  long  before  the  spirit  quit  its 
tabernacle?  Five  minutes?  an  hour?  a  day?  a  week?  Why  then  not  a  year? 
why  then  not  now  ?  6.  When  we  insist  upon  this  principle,  we  insist  on  nothing 
but  what  uniformly  appears  on  the  inspired  page  (Psa.  li.  10 ;  Matt.  v.  8 ;  Eph.  iii. 
19).  {Jas.  Bromley.)  Cleansing  virtue  of  Christ^s  blood : — It  is  a  short  but 
a  full  panegyric  of  the  virtue  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  1.  In  regard  of  the 
effect — cleansing.  2.  In  regard  of  the  cause  of  its  efficacy.  It  is  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  a  Saviour.  The  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  of  one  in  a  special  relation 
to  the  Father.  3.  In  regard  to  the  extensiveness  of  it — all  sin.  No  guilt  so 
high  but  it  can  master ;  no  stain  so  deep  but  it  can  purge.  Doctrine  :  The  blood 
of  Christ  hath  a  perpetual  virtue,  and  doth  actually  and  perfectly  cleanse  believers 
from  all  guilt.  This  blood  is  the  expiation  of  our  sin  and  the  unlocking  our  chains, 
the  price  of  our  liberty  and  of  the  purity  of  our  souls.  The  redemption  we  have 
through  it  is  expressly  called  the  forgiveness  of  sin  (Eph.  i.  7).  As  the  blood  of 
the  typical  sacrifices  purified  from  ceremonial,  so  the  blood  of  the  Anti-typical 
Offering  purifies  from  moral  uncleanness.  The  Scripture  places  remission  wholly  in 
this  blood  of  the  Redeemer.  1.  The  blood  of  Christ  is  to  be  considered  morally  in 
this  act.  2.  The  cleansing  is  to  be  doubly  considered.  There  is  a  cleansing  from 
guilt  and  a  cleansing  from  filth — both  are  the  fruits  of  this  blood.  The  guilt  is 
removed  by  remission,  the  filth  by  purification.  Christ  doth  both.  The  one  upon  the 
account  of  His  merit,  the  other  by  His  efficacy  which  He  exerts  by  His  Spirit. 
These  both  spring  up  from  the  death  of  Christ,  yet  they  belong  to  two  distinct 
offices  of  Christ.  He  justifies  us  as  a  surety,  a  sacrifice  by  suffering,  as  a  Priest  by 
merit.  But  He  sanctifies  us  as  a  King  by  sending  His  Spirit  to  work  efficaciously  in 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  47 

our  hearts.  By  virtue  of  His  death  there  is  no  condemnation  for  sin  (Rom.  viii. 
1-3).  By  virtue  of  the  grace  of  His  Spirit  there  is  no  dominion  of  sin  (Eom.  vi. 
4-14).  3.  This  cleansing  from  guilt  may  be  considered  as  meritorious  or  applicative. 
As  the  blood  of  Christ  was  offered  to  God  this  purification  was  meritoriously  wrought ; 
as  particularly  pleaded  for  a  person  it  is  actually  wrought ;  as  sprinkled  upon  the 
conscience  it  is  sensibly  wrought.  The  first  merits  the  removal  of  guilt,  the  second 
solicits  it,  the  third  ensures  it.  The  one  was  wrought  upon  the  Cross,  the  other  is 
acted  upon  His  throne,  and  the  third  pronounced  in  the  conscience.  The  first  is 
expressed  Rom.  iii.  25 :  His  blood  rendered  God  propitious.  The  second,  Heb. 
ix.  12  :  As  He  is  entered  into  the  holy  of  holies.  The  third,  Heb.  ix.  14 :  Christ 
justifies  as  a  sacrifice  in  a  way  of  merit,  and  when  this  is  pleaded  God  justifies  as 
a  Judge  in  a  way  of  authority.  4.  The  evidence  of  this  truth  well  appears.  5.  From 
the  credit  it  had  for  the  expiation  and  cleansing  of  guilt  before  it  was  actually  shed 
and  reliance  of  believers  in  all  ages  on  it.  The  blood  of  Christ  was  applied  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  though  it  was  not  shed  till  the  fulness  of  time.  We 
must  distinguish  the  virtue  of  redemption  from  the  work  of  redemption.  The  work 
was  appointed  in  a  certain  time,  but  the  vu'tue  was  not  restrained  to  a  certain  time. 
Several  considerations  will  clear  this.  (1)  The  Scripture  speaks  but  of  one  person 
designed  for  this  great  work  (John  i.  29).  As  God  is  the  God  of  all  that  died  before 
Christ  came,  as  well  as  of  those  that  lived  after ;  so  Christ  is  the  Mediator  of  all 
that  died  before  His  coming,  as  well  as  of  those  that  saw  His  day.  (2)  This  one 
Mediator  was  set  forth  ever  since  the  fall  of  man,  as  the  foundation  of  pardon  and 
recovery.  (3)  Though  these  promises  and  prophecies  of  the  expiation  and  cleansing 
of  sin  were  something  obscure  to  them  and  though  they  did  not  exactly  know 
the  method,  how  it  would  be  accomplished,  yet  that  sin  should  be  pardoned  was 
fully  revealed,  and  something  of  the  method  of  it  might  be  known  unto  them.  (4) 
The  ancient  patriarchs  had  faith,  and  were  actually  pardoned.  (5)  And  this  might 
well  be  upon  the  account  of  the  compact  between  the  Father  the  Judge  and  the  Son 
the  Redeemer.  Had  he  not  promised  the  shedding  of  His  blood,  justice  had  dis- 
lodged the  sinner  from  the  world.  This  was  the  true  and  sole  end  of  His  incarna- 
tion and  death.  All  the  ends  mentioned  by  the  Angel  Gabriel  to  Daniel  centre  iu 
this  and  refer  to  it.  "  To  finish  the  transgression,  make  an  end  of  sin,  and  make 
reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness"  (Dan.  ix.  24), 
and  thereby  should  all  the  visions  and  prophecies  concerning  the  Messiah  and  His 
work  be  fulfilled.  (6)  This  is  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  The  apostle, 
therefore,  with  a  particular  emphasis,  tells  them  this  is  a  thing  to  be  known  and 
acknowledged  by  all  that  own  Christianity  (chap.  iii.  5).  (7)  There  could  be  no  other 
end  of  His  shedding  His  blood  but  this.  Since  His  death  is  called  a  sacrifice  (Eph. 
V.  2),  a  propitiation  (chap.  ii.  2 ;  Rom.  iii.  25),  it  can  be  for  no  other  end  but 
the  cleansing  of  sin.  6.  The  cleansing  sin  is  wrought  solely  by  His  own  worth,  as 
He  is  the  Son  of  God.  It  is,  therefore,  said  in  the  text  the  blood,  not  only  of  Jesus 
Christ  but  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  blood  of  Jesus  received  its  value  from  His  Son- 
ship,  the  eternal  relation  He  stood  in  to  His  Father,  Since  sin  is  an  infinite  evil  no 
mere  creature  can  satisfy  for  it,  nor  can  all  the  holy  works  of  all  the  creatures  be  a 
compensation  for  one  act  of  sin,  because  the  vastest  heap  of  all  the  holy  actions  of 
men  and  angels  would  never  amount  to  an  infinite  goodness,  which  is  necessary 
for  the  satisfaction  of  an  infinite  wrong.  1.  Hence  it  follows  that  sin  is 
perfectly  cleansed  by  this  blood.  (1)  The  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  perfectly 
cleanse  us  here  from  sin,  in  regard  of  the  sense  of  it.  Some  sparks  of  the  fiery 
law  will  sometimes  flash  in  our  consciences  and  the  peace  of  the  gospel  be  put 
under  a  veil.  Evidences  may  be  blurred  and  guilt  revived.  Satan  may  accuse,  and 
conscience  knows  not  how  to  answer  him.  There  will  be  startlings  of  unbelief, 
distrusts  of  God,  and  misty  steams  from  the  miry  lake  of  nature.  But  it  hath  laid  a 
perfect  foundation,  and  the  top  stone  of  a  full  sense  and  comfort  will  be  laid  at  last. 
Peace  shall  be  as  an  illustrious  sunshine  without  a  cloud ;  a  sweet  calm  without  any 
whisper  of  a  blustering  tempest.  As  God's  justice  shall  read  nothing  for  condem- 
nation, so  conscience  shall  read  nothing  for  accusation.  The  blood  of  Christ  will 
be  perfect  in  the  effects  of  it.  The  soul  shall  be  without  fault  before  the  throne  of 
God  (Rev.  xiv.  5).  (2)  The  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  perfectly  cleanse  us  here  from 
sin  in  regard  of  the  stirrings  of  it.  The  Old  Serpent  will  be  sometimes  stinging  us 
and  sometimes  foiling  us.  But  this  blood  shall  perfect  what  it  hath  begun,  and  the 
troubled  sea  of  corruption  that  sends  forth  mire  and  dirt  shall  be  totally  removed 
(Heb.  xii.  23).  (3)  But  the  blood  of  Christ  perfectly  cleanseth  us  from  sin  here  in 
regard  of  condemnation  and  punishment.    Thus  it  blots  it  out  of  the  book  of  God's 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

justice ;  it  is  no  more  to  be  remembered  in  a  way  of  legal  and  judicial  sentence 
against  the  sinner.  Though  the  nature  of  sin  doth  not  cease  to  be  sinful,  yet  the 
power  of  sin  ceaseth  to  be  condemning.  Where  the  crime  is  not  imputed  the 
punishment  ought  not  to  be  inflicted.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  righteousness  of 
God  to  be  an  appeased  and  j'et  a  revenging  Judge.  When  the  cause  of  His  anger 
is  removed  the  effects  of  His  anger  are  extinguished.  Herein  doth  the  pardon  of  sin 
properly  consist  in  a  remission  of  punishment.  The  crhne  cannot  be  remitted,  but 
only  in  regard  of  punishment  merited  by  it.  If  God  should  punish  a  man  that  is 
Bprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ  it  would  be  contrary  both  to  His  justice  and 
mercy.  To  His  justice  because  He  hath  accepted  of  the  satisfaction  made  by  Christ 
who  paid  the  debt.  It  would  be  contrary  to  His  mercy,  for  it  would  be  cruelty  to 
adjudge  a  person  to  punishment  who  is  legally  discharged.  (4)  The  effect  of  this 
blood  shall  appear  perfect  at  the  last  in  the  final  sentence.  It  cleanseth  us  initially 
here,  completely  hereafter.  It  cleanseth  us  here  in  law.  Its  virtue  shall  be  manifest 
by  a  final  sentence.  There  is  here  a  secret  grant  passed  in  our  consciences  ;  there, 
a  solemn  publication  of  it  before  men  and  angels.  (5)  Hence  it  cleanseth  from  all 
sin  universally.  He  was  delivered  for  our  offences  (Eom.  iv.  25) — not  for  some  few 
offences,  but  for  all ;  and  as  He  was  delivered  for  them  so  He  is  accepted  for  them. 
Men  have  different  sins,'  according  to  their  various  dispositions  or  constitutions. 
Every  man  hath  his  own  way.  And  the  iniquity  of  all  those  various  sins  of  a 
different  stamp  and  a  contrary  nature  in  regard  of  the  acts  and  objects  God  hath 
made  to  meet  at  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  laid  them  aU  upon  Him  (Isa.  liii.  6) — the 
sins  of  all  believing  persons,  in  all  parts,  in  aU  ages  of  the  world,  from  the  first 
moment  of  man's  sinning  to  the  last  sin  committed  on  the  earth.  I.  How  Christ's 
BLOOD  CLEANSETH  FROM  SIN.  God  the  Father  doth  actually  and  efficiently  justify; 
Christ's  blood  doth  meritoriously  justify.  God  the  Father  is  considered  as  Judge, 
Christ  is  considered  as  Priest  and  Sacrifice.  This  is  done — 1.  By  taking  sin  upon 
Himself.  2.  By  accounting  the  righteousness  and  sufficiency  of  His  sufferings  to 
us.  (1)  This  cleansing  of  us  by  imputing  this  blood  to  us  is  by  virtue  of  union  and 
communion  with  Him.  (2)  This  union  is  made  by  faith,  and  upon  this  account  we 
are  said  to  be  justified  by  faith.  H.  The  use.  If  the  blood  of  Christ  hath  the 
only  and  perpetual  virtue  and  doth  actually  and  perfectly  cleanse  believers  from 
all  sin,  then  it  affords  us — 1.  A  use  of  instruction.  (1)  Every  man  uninterested  by 
faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ  is  hopeless  of  a  freedom  from  guilt  while  he  continues  in 
that  state.  (2)  No  freedom  from  the  guilt  of  sin  is  to  be  expected  from  mere  mercy. 
The  figure  of  this  was  notable  in  the  legal  economy.  The  mercy-seat  was  not  to  be 
approached  by  the  high  priest  without  blood  (Deut.  ix.  7).  Christ  Himself  typified 
by  the  high  priest  expects  no  mercy  for  any  of  His  followers  but  by  the  merit  of 
His  blood.  The  very  title  of  justification  implies  not  only  mercy  but  justice  ;  and 
more  justice  than  mercy,  for  justification  is  not  upon  a  bare  petition  but  a  propitia- 
tion. (3)  There  is  no  ground  for  the  merits  of  saints  or  a  cleansing  purgatory.  (4) 
No  mere  creature  can  cleanse  from  sin.  No  finite  thing  can  satisfy  an  infinite 
justice ;  no  finite  thing  can  remit  or  purchase  the  remission  of  an  injury  against  an 
Infinite  Being.  A  creature  can  no  more  cleanse  a  soul  than  it  can  frame  and  govern 
a  world  and  redeem  a  captived  sinner.  (5  )There  is  no  righteousness  of  our  own,  no 
services  we  can  do,  sufficient  for  so  great  a  concern.  To  depend  upon  any  or  all  of 
them,  or  anything  in  ourselves,  is  injurious  to  the  value  and  worth  of  this  blood; 
it  is  injurious  also  to  ourselves ;  it  is  like  the  setting  up  a  paper  wall  to  keep  off  a 
dreadful  fire,  even  that  consuming  one  of  God's  justice.  And  there  is  good  reason 
for  it.  (a)  No  righteousness  of  man  is  perfect,  and  therefore  no  righteousness  of 
man  is  justifying,  (b)  The  design  of  God  was  to  justify  us  in  such  a  way  as  to  strip 
us  of  all  matter  of  glorying  in  ourselves,  and  therefore  it  is  not  by  any  righteous- 
ness of  our  own.  (6)  We  are  therefore  justified  by  a  righteousness  imputed  to  us. 
The  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  It  is  not  physically  or  corporally 
apphed  to  us,  but  juridically,  and  therefore  imputed  to  us,  and  that  for  justification 
(Eom.  V.  9).  in.  Use  of  comfort.  The  comfort  of  a  believer  hath  a  strong  and 
lasting  foundation  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  1.  The  title  is  cheering.  The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  His  Son.  The  titles  of  the  blood  of  God  and  the  righteousness  of  God 
are  enough  to  answer  all  objections,  and  testify  a  virtue  in  it  as  incomprehensible  as 
that  of  His  Godhead  which  elevated  it  to  an  infinite  value.  What  wounds  are  so 
deep  that  they  cannot  be  healed  by  the  sovereign  balsam  of  so  rich  a  blood  ?  The 
blood  of  Christ  is  as  much  above  the  guilt  of  our  sins  as  the  excellency  of  His  person 
is  above  the  meanness  of  ours.  2.  Arid  who  can  fathom  the  comfort  that  is  in  the 
extensiveness  of  the  object  ?    All  sin.    All  transgressions  to  it  are  like  a  grain  of 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  49 

sand  or  the  drop  of  a  bucket  to  the  ocean — no  more  seen  or  distinguished  when  it 
is  swallowed  up  by  that  mass  of  waters.  It  is  a  plenteous  redemption.  3.  And  doth 
not  the  word  "  cleanse"  deserve  a  particular  consideration?  What  doth  that  note 
but — (1)  Perfection?  It  cleanseth  their  guilt  so  that  it  shall  not  be  found  (Jer.  1.  20). 
What  can  justice  demand  more  of  us,  more  of  our  Saviour,  than  what  hath  been 
already  paid?  (2)  Continuance  of  justification.  The  present  tense  impUes  a 
continued  act.  Hence  will  follow  security  at  the  last  judgment.  His  blood 
cleanseth  from  all  sin  here,  and  His  voice  shall  absolve  from  all  sin  hereafter. 
IV.  Use  of  exhortation.  Have  recourse  only  to  this  blood  upon  all  occasions 
since  it  only  is  able  to  cleanse  us  from  all  our  guilt.  (B.  Hacket.)  The 
cleansing  blood: — 1.  The  blood  of  the  Cross  was  royal  blood.  It  is  called  an 
honour  to  have  in  one's  veins  the  blood  of  the  house  of  Stuart,  or  of  the  house  of 
Hapsburg.  It  is  nothing  when  I  point  you  to  the  outpouring  blood  of  the  King  of 
the  Universe  ?  It  is  said  that  the  Unitarians  make  too  much  of  the  humanity  of 
Christ.  I  respond  that  we  make  too  little.  If  some  Roman  surgeon,  standing 
under  the  Cross,  had  caught  one  drop  of  the  blood  on  his  hand  and  analysed  it,  it 
would  have  been  found  to  have  the  same  plasma,  the  same  disc,  the  same  fibrine, 
the  same  albumen.  2.  It  was  unmistakably  human  blood.  3.  I  go  still  further, 
and  say  it  was  a  brother's  blood.  If  you  saw  an  entire  stranger  maltreated,  and  his 
life  oozing  away  on  the  pavement,  you  would  feel  indignant.  But  if,  coming 
along  the  street,  you  saw  a  company  of  villains  beating  out  the  life  of  your  own 
brother  the  sight  of  his  blood  would  make  you  mad.  You  would  bound  into  the 
affray.  That  is  your  brother,  maltreated  on  the  Cross.  4.  It  was  substitutionary 
blood.  Our  sins  cried  to  heaven  for  vengeance.  Some  one  must  die.  Shall 
it  be  us  or  Christ  ?  "  Let  it  be  me,"  said  Jesus.  (T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.) 
The  cleansing  blood : — I.  Consider  the  connection  of  the  text.  The 
blood  of  Christ  and  its  cleansing  efficacy  are  associated  with  fellowship.  The 
question  is,  what  is  the  relation  between  them  to  which  the  apostle  adverts? 
Without  it  we  can  have  no  fellowship  with  the  Father  (Heb.  ix.,  x.).  The  penitent 
sinner,  carrying  the  blood  of  Jesus  in  the  hand  of  faith,  and  sprinkling  the  mercy- 
seat,  may  have  fellowship  with  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The 
same  law  obtains  in  holding  fellowship  with  the  Son  also.  How  impressively  this 
lesson  is  taught  in  His  own  ordinance  of  the  Supper.  That  ordinance  is  the  out- 
ward expression  of  fellowship  with  Him,  and  it  thus  teaches  how  that  fellowship  is 
to  be  enjoyed.  Nor  is  there  any  other  basis  on  which  believers  can  hold  fellowship 
with  one  another  as  the  followers  of  Christ.  They  may  truly  say,  "  The  cup  of 
blessing  which  we  bless,"  &c.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  bond  of  their  union. 
They  are  alike  sinners,  and  have  no  hope  but  the  death  of  Jesus.  It  is  to  be  borne 
in  mind  also  that  fellowship  in  all  these  views  with  the  Father,  and  the  Son, 
and  believers,  as  it  is  begun  by  the  reception  of  this  doctrine,  must  ever  be  main- 
tained by  the  application  of  it.  We  can  never  come  to  God  otherwise,  and  we  may 
always  come  to  Him  by  the  peace-speaking  blood  of  Jesus.  11.  The  blessed 
doctrine  itself.  The  statement  expresses  both  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ 
and  the  reason  of  it.  1.  Whence  does  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  cleanse 
from  sin  arise  ?  Not  merely  from  Divine  appointment,  although  there  was  a  Divine 
appointment.  That  appointment  was  made  because  it  was  seen  by  the  Omniscient 
mind  to  be  effectual.  It  constituted  at  once  the  "  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of 
God."  2.  The  efficacy  itself — "It  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  (1)  There  is  original 
sin.  (2)  There  is  again. actual  sin.  Alas!  how  mightUy  does  it  prevail.  (3)  There 
is,  farther,  the  guilt  of  sin.  How  fearfuUy  is  it  accumulated  !  Which  of  God's 
commandments  has  riot  the  sinner  broken  ?  (4)  So  also  is  there  the  power  of  sin. 
It  might  be  supposed  this  was  not  to  be  overcome.  (5)  Yet  again  there  are  the  sina 
of  believers.  (6)  Even  the  best  services  of  believers,  however,  are  not  faultless. 
Often,  while  otners  applaud  them,  they  are  ashamed  to  lift  up  their  faces  to  the  Lord. 
They  can  look  for  acceptance  only  through  the  merit  and  mediation  of  Jesua 
Christ.  3.  Blood  must  be  sprinkled  before  it  is  made  effectual.  Under  the  law,  aU 
things  were  purged  by  blood.  The  book,  the  people,  the  tabernacle,  and  the  vessels 
of  the  ministry,  were  sprinkled  with  blood.  So  must  it  be  with  our  souls.  It  will  not 
suffice  that  the  blood  of  Christ  has  been  shed.  It  must  be  applied  to  the  conscience. 
{J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Cleanseth  from  all  sin,  so  that  men  are  made  like  to  God,  in 
whom  is  no  darkness  (ver.  5).  The  thought  here  is  of  "  sin"  and  not  of  " sins" ; 
of  the  spring,  the  principle,  and  not  of  the  separate  manifestations.  (Bp.  Westcott.) 
♦•  Cleanseth."  Not  a  coming  to  the  fountain  to  be  cleansed  only,  but  a  remaining  in 
it,  80  that  it  may  and  can  go  on  cleansing ;  the  force  of  the  tense  a  continuous 

4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

present,  always  a  present  tense,  not  a  present  which  the  next  moment  becomes  a 
past.  {Frances  R.  Havergal.)  "The  blood": — This  word  declares  more  vividly 
than  any  other  could  do  three  great  realities  of  the  Christian  belief — the  reality  of 
the  manhood  of  Jesus,  the  reality  of  Hi  a  sufferings,  the  reality  of  His  sacrifice. 
{Expositor's  Bible.) 

Vers.  8-10.  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves. — Assumptions 
of  sinlessness : — This  is  a  strong  and  clear  statement,  the  utterance  of  an  apostle 
who  speaks  out  of  the  fulness  of  a  long  and  ripe  Christian  experience,  not  simply 
in  his  own  name,  but  as  the  organ  or  representative  of  the  whole  Church.  Let  us 
consider  its  bearing : — I.  On  oue  conceptions  of  truth.  Truth  is  a  wide  word, 
but  I  use  it  here  in  St.  John's  sense  as  equivalent  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel — the 
truth  which  regulates  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  only  by  patient  study  and  the 
contributions  furnished  by  prayerful  research  on  the  part  of  her  members,  the 
Church  can  enrich  herself  with  the  full  contents  of  Divine  revelation.  An  infallible 
judgment  can  only  exist  in  a  perfect  or  sinless  character.  Prejudice  prejudges  a 
question  in  accordance  with  its  own  bias,  and  unduly  discounts  the  evidence  that 
looks  in  another  direction.  Personal  feeling  blinds  us  to  considerations  whose  force 
would  otherwise  be  recognised.  Attachment  to  a  theory,  or  a  traditional  interpre- 
tation, makes  us  unwilling  to  acknowledge  frankly  what  tells  against  it,  and  tempts 
us  to  do  violence  to  the  natural  meaning  of  words.  To  assume,  therefore,  that 
because  a  man  is  a  Christian,  sincere,  devout,  and  earnest  in  his  faith,  he  must  be 
unquestionably  right  in  his  views  of  Scripture,  is  to  assume  what  the  apostle  here 
condemns.  It  is  to  suppose  that  he  is  absolutely  free  from  all  that  can  limit,  warp, 
or  obscure  the  understanding,  that  is,  that  he  has  no  sin.  But  you  may  ask — Does 
not  this  destroy  the  infallibility  of  the  apostles  themselves  ?  They  never  claimed 
to  be  sinless.  I  answer  to  this  that  for  special  purposes  the  apostles  were  enriched 
with  supernatural  gifts.  But  still  farther  you  may  ask — What,  then,  does  St. 
John  mean  when  he  says  :  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  know  aJl 
things"?  "All  things,"  if  you  look  at  the  verse  that  follows,  St.  John  uses  as 
equivalent  to  "the  truth" — the  distinctive  truth  of  the  gospel.  As  a  man  who 
does  not  know  his  own  mind  is  at  the  mercy  of  every  wind  of  opinion,  and  exercises 
no  determining  influence  upon  events,  so  the  Church  of  Christ  unless  it  knew  her 
Lord,  and  the  peculiar  truths  which  centre  in  His  Person,  would  be  simply  and 
hopelessly  lost  amid  the  conflicting  eddies  of  the  world.  But  this  is  quite  a 
different  matter  from  affirming  that  every  individual  Christian  will  come  to  correct 
conclusions  on  all  the  debatable  subjects  that  lie  within  the  compass  of  revelation. 
Let  us,  therefore,  while  we  hold  fast  the  faith  and  rest  upon  it,  as  the  broad  founda- 
tion of  all  our  hope,  ever  remember  our  own  proneness  to  go  astray  and  to  attach  a 
disproportionate  importance  to  secondary  truths.  II.  In  relation  to  guidance  m 
PRACTICAL  CONDUCT.  When  we  know  the  gospel  we  wish  to  act  in  accordance  with 
it.  In  other  words,  we  desire  not  only  to  be  led  into  right  views  of  truths,  but  also 
into  right  conceptions  of  duty.  In  reality  these  two  are  one.  To  think  truly  will 
secure  our  acting  rightly.  If  we  should  require  to  be  perfect  or  sinless  men  in 
order  to  be  sure  that  our  conclusions  in  regard  to  all  matters  connected  with  Eevela- 
tion  are  certainly  right,  we  should  require  to  be  the  same  kind  of  men  to  be  sure 
that  our  decisions  in  points  of  duty  are  never  wrong.  In  both  cases  we  must 
remember  that  if  we  say  we  have  no  sin  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  that  wherever 
sin  is  there  is  liability  to  error,  just  as  there  is  to  pride,  or  hatred,  or  open  trans- 
gression. Perhaps  you  will  say:  "Nobody  seriously  doubts  this;  but  do  we  not 
receive  in  answer  to  prayer  what  will  neutralise  this  confessed  liability,  and  guide 
us  to  a  right  decision?  "  How,  then,  does  God  answer  our  prayer  for  guidance? 
He  gives  us  what  the  Scripture  calk  grace,  inward  enlightenment,  or  strength, 
according  as  the  occasion  may  require.  But  you  must  not  imagine  that  grace,  any 
more  than  sin,  is  a  physical  quantity  which  may  occupy  a  definite  space  within  a 
man's  nature.  Grace  operates  throughout  our  whole  nature,  renewing  the  will, 
cleansing  the  affections,  stimulating  and  purifying  thought,  acting  as  an  antidote  ia 
all  these  directions  to  the  power  of  sin.  Without  it  sin  works  unqualified  by  any 
Divine  control,  with  it  sin  is  always  under  restraint.  Hence  no  act  or  perception 
on  the  part  of  a  Christian  man  is  wholly  the  result  of  grace,  but  more  or  less  of 
grace  and  more  or  less  of  sin.  In  short,  it  is  the  outcome  or  exercise  of  a  sinful 
nature  in  which  both  co-exist.  We  may  interpose  an  obstacle  that  will  seriously 
hinder  His  working  or  wholly  arrest  it.  Conscience  may  have  been  deadened 
through  previous  inconsistency  or  unfaithfulness.    The  heart  may  have  grown 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  JOHN.  51 

sluggish  through  neglect.  Our  affections  may  have  spent  themselves  too  lavishly 
upon  earthly  things,  and  grown  dull  and  indifferent  towards  things  above.  Temp- 
tation may  have  prevailed  against  us,  and  through  pride  or  unwatchfulness  we  may 
have  admitted  strange  and  aUen  guests  into  the  sanctuary  of  the  soul.  Is  it 
possible  that  in  such  circumstances  we  should  be  keenly  sensitive  to  the  motions  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  ?  May  we  not  miss  the  intimations  we  might  otherwise  detect,  or 
yield  but  a  halting  and  imperfect  response  to  their  monitions  ?  The  truth  is,  we 
conceive  of  prayer  and  its  results  in  too  mechanical  and  unspiritual  a  way.  We 
imagine  we  are  always  ready  and  able  to  receive,  no  matter  what  our  petitions  may 
include.  It  does  not  always  occur  to  us  that  spiritual  blessings  must  be  spiritually 
discerned  and  spiritually  used.  And  hence  a  double  danger  ensues.  When  Chris- 
tians pray,  and  the  answer  does  not  correspond  to  the  request,  their  faith  in  prayer 
is  apt  to  be  shaken.  They  fail  to  realise  that  His  answer  can  never  be  heard  so 
long  as  the  ear  is  stopped ;  that  His  grace  can  never  enter  as  long  as  the  heart  is 
pre-occupied  with  other  things,  and  unwilling  to  surrender  itself  wholly  to  Him. 
Or,  on  the  other  hand,  they  may  assume  that  a  Divine  light  is  leading  them  on, 
where  they  are  following  in  reality  the  sparks  of  their  own  kindling.  They  become 
dogmatic  and  opinionative,  when  there  is  no  warrant  for  their  being  so.  They 
contract  a  self-confidence,  and  conviction  that  they  are  always  right,  which  is  apt 
to  blind  them  to  many  pitfalls,  and  dig  a  ditch  for  their  own  feet.  (G.  Moinet, 
M.A.)  Self-delusion  as  to  our  state  before  God : — It  is  among  the  most  potent  of 
the  energies  of  sin,  that  it  leads  astray  by  blinding,  and  blinds  by  leading  astray.  I. 
The  apostle  declabbs  that  the  imagination  of  oub  own  sinlessness  is  an  inward 
WB.  To  believe  or  to  deny  the  possibility  of  Christian  "  perfection  "  is  to  leave  the 
motives  of  the  spiritual  life  almost  wholly  unchanged,  as  long  as  each  man  believes 
(and  who  on  any  side  doubts  this  ?)  that  it  is  the  unceasing  duty  of  each  to  be  as 
perfect  as  he  can,  and,  in  the  holy  ambition  of  yet  completer  conquest,  to  "  think 
nothing  gained  while  aught  remains  to  gain."  Were  a  perfect  man  to  exist,  he 
himself  would  be  the  last  to  know  it ;  for  the  highest  stage  of  advancement  is  the 
lowest  descent  in  humility.  As  long  as  this  humility  is  necessary  to  the  fulness  of 
the  Christian  character,  it  would  seem  that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  the  constant 
growth  in  grace  to  see  itself  lowlier  as  God  exalts  it  higher.  Besides  this  operation 
of  humility,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  spiritual  life  involves  a  progressively 
increasing  knowledge  of  God.  Now,  though  the  spirit  of  man  assuredly  must 
brighten  in  purity  as  thus  in  faith  and  love  it  approaches  the  great  Source  of  all 
holiness,  it  must  also  appreciate  far  more  accurately  the  force  of  the  contrast 
between  itself  and  its  mighty  model ;  and  thus,  as  it  becomes  relatively  more 
perfect,  it  may  be  said  to  feel  itself  absolutely  less  so.  Nay,  I  doubt  not  but  it  is 
the  very  genius  of  that  Divine  love  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness,  to  be  lovingly 
dissatisfied  with  its  own  inadequacy ;  and  such  a  worshipper  in  his  best  hours  will 
feel  that,  though  "  love  "  be,  indeed,  as  these  divines  so  earnestly  insist,  the  "  ful- 
filling of  the  law,"  his  love  is  itself  imperfect,  deficient  in  degree,  and  deficient  in 
constancy ;  and  that  in  this  life  it  can,  at  best,  be  only  the  germ  of  that  charity 
which,  "  never-failing,"  is  to  form  the  moving  principle  of  the  life  of  eternity.  But 
it  is  not  of  those,  whom  some  would  not  only  pronounce  "  perfect,"  but  enjoin  to 
feel  and  know  themselves  such  ;  it  is  not  of  those,  who  (as  I  would  rather  represent 
it)  doubt  all  in  themselves  while  they  doubt  nothing  in  Christ,  that  I  have  now  to 
Bpeak,  but  of  those  whose  cold  hearts  and  neglectful  li^es  utter  the  bold  denial  of 
a  sinlessness  which  the  lips  dare  not  deny  ;  who  "cry  out  of  the  depths,"  indeed, 
but  not  for  rescue  or  redemption ;  who  cannot  know  God  as  a  Bedeemer,  for  they 
cannot  feel  from  what  He  is  to  redeem !  U.  It  wootj)  be  vain  to  think  of 
SPECimNG  the  pabticdlae  causes  op  the  evil  ;  WE  CAN  ONLY  speak  of  some  of 
the  geneeal  pbinciples  on  which  it  rests.  The  whole  mystery  of  deceit  must  be 
primarily  referred  to  the  governing  agency  of  Satan — in  this  sense,  as  in  every 
other,  "the  ruler  of  the  darkness  of  this  world."  It  is  a  living  spirit  with  whom 
we  have  to  contend,  as  it  is  a  "living  God "  whom  we  have  to  aid  us.  The  cunning 
of  the  Serpent  alone  can  reach  the  master-subtlety  of  making  the  soul  of  man  do 
his  work  by  being  its  own  unpitying  enemy,  and  traitor,  and  cheat ;  it  is  only  the 
"  father  of  lies  "  that  thus  can  make  the  wretched  heart  a  liar  to  itself.  But  then 
it  is  certain,  that  as  God  is  pleased  to  work  by  means,  and  to  approach  circuitously 
to  His  ends,  so,  still  more,  is  His  enemy  bound  to  the  same  law  ;  and  that,  there- 
fore, as  the  Creator's  path  of  light,  through  providence  and  grace,  is  occasionally 
discoverable  by  experience,  and  directed  on  principles  already  prepared  to  His 
Almighty  purposes,  so  also  may  the  crooked  ways   of   the  Evil   One,  similarly 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

adjusted,  be  similarly  sought  and  known.  1.  The  first  and  darkest  of  his  works  on 
earth  is  also  the  first  and  deepest  fountain  of  the  misfortune  we  are  now  lamenting 
— the  original  and  inherited  corruption  of  the  human  soul  itself.  It  is  ignorant  of 
sin,  just  because  it  is  naturally  sinful.  We  cannot  know  our  degradation,  we  cannot 
struggle,  or  even  wish,  to  rise,  if  we  have  never  been  led  to  conceive  the  possibility 
of  a  state  higher  than  our  own.  Nature  can  teach  discontent  with  this  world,  but 
there  her  lesson  well-nigh  closes  ;  she  talks  but  vaguely,  and  feebly,  and  falsely  of 
another !  Now,  if  this  be  so,  have  we  not  for  this  mournful  unconsciousness  of  our 
personal  depravity  a  powerful  cause  in  that  depravity  itself  ?  2.  If  Nature  alone — 
treacherous  and  degraded  nature — is  silent  in  denouncing  sin — if  she  has  no 
instinctive  power  to  arouse  herself,  what  shall  she  be  when  doubly  and  trebly 
indurated  by  habit ;  when  the  malformed  limb  becomes  ossified ;  when  that  faculty 
which  was  destined  to  be,  under  Divine  guidance,  the  antagonist  of  nature,  "  a 
second  nature,"  as  it  is  truly  called,  to  reform,  and  resist,  and  overlay  the  first — is 
perverted  into  the  traitorous  auxiliary  of  its  corruption  ?  We  know  not  ourselves 
sinners,  because  from  infancy  we  have  breathed  the  atmosphere  of  sin ;  and  we 
now  breathe  it,  as  we  do  the  outward  air,  unceasingly,  yet  with  scarcely  a  conscious- 
ness of  the  act !  The  professional  man,  for  example,  who  may  become  habituated 
to  the  use  of  falsehood  or  duplicity,  as  little  knows  how  to  disentangle  this,  even  in 
conception,  from  the  bulk  and  substance  of  his  customary  business — to  regard  it 
as  something  separately  and  distinctively  wrong — as  men  think  of  mentally  decom- 
posing into  their  chemical  constituents  the  common  water  or  air,  every  time  they 
imbibe  them.  The  mass  of  men  know  these,  as  they  know  their  own  hearts,  only 
in  the  gross  and  the  compound.  Is  it  not  thus  that  constant  habit  persuades  us 
«'  we  have  no  sin"  by  making  us  unceasingly  sin ;  and  increases  our  self -content  in 
direct  proportion  as  it  makes  it  more  and  more  perilous  ?  3.  As  men  copy  them- 
selves by  force  of  habit,  they  copy  others  by  force  of  example ;  and  both  almost 
equally  foster  ignorance  of  the  virulence  of  the  evil  they  familiarise,  and  perpetu- 
ally reconcile  the  sinner  to  himself.  Mankind  in  crowds  and  communities  tend  to 
uniformity ;  as  the  torrents  of  a  thousand  hills,  from  as  many  different  heights, 
meet  to  blend  in  one  unbroken  level.  And  in  that  union,  the  source  of  so  much 
happiness  and  of  so  much  guilt,  each  countenances  the  other  to  console  himself  ; 
we  are  mutual  flatterers  only  that  the  flattery  may  soothingly  revert  to  our  own 
corruptions.  4.  How  the  power  of  this  universality  of  sin  around  us  to  paralyse 
the  sensibility  of  conscience  is  augmented  by  the  influence  of  fashion  and  of  rank — ■ 
not  merely  to  silence  its  voice,  but  to  bestow  grace,  and  attraction,  and  authority 
upon  deadly  sin — I  need  not  now  insist.  Philosophers  tell  us  that  the  least  oscilla- 
tion in  the  system  of  the  material  universe  propagates  a  secret  thrill  to  its 
extremity ;  it  is  so  in  the  every  act  of  social  man  ;  but  the  disorders  of  the  upper 
classes  are  publicly  and  manifestly  influential — they  are  as  if  the  central  mass 
itself  of  the  system  were  shaken  loose,  and  all  its  retinue  of  dependent  worlds 
hurled  in  confusion  around  it.  5.  But  to  example  and  authority,  thus  enlisted  in 
the  ranks  of  evil,  and  thus  fortifying  the  false  security  of  our  imaginary  innocence, 
must  be  added  such  considerations  as  the  tendency  of  pleasure  itself,  or  of  indo- 
lence, to  prolong  this  deception,  and  our  natural  impatience  of  the  pain  of  self- 
disapproval.  Now  you  know  there  are  two  ways  of  easing  an  aching  joint— by 
healing  its  disease  or  by  paralysing  the  limb.  And  there  are  two  ways  of  escaping 
an  angry  conscience — by  ceasing  from  the  evil  that  provokes  it  or  by  resolutely 
refusing  to  hear  its  voice,  which  soon  amounts  to  silencing  it  for  ever.  And  aU 
this  proceeds  in  mysterious  silence  1  There  are  no  immediate  visible  attestations 
of  God's  displeasure  to  startle  or  affright.  All  our  customary  conceptions  of  the 
justice  of  heaven  are  taken  from  the  tribunals  of  earth,  and  on  earth  punishment 
ordinarily  dogs  the  heels  of  crime.  Hence,  where  the  punishment  is  not  direct,  we 
forget  that  the  guilt  can  have  existed.  The  very  immutability  of  the  laws  of  visible 
nature,  the  ceaseless  recurrence  of  those  vast  revolutions  that  make  the  annals  of 
the  physical  universe,  and  the  confidence  that  we  instinctively  entertain  of  the 
stability  of  the  whole  material  system  around  us,  while  they  are  the  ground  of  all 
our  earthly  blessings,  and  while  they  are,  to  the  reason,  a  strong  proof  of  Divine 
superintendence,  are  as  certainly  to  the  imagination  a  constant  means  of  deadening 
our  impressions  of  the  possibility  or  probability  of  Divine  interposition.  Surely  the 
God  wUl  break  forth  at  length  from  His  hidden  sanctuary,  and  break  forth,  as  of 
old  upon  the  Mount,  "  in  fire  and  the  smoke  of  a  furnace."  {Prof.  W.  A.  Butler.) 
Deceiving  ourselves: — How  many  are  there  in  this  congregation,  I  wonder,  who 
•would  really  say  to  themselves,  "  We  have  no  sin"  ?  ~I  do  not  mean,  would  say  it 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  63 

just  in  that  form.  Of  course  not.  We  are  too  well  educated  for  that.  But 
practically  would  say  it,  and  would  resent  with  considerable  indignation  that  any 
one  else  should  call  them  sinners.  I  want  you  to  consider  how  thus  we  do  deceive 
ourselves.  1.  In  the  first  place,  we  balance  off  against  our  sins  certain  pseudo 
virtues.  We  keep,  not  very  correctly,  and  certainly  not  with  very  good  bookkeeping, 
a  debtor  and  creditor  account.  Over  against  the  evil  in  our  lives  we  set  certain 
credit  marks.  We  attend  church  with  regularity — perhaps  we  say  our  prayers,  as 
the  phrase  is ;  perhaps  we  read  our  Bible,  if  we  are  not  too  much  driven  in  the 
morning  with  engagements,  or  too  sleepy  at  night  to  take  it  in.  And  therefore  we 
are  virtuous.  It  is  very  curious  how  loth  men  are  to  accept  this  most  fundamental 
and  simple  truth  of  religion  that  God  is  a  righteous  God  and  demands  righteous- 
ness of  His  children,  and  demands  nothing  else.  So  the  ancient  Jew  was  ready  to 
give  Him  sacrifice  and  fast-days  and  pilgrimages  ;  and  the  ancient  Pharisee  stood 
up  and  prayed  within  himself,  saying,  "  I  thank  God  I  am  not  as  these  other  men 
are,  extortioners,  adulterers,  unjust,  or  even  as  this  publican  ;  I  fast  twice  a  week,  I 
give  tithes  of  all  I  possess."  "  Mr.  Pharisee,  are  you  fair-minded  in  your  dealing 
and  honourable  in  your  work  with  other  men  ?  "  "I  fast  twice  a  week."  "  Are  you 
kind  in  your  family,  patient  with  your  children,  chivalric  to  your  wife ?  "  "I 
fast  twice  every  week."  "Did  you  ever  cheat  a  man  in  a  bargain?"  "I 
give  tithes  of  all  I  possess."  "  Have  you  ever  had  a  share  in  political  corrup- 
tion ?  "  Oh,  it  is  an  old  trick,  this  balancing  of  one  thing  over  against  another, 
and  thinking  ourselves  excused  from  righteousness  by  something  else  than 
righteousness.  We  wonder  that  in  the  Middle  Ages  men  would  put  money  into 
the  coffers  of  the  Church  and  think  that  balanced  their  iniquity.  We  will  have 
no  such  system  of  indulgences  as  that ;  but  there  is  many  a  person  to-day  in 
the  nineteenth  century  who  lives  a  life  as  grasping,  as  selfish,  as  covetous,  as 
greedy,  as  ambitious  as  his  neighbour,  and  thinks  the  account  is  balanced  because 
he  goes  to  church  and  says  his  prayers,  or  because  he  has  at  times  ideals  in  which 
he  rejoices.  He  thinks  he  is  a  Christian  because  he  admires  Christ ;  because  some- 
times his  heart  fills  with  emotion  as  he  sings.  2.  We  assume  virtues  that  are  not 
our  own,  and  think  ourselves  virtuous  because  of  them.  Men  pride  themselves  on 
their  family.  Yes,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  belong  to  a  good  family.  But  what  have 
you  and  I  done  in  our  family  ?  How  much  wiser  or  richer  or  better  or  nobler  or 
worthier  is  it  because  we  are  members  of  it  ?  Men  glorify  themselves  because  they 
are  Americans.  "  I  thank  God  that  I  am  not  a  Turk,  that  I  am  not  a  Eussian, 
that  I  am  not  even  an  Englishman — I  am  an  American."  What  have  you  done 
that  is  worthy  of  the  name  America  ?  That  is  the  real  question.  What  have  you 
done  to  make  politics  purer,  to  make  honour  brighter,  to  make  the  America  of  the 
future  more  assured  ?  So  men  pride  themselves  on  their  Church.  "  I  am  a 
member  of  a  benevolent  church — look  at  the  Ust  of  its  contributions;  I  am  a 
member  of  a  working  Church — see  its  activities,  how  much  it  is  doing."  How 
much  are  you  doing  ?  How  much  did  you  put  into  that  Ust  of  benefactions  ?  You 
are  not  generous  because  you  belong  to  a  generous  Church.  Men  that  laugh  openly 
at  the  theological  doctrine  of  imputation  practise  it  continually,  only  they  impute 
to  themselves,  not  the  virtues  of  their  God  or  of  their  Christ,  but  the  virtues  of 
their  feUow-men.  Men  believe  in  the  solidarity  of  the  race  for  the  purpose  of 
satisfying  their  pride,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  developing  their  humility.  3.  As 
men  take  the  virtues  that  do  not  belong  to  them,  see  them  and  rejoice  in  them,  so 
they  do  not  take  the  vices  that  belong  to  them.  They  see  the  sins  of  others — not 
their  own.  The  spendthrift  can  read  you  a  homily  on  the  vices  of  the  miser,  but  it 
never  occurs  to  him  that  there  is  any  vice  in  the  life  he  is  leading ;  the  miser  wiU 
read  you  an  eloquent  sermon  on  the  vices  of  the  spendthrift,  but  it  never  occurs  to 
him  that  there  is  no  sin  in  clutching  a  dollar  until  it  cries.  How  quick  are  we  to 
see  the  vices  of  our  neighbours ;  how  slow  to  turn  our  eyes  upon  our  own !  4.  We 
disguise  our  vices.  We  give  them  false  names  ;  we  dress  them  up  as  virtues  and 
call  them  such,  and  really  think  they  are.  And  this  young  man  who  never  has 
earned  a  dollar  in  his  life  by  solid,  honest  industry,  takes  the  money  that  his  father 
has  earned  by  hard  industry  and  throws  it  freely,  hither  and  yon,  among  his 
fellows,  and  calls  it  generosity,  and  thinks  it  is.  He  does  not  know  that  it  is  mean 
to  spend  in  lavish  living  what  another  has  toiled  to  acquire.  5.  We  change  the 
form  of  our  sin,  and  then  think  we  are  done  with  it.  We  think  that  sin  consists 
in  the  shape  it  assumes ;  we  do  not  know  that  it  consists  in  the  evil  heart  that  beats 
within.  We  read  our  Ten  Commandments  over  and  say  to  ourselves,  "  Thou  shalt 
not  kill."     "  Thank  God  we  do  not  live  in  a  murdering  age,  when  men  go  forth  to 


6i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Blay  and  kill."  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal."  "Thank  God  there  are  no  robber  barons 
left  that  ravage  the  land  and  leave  it  desolate."  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery." 
"We  are  in  America,  and  we  will  have  no  polygamy  under  our  flag."  And  still  the 
cry  of  the  children  goes  up  from  the  slums,  and  the  polluted  air  squeezes  the  life 
oat  of  the  little  ones,  and  they  die  three  times  as  fast  as  they  would  in  healthy 
atmosphere,  because  greed  walks  the  earth.  Lust  there,  as  in  polygamy. 
Covetousness  there,  as  in  robber  barons.  Murder  there,  as  in  unsheathed  sworda. 
We  have  not  ceased  to  sin  because  we  have  changed  the  form  of  our  sinning.  6. 
And  when  we  can  no  longer  disguise  from  ourselves  that  we  are  doing  wrong,  we 
hide  behind  all  manner  of  excuses.  We  say :  "  Yes,  I  admit  this  is  not  quite  right, 
but  everybody  does  it."  Or,  "  I  admit  this  is  not  quite  according  to  the  Gospel 
ideal,  but  the  Gospel  ideals  are  not  practicable  in  the  nineteenth  century."  Or,  "  I 
could  not  help  it ;  I  was  made  so."  And  so,  little  by  little,  we  creep  up  to  that 
excuse  so  common  in  our  day  :  "  There  is  no  real  moral  evil,  there  is  no  real  sin." 
What  men  call  sin  is  only  good  in  the  making.  It  is  the  greenness  of  an  apple  that 
by  and  by  will  be  ripe.  It  is  the  foolishness  of  a  chUd  who  by  and  by  will  be  wiser. 
The  fall  is  only  a  fall  upward.  Let  us  not  trouble  ourselves,  therefore,  but  wait. 
There  is  a  good  God,  and  by  and  by  He  will  bring  all  things  right.  Think  Canada 
thistles  are  wheat  in  the  making ;  think  a  broken  arm  is  an  athlete's  arm  in  the 
making  ;  think  that  diphtheria  and  scarlet  fever  are  health  in  the  making ;  but  do 
not  think  that  to  be  estranged,  self-willed,  and  self-indulgent  is  holiness  and 
righteousness  and  goodness  in  the  making.  But  more  than  of  any  other  class 
deceive  themselves  by  not  thinking  about  the  matter  at  all.  They  cast  up  accounts 
to  see  how  their  finances  balance ;  disease  comes  into  the  house,  and  the  doctor 
inquii-es  as  to  their  health,  and  so  they  ascertain  their  physical  health-balance,  but 
they  never  strike  a  balance  in  the  moral  realm.  No  captain  on  the  Atlantic  Ocean 
wiU  allow  twenty-four  hours  to  go  by  without  taking  his  reckoning,  if  he  can,  and 
finding  out  where  he  is.  But  it  will  be  very  strange  if  in  this  congregation  this 
Sabbath  morning,  large  as  is  the  proportion  of  professing  Christians,  there  are  not 
many  of  us  that  never  have  taken  an  observation  and  do  not  know  or  even  ask 
ourselves  what  is  our  moral  latitude  and  longitude.  (Lyman  Abbott.)  The 
heart  sinful : — The  seeds  of  all  my  sins  are  in  my  heart,  and  perhaps  the  more 
dangerous  that  I  do  not  see  them.  (it.  McCheyne.)  Sins  of  heart : — Motives  that 
seem  to  you  as  white  as  the  light  may  prove,  when  seen  through  His  prism,  to  be 
many-coloured.  Aims  that  seem  straight  as  a  line  may,  when  tested  by  the  right 
standard,  prove  indirect  and  tortuous.  We  shall  find  at  last  that,  in  many  cases, 
what  we  have  thought  devotion  was  indevout ;  what  we  have  thought  love  was 
struck  through  with  the  taint  of  selfishness;  what  we  have  thought  faith  was 
utterly  vitiated  with  the  poison  of  unbelief.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  If  we  eonfess 
our  sins,  He  is  faithful  and  Just  to  forgive. — The  primary  condition  of  the  Divine 
felloivship  fiiljilled  in  the  believing  confession  of  a  guileless  spirit: — I.  It  is  not 
deliberate  hypocrisy  that  we  are  (ver.  8)  warned  against ;  but  a  far  more  subtle 
FORM  OF  FALSEHOOD,  and  One  apt  more  easily  to  beset  us,  as  believers,  even  when 
most  earnestly  bent  on  "walking  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light."  In  its  subtlest 
form  it  is  a  kind  of  mysticism  more  akin  to  the  visionary  cast  of  ancient  and 
oriental  musing  than  to  the  more  practical  turn  of  thought  and  feeling  that  com- 
monly prevails  among  us.  Look  at  yonder  attenuated  and  etherealised  recluse, 
who  has  been  grasping  in  successive  philosophic  systems,  or  schools  of  varied 
theosophic  discipline,  the  means  of  extricating  himself  out  of  the  dark  bondage  of 
carnal  and  worldly  pollution,  and  soaring  aloft  into  the  light  of  pure  spiritual 
freedom  and  repose.  After  many  trials  of  other  schemes,  Christianity  is  embraced 
by  him ;  not,  however,  as  a  discovery  of  the  way  in  which  God  proposes  to  deal 
with  him,  but  rather  as  an  instrument  by  which  he  may  deal  with  himself ;  a 
medicine  to  be  seK-administered ;  a  remedy  to  be  self-applied.  By  the  laboured 
imitation  of  Christ,  or  by  a  kind  of  forced  absorption  into  Christ,  considered 
simply  as  the  perfect  or  ideal,  his  soul,  emancipated  from  its  bodily  shackles  and 
its  earthly  entanglements,  is  to  reach  a  height  of  serene  illumination  which  no 
bodily  or  earthly  stain  can  dim.  From  such  aspirations,  the  next  step,  and  it  is  a 
short  one,  is  into  the  monstrous  fanaticism  which  would  make  spiritual  illumination 
compatible  with  carnal  indulgence  and  worldly  lust ;  his  inward  and  sinless  purity 
being  so  enshrined  in  a  certain  Divine  sublimity  and  transcendentalism  of  devotion 
that  outward  defilement  cannot  touch  it.  Church  history,  beginning  even  with  the 
apostle's  own  day,  furnishes  more  than  one  instance  of  men  tlms  deplorably 
"  deceiving  themselves,  saying  they  have  no  sin."    II.  As  to  the  confession  (ver.  9), 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  55 

it  is  the  confession  of  men  "  walking  in  the  light,  as  God  is  in  the  light " ;  having  the 
Bame  medium  of  vision  that  God  has ;  it  is  the  continual  confession  of  men  con- 
tinually so  walking  and  so  seeing.  For  the  forgiveness,  on  the  faith  of  which  and 
with  a  view  to  which  we  are  thus  always  to  be  confessing  our  sins,  wDl  always  be 
found  to  be  a  very  complete  treatment  of  our  case.  What  is  the  treatment  ?  The 
sins  we  confess  are  so  forgiven  that  we  are  cleansed  from  all  uiurighteousness  with 
regard  to  them.  The  forgiveness  is  so  free,  so  frank,  so  full,  so  unreserved,  that  it 
purges  our  bosom  of  all  reserve,  all  reticence,  all  guile ;  in  a  word,  "  of  all  un- 
righteousness." And  it  is  so  because  it  is  dispensed  in  faithfulness  and  righteous- 
ness ;  "  He  is  faithful  and  just  in  forgiving  our  sins."  He  to  whom,  as  always  thus 
dealing  with  us,  we  always  thus  submit  ourselves,  is  true  and  righteous  in  all  His 
ways,  and  specially  in  His  way  of  meeting  the  confidence  we  place  in  Him  when 
we  confess  our  sins.  HI.  If,  in  the  face  of  such  a  faithful  manner  of  forgiveness  on 
the  part  of  God,  we  continue  to  shrink  from  that  open  dealing  and  guileless  confes- 
sion which  our  walking  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light  implies — we  not  only  wrong 
ourselves  and  do  violence  to  our  own  consciousness  and  our  own  conscience ;  but, 
"  saying  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  Him  a  liar,  and  His  Word  is  not  in  us  " 
(ver.  10).  To  prefer  now,  even  for  a  single  instant,  or  with  reference  to  a  single 
sin,  the  miserable  comfort  of  wrapping  ourselves  in  fig-leaves  and  hiding  among 
the  trees  of  the  garden,  to  the  unspeakable  joy  of  coming  forth  and  asking  God  to 
deal  with  us  according  to  His  own  loving  faithfulness  and  righteousness  and  truth 
— that  surely  is  a  high  affront  to  Him  and  to  His  Word,  as  well  as  a  fooUsh  mistake 
for  ourselves.  There  can  be  no  fellowship  of  light  between  us  and  Him  it  such 
unworthy  sentiments  of  dark  suspicion  and  reserve  as  this  implies  are  insinuating 
themselves  into  our  bosoms.  Let  me  rather,  taking  Him  at  His  word,  try  the  more 
excellent  way  of  carrying  with  me  always,  in  the  full  confidence  of  loving  fellow- 
ship, into  the  secret  place  of  my  God,  all  that  is  upon  my  mind,  my  conscience,  my 
heart ;  all  that  is  harassing,  or  burdening,  or  tempting  me ;  my  present  matter  of 
care  or  subject  of  thought,  whatever  that  may  be.  I  would  keep  back  nothing 
from  my  God.  I  will  not  deceive  myself  by  keeping  silence  about  my  sin.  I 
wUl  not  make  my  God  a  liar — I  wiU  not  do  my  God  and  Father  so  great  a  wrong 
as  to  give  Him  the  lie — by  refusing  entrance  into  my  soul  to  that  Word  of  His 
which  gives  light,  even  the  light  of  life.  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Denial  of 
sin  and  confession  of  sin  with  their  respective  consequences  : — I.  The  deniai  of 
BIN.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,"  &c.  To  the  enlightened  Christian  mind 
it  is  a  matter  of  wonder  how  any  sane  man  could  deny  his  own  sinfulness.  1.  Some 
claim  an  absolute  exemption  from  sin.  Such  were  the  Pharisees  of  old.  2.  Some 
say  they  have  no  sin,  by  claiming  a  relative  exemption  from  sin.  They  lay  stress 
upon  their  religious  observances,  their  morality,  their  benevolence,  their  fair-dealing, 
&c.  n.  The  consequence  OF  THIS  DENIAL  OF  SIN.  "  Wc  deceive  oursclves,"  &c.  In 
worldly  matters  to  be  deceived  is  a  grave  consideration.  For  thus  to  deny  our  sin 
is — 1.  To  deny  indisputable  facts.  2.  To  deny  the  infalUble  testimony  of  the 
Word  of  God.  3.  To  deny  the  moral  propriety  of  the  scheme  of  redemption.  The 
■whole  need  not  a  physician,  &c.  No  sinner,  no  Saviour.  III.  The  confession  of 
SIN.  "  If  we  confess  our  sin,"  &c.  IV.  The  consequence  of  confession  of  sin. 
"  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteous- 
ness." (D.  Clark.)  Honest  dealing  with  God  : — "  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no 
darkness  at  all"  ;  and  consequently  He  cannot  have  fellowship  with  darkness.  Our 
tendency  to  be  false  is  illustrated  in  the  chapter  before  us,  for  we  find  three  grades 
of  it  there.  There  is  first  the  man  who  lies :  "  If  we  say  we  have  fellowship  with 
Him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth."  We  say  and  do  that 
which  is  untrue  if  while  abiding  under  the  influence  of  sin  and  falsehood  we  claim 
to  have  fellowship  with  God.  If  this  tendency  is  unchecked,  you  will  find  the  man 
growing  worse  and  doing  according  to  the  eighth  verse,  wherein  it  is  written,  "  We 
deceive  ourselves."  Here  the  utterer  of  the  falsehood  has  come  to  believe  his  own 
lie;  he  has  bUnded  his  understanding  and  befooled  his  conscience  tUl  he  has 
become  his  own  dupe.  He  will  soon  reach  the  complete  development  of  his  sin, 
which  is  described  in  the  tenth  verse,  when  the  man,  who  first  lied,  and  then, 
secondly,  deceived  himself,  becomes  so  audacious  in  his  falseness  as  to  blaspheme 
the  Most  Holy  by  making  Him  a  liar.  It  is  impossible  to  say  where  sin  will  end ; 
the  beginning  of  it  is  as  a  little  water  in  which  a  bird  may  wash,  and  scatter  half 
the  pool  in  drops,  but  in  its  progress  sin,  like  the  brook,  swells  into  a  torrent  deep 
and  broad.  Our  only  safe  course  is  to  come  to  God  as  we  are,  and  ask  Him  to  deal 
with  us,  in  Christ  Jesus,  according  to  our  actual  condition.     I.  Let  us  consider 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

THE  THREE  COURSES  laid  Open  before  us  in  the  text.  I  will  suppose  that  we  are  all 
earnestly  anxious  to  be  in  fellowship  with  God.  Our  deceitful  heart  suggests  to  us, 
first,  that  we  should  deny  our  present  sinfulness,  and  so  claim  fellowship  with  God, 
on  the  ground  that  we  are  holy,  and  so  may  draw  near  to  the  Holy  God.  I  mind 
not  how  honest  your  parentage,  nor  how  noble  your  ancestry,  there  is  in  you  a  bias 
towards  evil ;  your  animal  passions,  nay  more,  your  mental  faculties  are  unhinged 
and  out  of  order,  and  unless  some  power  beyond  your  own  shall  keep  your  desires 
in  cheek,  you  will  soon  prove  by  overt  acts  of  transgression  the  depravity  of  your 
nature.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  others  to  arrive  at  the  same  conclusion  by  another 
road.  They  have  attained  to  the  audacity  to  say  that  they  have  no  sin  by  divers  feelings 
and  beliefs  which  they,  as  a  rule,  ascribe  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  Now,  if  any  man  says 
that  all  tendency  to  sin  is  gone  from  him,  that  his  heart  is  at  all  times  perfect  and 
his  desires  always  pure,  so  that  he  has  no  sin  in  him  whatsoever,  he  may  have 
travelled  a  very  different  road  from  the  character  we  just  now  warned,  but  he  has 
reached  the  same  conclusion,  and  we  have  but  one  word  for  both  boasters,  it  is  the 
word  of  our  text — "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the 
truth  is  not  in  us."  Some,  however,  have  reached  this  position  by  another  route. 
They  plead  that  though  it  may  be  they  have  sin,  yet  they  are  not  bad  at  heart ; 
they  look  upon  sin  as  a  technical  term,  and  though  they  admit  in  words  that  they 
have  sin,  yet  they  practically  deny  it  by  saying,  "  I  have  a  good  heart  at  bottom  ;  I 
always  was  well-intentioned  from  the  very  first.  I  know  I  have — of  course  we  all 
have^erred  here  and  there,  but  you  cannot  expect  a  fellow  to  be  perfect.  I  can't 
say  I  see  anything  to  find  fault  with."  In  so  saying  or  feeling  you  prove  that  the 
truth  is  not  in  you — you  are  either  deplorably  ignorant  as  to  what  holiness  is,  or  else 
you  are  wilfully  uttering  a  falsehood ;  in  either  case  the  truth  is  not  in  you.  A 
fourth  sort  of  persons  say  the  same  thing,  for  albeit  they  confess  that  they  have 
sinned,  they  think  themselves  now  to  be  in  a  proper  and  fit  condition  to  receive 
pardon.  "  We  have  prayed,"  say  they ;  "  we  have  repented,  we  have  read  the 
Scriptures,  we  have  attended  public  worship,  and  are  as  right  as  we  can  be :  we 
have  tenderness  and  contrition,  and  every  right  and  proper  feeling ;  our  wonder  is 
that  we  do  not  receive  salvation."  The  idea  of  fitness  is  only  another  form  of  the 
vain  notion  of  merit,  and  it  cannot  find  an  inch  of  foothold  in  the  gospel.  True 
penitents  can  see  nothing  in  themselves  to  commend  them  to  mercy,  and  therefore 
they  cast  themselves  upon  undeserved  favour,  feeling  both  unworthy  and  unfit,  but 
hoping  to  receive  forgiveness  freely.  The  second  course  which  is  open  to  us  is  the 
one  which  I  trust  the  Divine  Spirit  may  lead  us  to  follow,  to  lay  bare  our  case  before 
God  exactly  as  it  stands.  "  Lord,  I  own  with  shame  that  as  my  nature  is  corrupt 
such  has  my  life  been  ;  I  am  a  sinner  both  by  nature  and  by  practice."  Make  the 
confession  of  the  two  things,  of  the  cause  and  the  effect,  of  the  original  depravity — 
the  foul  source,  and  then  of  the  actual  sin  which  is  the  polluted  stream.  When  a 
sinner  feels  he  has  no  natural  fitness  for  receiving  the  grace  of  God  ;  when  a  broken 
spirit  cries,  "  Oh,  what  a  wretch  I  am !  Not  only  my  past  sin  but  my 
present  feelings  disqualify  me  for  the  love  of  God;  I  seem  to  be  made  of  hell- 
hardened  steel,"  he  is  confessing  that  sin  is  in  him.  It  is  in  your  vileness  that 
sovereign  grace  o'er  sin  abounding  will  come  to  you  and  cleanse  you,  and  therefore 
the  sooner  you  come  to  the  honest  truth  the  better  for  you,  for  the  sooner  will  you 
obtain  joy  and  peace  through  believing  in  Christ.  The  text  means  just  this — treat 
God  truthfully,  and  He  will  treat  you  truthfully.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  has 
made  a  full  atonement,  and  God  will  be  faithful  to  that  atonement.  He  will  deal 
with  you  on  the  grounds  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  of  which  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  is 
the  seal,  and  therein  also  He  will  be  true  to  you.  Now,  there  are  still  some  who  say, 
"  Well,  yes,  I  think  I  could  go  to  God  in  that  way,  sir,  but  oh  !  my  past  sins  prevent 
me.  I  could  tell  Him  I  am  sinful,  I  could  ask  Him  to  renew  my  nature,  I  could  lay 
myself  bare  before  Him,  but  oh  !  my  past  sins  ;  all  might  yet  be  well  if  I  had  not  so 
sinned !  Ah,  that  brings  out  a  third  course  which  lies  before  you,  which  I  hope 
you  will  not  follow,  namely,  to  deny  actual  sin.  The  very  thing  which  you  cannot 
do  would  seal  your  doom,  for  it  would  lead  you  to  make  God  a  liar,  and  so  His 
Word  could  not  abide  in  you.  II.  Let  us  now  consider  how  we  can  follow  this 
COURSE,  which  is  the  only  right  one,  namely,  to  confess  our  sin.  Do  not  shirk  the 
facts  or  shrink  from  knowing  their  full  force,  but  feel  the  power  of  the  condemning 
law.  Then  recollect  your  individual  sins ;  recall  them  one  by  one — those  greater 
sins,  those  huge  blots  upon  your  character,  do  not  try  to  forget  them.  If  you  have 
forgotten  them,  raise  them  from  the  grave  and  think  them  over,  and  feel  them  as 
^our  own  sins.     Think  of  your  sins  of  omission,  your  failures  in  duty,  your  short- 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  57 

comings  in  spirit.  Repent  of  what  you  have  done,  and  what  you  have  not  done. 
Think  of  your  sins  of  heru*t.  How  cold  has  that  heart  been  towards  your  Saviour  ! 
Your  sins  of  thought,  how  wrongly  your  mind  has  often  judged ;  your  sins  of 
imagination,  what  filthy  creatures  your  imagination  has  portrayed  in  lively  colours 
on  the  wall.  Think  of  all  the  sins  of  your  desires  and  delights,  and  hopes  and  fears. 
Let  us  take  care  that  we  confess  all.  And  then  let  us  try  to  see  the  heinousness  of 
all  sin  as  an  offence  against  a  kind,  good,  loving  God,  a  sin  against  a  perfect  law, 
intended  for  our  good.  III.  Let  us  consider  why  we  should  confess  sin.  1.  I 
shall  say  first,  do  so  because  it  is  right.  Eeligious  lie-telling  is  a  dreadful  thing, 
and  there  is  plenty  of  it ;  but  if  I  could  be  saved  by  masking  my  condition  before 
God,  I  would  not  like  to  be  saved  in  that  way.  2.  Moreover,  upon  some  of  us  it  is 
imperative,  because  we  cannot  do  anything  else.  3.  Besides,  suppose  we  have  tried 
to  appear  before  God  what  we  are  not,  God  has  not  been  deceived,  for  He  is  not 
mocked.  (G.H.  S-purgeon.)  The  conviction  and  confession  of  sin  .-—The  apostle  had 
said,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  But  who  are  understood 
by  "  us  "  ?  Certainly  not  all  men.  The  impenitent,  and  unbelieving,  and  ungodly, 
have  not  been  cleansed  from  their  sin.  I.  Conviction  of  sin.  "If  we  say  that  we 
have  no  sin,"  &c.  Many  will  own  they  are  sinners,  and  yet  think  they  may  come 
to  God  as  they  are,  independent  of  Christ  and  His  blood.  They  do  not  say  so,  but 
they  act  so.  Listen  to  their  prayers,  and  they  call  upon  God  without  any  mention 
of  His  Son.  It  is  obvious  they  have  no  sense  of  their  real  position  in  His  sight. 
They  have  not  entered  into  the  spirit  of  Christ's  words,  "No  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father  but  by  Me."  In  this  sense  they  say  "  they  have  no  sin."  The  same  may  be 
said  of  their  fellowship  with  Christ.  They  may  think  of  Him  as  a  model  of 
perfection.  But  His  death  does  not  specially  affect  them.  They  attach  no  peculiar 
eflScacy  to  the  shedding  of  His  blood.  And  the  reason  is,  they  have  no  adequate 
sense  of  their  sin.  So  also  as  to  fellowship  with  believers.  They  can  meet  them 
as  friends,  and  neighbours,  and  brethren,  but  they  have  no  perception  of  the 
communion  arising  out  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  They  do  not  feel  either  its  necessity 
or  influence  as  a  bond  of  union.  Of  all  such  the  apostle  testifies  "  they  deceive 
themselves."  They  are  deceived  by  an  imagination  of  their  own  excellence,  while 
in  reality  they  are  dead  in  sin.  It  is  said  of  them  farther,  "  the  truth  is  not  in 
them."  Its  light  may  be  all  around  them,  but  it  has  never  penetrated  to  the  inner 
man.  Such  was  the  condition  of  the  church  at  Laodicea  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18).  The 
same  admonition  and  counsel  are  applicable  to  all  who  have  not  an  adequate  idea 
of  their  sinfulness,  such  an  idea  as  to  make  them  feel  that  their  only  hope  is  the 
blood  of  Christ.  II.  Confession  of  sin.  "  If  we  confess,"  &c.  There  is  a  close 
and  natural  connection  between  conviction  and  confession.  "  Out  of  the  abundance 
of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  If  the  heart  be  touched  by  a  sense  of  sin  it  - 
cannot  be  restrained  from  pouring  forth  the  accents  of  humiliation.  What  are  the 
features  of  such  confession  ?  It  is  sincere,  coming  from  the  heart.  It  is  full,  no 
attempt  being  made  to  hide  anything  from  God  or  ourselves.  It  is  special,  not 
satisfied  with  acknowledging  sin  generally,  but  noting  special  offences  and  dwelling 
on  their  aggravations.  It  fills  the  mind  with  grief  for  sin.  It  rouses  to  the  hatred 
of  it.  It  constrains  to  an  immediate  and  total  abandonment  of  it.  It  is  such  as 
was  exemplified  by  David  (Psa.  li.).  To  such  confession  there  is  the  most  gracious 
encouragement  in  the  text,  "  If  we  confess  our  sins."  This  is  all  we  are  required 
to  do.  We  are  not  sent  on  some  toilsome  pilgrimage,  or  subjected  to  some  round 
of  self -mortification.  We  are  to  come  to  God  as  we  are^now — and  with  the  whole 
burden  of  our  sin  upon  our  hearts.  Then  God  is  "  faithful  to  forgive  us  our  sins." 
He  has  said  in  His  Word  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper ;  but  whoso 
confesseth  and  forsaketh  them  shall  have  mercy."  It  is  not  presumption,  therefore, 
to  expect  pardon  on  confession.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  distrust  of  God  to  doubt  it. 
And  observe  the  gracious  yet  warning  words  that  follow,  "  and  to  cleanse  us  from 
all  unrighteousness."  They  are  designed  to  meet  the  jealousy  of  the  awakened  soul. 
We  are  taught  that  God  will  accompany  His  pardon  with  sanctifying  grace.  Our 
plan  would  be  to  put  purity  first  and  pardon  next.  But  God's  plan  is  the  reverse. 
We  are  to  accept  pardon  at  once,  and  it  will  be  accompanied  and  followed  by 
holiness.  III.  Habitual  penitence  for  sin.  "  If  we  say  we  have  not  sinned,"  &c. 
Observe  the  difference  between  this  verse  and  the  eighth.  There  the  expression  is, 
"  if  we  say  we  have  no  sin  "  ;  here  it  is,  "  if  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned."  The 
former  describes  the  condition  of  the  man  who  does  not  feel  his  present  sinfulness, 
the  latter  of  him  who  justifies  his  past  conduct.  The  former  needs  to  be  convinced 
of  his  sinfulness,  the  latter  to  be  exercised  aright  about  his  past  transgressions.     In 


158  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  one  verse  there  is  reference  to  the  beginning  of  the  Divine  life,  in  the  other  to 
the  maintenance  of  it.  The  one  consists  in  the  conviction  which  brings  the  sinner 
to  the  blood  of  Christ  for  salvation,  the  other  in  the  habit  of  penitence  which  must 
accompany  him  as  long  as  he  hves.  Let  me  exhort  you  to  cultivate  this  habit. 
Many  important  ends  are  served  by  it.  It  will  keep  us  mindful  of  what  we  once 
were,  and  of  how  much  we  are  debtors  to  Divine  grace.  It  will  stimulate  us  to 
devote  ourselves  more  unreservedly  to  God  in  the  future.  It  will  promote  watchful- 
ness against  temptation.  It  will  strengthen  faith.  Calling  to  mind  how  graciously 
God  dealt  with  us  in  other  days,  we  are  encouraged  to  trust  Him  to  the  end.  It 
will  kindle  repentance.  Like  Ephraim  of  old,  it  will  lead  us  to  say,  "  'What  have 
I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  It  wiU  promote  holiness.  It  wLU  urge  perseverance. 
{Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Confession  of  sin  : — There  are  two  ways  in  which  men  are 
wont  to  make  confession  of  their  sins,  which  appear  to  my  mind  the  same  as  making 
no  true  confession  at  all.  One  is  to  acknowledge  sin,  in  general  terms,  as  a 
customary  and  proper  part  of  pubUc,  domestic,  or  private  devotion,  but  without  any 
accompanying  feeling  of  contrition,  desire  of  amendment,  or  even  thought  of  personal 
application.  The  other  is  to  confess  our  sinfulness  in  such  extravagant  terms  that 
the  force  of  the  confession  is  destroyed  by  its  palpable  discordance  with  nature  and 
truth.  It  is  to  confess  that  we  are  all  utterly  vile  and  abominable.  In  a  common 
congregation  of  worshippers  such  language  is  senseless  and  nugatory.  It  is  so, 
because  it  is  felt  to  be  inapplicable,  even  by  those  who  think  it  religious  to  use  and 
assent  to  it.  I.  Do  we  then  sat  that  we  have  no  sin  ?  Certainly  not.  If  we  say 
BO,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  There  is  not  one  of  us  who 
will  not  see  loads  of  sin  pressing  heavily  upon  his  life  if  he  will  send  his  reflections 
back  and  impartially  retrace  its  history.  1.  We  can  all  of  us  look  back  on  our 
childhood.  And  what  see  we  there  ?  Perfect  innocence,  spotless  virtue,  blameless 
affections  ?  Who  is  there  of  us  who  never  caused  his  parents'  hearts  to  ache — I  do 
not  mean  ignorantly,  but  knowingly  and  recklessly?  2.  Is  our  survey  more  or  less 
satisfactory,  do  our  reflections  become  more  or  less  gratifying,  when  we  leave  the 
days  of  our  childhood  and  come  forward  to  those  of  our  youth  ?  Youth  is  life's 
seedtime.  Did  we  prepare  ourselves  for  the  harvest  as  we  ought  to  have  done  ? 
Did  we  acquire  all  the  knowledge  that  was  within  our  reach  ?  What  attention  did 
we  pay  to  the  formation  of  our  character?  Did  we  guard  it  anxiously,  and  mould 
it  carefully,  and  keep  it  away  from  polluting  influences,  and  lay  strong  foundations 
for  it,  and  build  it  up,  and  beautify  it,  after  the  best  and  purest  models  ;  or  did  we 
give  it  over  to  chance,  to  custom,  and  to  the  world  ?  Did  our  Maker  have  as  much 
of  our  time,  thoughts,  desires  and  obedience  as  was  due  to  Him  ?  3.  And  I  call  on 
those  who  have  advanced  into  the  middle  regions  of  life  to  say  whether,  when 
youth  passed  away,  folly  and  sin  went  with  it,  and  left  their  maturer  years  to  the 
peaceful  and  undisturbed  dominion  of  wisdom  and  virtue.  Have  they  acquired 
such  habitual  self-command  that  they  constantly  and  willingly  obey  the  command- 
ments of  God  ?  Do  they  walk  within  their  houses  with  perfect  hearts  ?  Do  they 
never  take  a  hard  and  griping  advantage  of  their  neighbour's  weakness,  or  ignorance, 
or  necessity  ?  11.  What  then  will  be  the  effect  of  a  true  confession  of  sin  ? 
The  mere  verbal  confession  of  sin  can  be  of  no  possible  benefit  to  us ;  can  do  us  no 
more  good  than  the  repetition  of  any  other  words,  with  or  without  meaning.  But 
if  our  confession  is  accompanied  by  a  sincere  conviction  of  sin,  we  shall  be 
forgiven  and  cleansed  by  a  faithful  and  just  God.  There  is  nothing  vindictive 
in  the  government  of  God.  We  shall  not  be  made  to  suffer  for  sins 
which  we  have  renounced,  and  which  our  spirit  now  looks  upon  with 
abhorrence,  as  foreign  and  hateful  to  it.  The  character  which  we  have  formed 
here  will  accompany  us  to  the  unseen  world  ;  and  as  it  has  worked  out  our  pardon 
here,  so  has  it  prepared  for  us  eternal  felicity,  (F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.) 
Confession : — Prayer  (in  the  wide  sense  of  the  word)  is  a  varied  melody,  now  rising, 
now  faUing  upon  the  ear.  It  has  its  bass  notes  and  its  high  notes,  its  plaintive 
cadences  and  its  jubilant  cadences,  or  (to  transfer  the  imagery  from  the  domain  of 
sound  to  that  of  sight),  it  has  its  gleams  of  sunlight  and  its  depths  of  shadow.  It 
is  with  the  low  and  plaintive  cadences  of  prayer  that  we  purpose  to  deal,  in  other 
words,  we  shall  speak  of  confession  of  sin.  I.  Confession  of  sin  should  be  a  keaIi 
element  in  the  devotional  system  of  each  one  of  us.  Confession  is  nothing  more 
nor  less  than  the  practical  recognition  of  our  sinfulness  and  of  our  sins.  Now  both 
our  sinfulness  and  our  sins  are  always  with  us  in  this  life.  As  saith  the  Scrip- 
ture, "  There  is  no  man  that  sinneth  not."  II.  If  Confession  is  to  become  in 
reahty  part  and  parcel  of  the  religious  system  of  each  individual — if  it  is  to  enter 


CHAP.  1.]  I.  JOHN.  69 

as  an  element  into  his  devotion — it  must  not  be  pointless  and  vague,  but  definite 
AND  PRECISE.  It  must  tum  upon  those  particular  faults  of  conduct  and  character, 
of  which  we  are  personally  conscious.  It  must  aim,  not  merely  at  bringing  to  light 
erroneous  conduct,  but  at  ascertaining  the  general  drift  and  current  of  our  character. 
It  must  not  rest  contented  with  a  general  survey  of  our  faults ;  but  must  unmask, 
if  possible,  the  ruling  passion.  But  it  may  be  asked.  Does  not  our  Church  place  in 
the  forefront  of  her  public  worship  a  general  confession  ;  a  confession  whose  ample 
terms  embrace  all  mankind  universally,  and  which  seems  to  eschew  aU  details  of 
wrong  sentiment  and  wrong  action  ?  No  doubt  she  does  so ;  but  her  intention,  here 
and  elsewhere  in  her  formularies,  is  that  under  the  general  expression  should  be 
represented  in  the  mind  of  each  individual  that  individual's  case.  Each  man  is 
to  glance  mentally  at  his  own  sins  as  he  repeats  the  general  confession ;  at  his 
own  wants  as  he  follows  the  collects  and  Lord's  Prayer ;  at  his  own  mercies  as  he 
follows  the  general  thanksgiving.  It  is  to  be  found  in  that  ordinance  of  the 
Levitical  law,  which  prescribes  the  expiation  of  the  sin  of  the  whole  congregation 
of  Israel.  In  every  genuine  act  of  public  confession,  hearts  from  aU  quarters 
encircle  the  Victim,  and  bring  each  one  its  own  burden  and  each  one  its  own  bitter- 
ness, to  lay  it  with  the  outstretched  hand  of  faith  on  that  sacred  and  devoted  Head. 
HI.  But  DOES  the  Church  of  England  recommend  to  heb  sons  and  daughters 

IN   THE   matter   OF   CONFESSION   NOTHING   OF    A   MORE  SPECIFIC   CHARACTER   THAN  WHAT 

WE  HAVE  ANNOUNCED?  What  the  Prayer-book  says  amounts  to  this:  "If,  on 
examination  of  your  state  of  health,  you  find  yourself  sick,  I  recommend  your  seek- 
ing out  and  resorting  to  a  discreet  and  learned  physician."  The  implication  clearly 
is,  whatever  some  devout  and  good  men  may  have  conceived  to  the  contrary,  that, 
if  we  find  ourselves  well,  or  at  least  able  to  treat  our  own  case,  we  shall  not  resort 
to  him.  Is  not  this  the  plain  rule  of  reason  in  the  analogous  case  of  the  treatment 
of  the  body  ?  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  answer  which  may  be  made.  Is  there  any 
one  of  us,  our  opponents  ask  triumphantly,  who  enjoys  spiritual  health,  who  has 
not  a  sin-sick  soul — any  one  of  us  who  has  not  to  take  up  into  his  mouth  this 
testimony  respecting  himself,  "There  is  no  health  in  me?"  Then,  if  all  be 
spiritual  invalids,  all  should  resort  regularly  and  habitually  to  the  physician.  We 
reply  by  admitting  fuUy  that  every  soul  of  man  is  sinful,  and  as  such  has  in  it  the 
seeds  of  spiritual  disease.  But  this  is  a  totally  different  thing  from  saying  that 
every  conscience  of  man  is  morbid,  perplexed  with  scruples,  agitated  with  timid 
doubts,  and  unable  by  God's  grace  to  guide  itself.  Confession  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  that  self-scrutiny  which  must  precede  it,  are  most  healthful  practices ; 
but  they  require  to  have  their  tendencies  counterbalanced  and  held  in  equipoise  by 
devotional  exercises  of  a  contrary  kind.  Self-introspection  may  easily,  and  will 
certainly,  become  morbid  if  it  be  not  checked  by  a  constant  outlooking  of  the  mind. 
Look  into  yourself  to  see  your  own  vUeness,  look  out  of  yourself  to  Christ. 
The  knowledge  and  deep  consciousness  of  thy  dark  guilt  is  only  valuable  as  a  back- 
ground on  which  to  paint  more  vividly  to  thy  mind's  eye  the  rainbow  colours  of 
the  love  of  Jesus.  Walk  abroad  ever  and  anon,  and  expatiate  freely  in  the  sun- 
light of  God's  grace  and  love  in  Christ.  A  religion,  it  it  is  to  be  strong,  must  be 
joyous ;  and  joyous  it  cannot  be  without  the  light  of  God's  love  in  Christ  shining 
freely  into  every  corner  of  the  soul.  (Dean  Goulburn.)  The  true  comfort: — 
Suppose  the  case  of  a  man,  the  victim  of  a  mortal  disease,  yet  clinging  eagerly  to 
life  :  that  man  may  find  comfort  from  persuading  himself  that  his  complaint  is  but 
trifling  and  wUl  speedily  disappear  ;  this  is  a  false,  deceitful  comfort.  Or  he  may 
derive  comfort  from  knowing  that,  though  his  complaint  be  in  itself  deadly,  yet  he 
has  at  hand  an  infallible  specific,  in  the  use  of  which  his  disease  wiU  be  eradicated, 
and  his  health  restored.  This  is  a  true  and  sohd  comfort.  It  is  even  so  in 
the  concerns  of  the  soul.  The  sinner  may  find  comfort  from  trying  to 
persuade  himself  that  his  sins,  if  any,  are  inconsiderable,  and  do  not 
seriously  affect  the  safety  of  the  soul.  This  is  a  false  and  unscriptural  source 
of  comfort.  Or  else  he  may  have  a  deep,  overwhehniag  sense  of  his  own  vile- 
ness,  of  his  naturally  guilty,  hopeless  state,  and  yet  be  comforted  by  the  assurance 
of  God's  forgiving  love  in  Christ.  This  is  a  sure.  Scriptural,  and  solid  ground  of 
comfort.  I.  There  is  a  false  ground  of  comfort  that  is  here  condemned.  "  If 
we  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us." 
While  all,  in  so  many  words,  allow  that  they  are  sinners,  yet  very  many  so  qualify 
that  confession  as  in  effect  to  say  "that  they  have  no  sin."  1.  One,  for  example, 
when  appealed  to,  says,  "  Oh,  I  know,  of  course,  that  I'm  a  sinner.  All  are 
sinners,  but   I'm  not   a   great  sinner.     I  am   not,  perhaps,   what  I   ought    to 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

be ;  I  have  no  doubt  done  many  things  that  were  wrong.  Every  one  doea 
the   same ;   but  I    have    committed   no  sin  of    a  gross    or  heinous    character," 

2.  Others,  while  admitting  that  they  are  sinners — grievous  sinners — yet  so 
extenuate  and  explain  away  their  sins  as  virtually  to  affirm  that  they  "have 
no  sin."  They  have  done  very  wickedly;  but  then  it  has  been  through  surprise,  or 
ignorance,  or  the  influence  of  others  :  the  temptation  has  been  so  strong,  and  their 
natural  weakness  so  great,  that  they  were  overcome ;  they  had,  however,  no 
dehberately  wicked  purpose,  and  God  will,  they  trust,  on  that  ground,  mercifully 
overlook  their  sins.  3.  Others,  again,  while  admitting  that  their  sins  are  neither 
few  nor  trifling,  yet  trust  that  their  good  deeds  so  preponderate  as  that  God  will  in 
His  mercy  overlook  what  they  have  done  amiss.  They  open  a  kind  of  debtor  and 
creditor  account  with  heaven.  May  it  not  be  feared  that  much  of  almsgiving, 
much  of  attendance  at  the  house  of  God,  and  at  sacraments,  is  to  be  ascribed  to 
motives  not  very  different  from  these?  II.  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  He  is  faith- 
ful AND  JUST  TO  FORGIVE  US  OUR  SINS."  The  confessiou  here  meant  must  be,  of 
course,  not  a  mere  cold  and  formal  one — the  mere  confession  of  the  lip.  No ;  it 
must  be  sincere  and  earnest,  the  unveiling  of  the  heart  to  Him  "  to  whom  all  hearts 
be  open."  It  must,  furthermore,  be  penitent  and  contrite ;  we  must  be  taught  to 
mourn  over  sin.  We  must  confess  our  sins,  then,  with  a  sincere,  penitent,  believing 
heart;  and,  if  so,  "God  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to 
cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  But  are  not  God's  faithfulness  and  justice 
pledged  to  punish  sin  and  to  destroy  the  sinner  ?  Yes,  out  of  Christ  it  is  so,  but  in 
Christ  God  stands  to  the  sinner  in  a  new  covenant  relationship,  and  He  who  was 
"faithful  and  just"  to  destroy  is,  in  Christ,  "faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our 
sins."  God  is  "faithful  to  forgive  "  ;  for  God  has  promised,  through  Christ,  forgive- 
ness to  the  believing  penitent ;  and  "  He  is  faithful  that  promised."  {W.  A.  Corn- 
wall, M.A.)  Confession  of  sins  and  the  poioer  of  absolution: — If  we  say  that  we 
have  no  sin,  we  sin  in  saying  so,  for  we  give  God  the  lie  (ver.  10).  I.  The 
NECESSITY  OF  CONFESSION.  If  wc  coufcss  God  will  forgivc,  not  otherwise.  Though 
we  cannot  of  ourselves  avoid  those  sins  without  the  grace  of  God,  yet  we  might, 
if  we  would  have  that  grace  which  would  enable  us  to  avoid  them.  And  if  man 
hath  not  this  grace  of  God,  the  want  is  not  in  God,  but  in  ourselves.  Our  con- 
fession must  be  with  a  purpose  of  obedience  for  the  time  to  come.  Not  every  one 
that  confesseth,  "  but  he  that  confesseth  and  forsaketh  his  sins  shall  have  mercy." 
n.  Where  is  ant  to  take  our  confessions  ?  Here  is  none  in  the  text  to  confess 
to,  if  we  had  a  mind  to  it.  None  indeed  expressly  named,  but  here  is  one  plainly 
enough  described,  that  can  pardon  our  sins  and  purge  us  from  all  our  iniquities ; 
to  whom  can  we  better  confess  than  to  Him  that  hath  the  power  of  absolution  ? 
Would  you  know  who  this  He  is  ?  "  I,  even  I,"  saith  God,  "  am  He  who  blotteth 
out  all  your  iniquities,  and  that  forgiveth  your  sins"  (Isa.  xliii.  25).  (Bp. 
Sparrow.)  Confession  of  sins  the  sure  condition  of  forgiveness  and  cleansing  : — 
I.  Confession  of  sin.  What  is  it  ?  Every  one  admits,  in  a  general  way,  that 
confession  of  sin  is  a  necessary  condition  of  forgiveness.  But  in  how  many 
cases  is  this  confession  altogether  unreal !  1.  Every  sin  must  be  confessed.  We 
must  deal  honestly  with  God.  We  must  tell  Him  all  that  is  in  our  hearts.  2. 
No  sin  must  be  excused.  It  must  be  confessed  precisely  as  it  is.  Nothing 
must  be  added  to  it,  nothing  taken  from  it ;  there  must  be  no  false  or 
affected  exaggeration,  and  still  less  must   there  be  any  attempt    at   palliation. 

3.  Sin  when  once  confessed  must  be  at  once  forsaken.  Joined  with  this  inward 
abandonment  of  sin  there  must  of  necessity  be  the  outward  abandonment  also. 
We  must  forsake  our  sins,  both  in  disposition  and  in  action.  We  must  for- 
sake our  sin  and  follow  righteousness.  II.  Forgiveness  of  sins  and  cleansino 
FROM  unrighteousness.  God  bestows  this  double  blessing  on  those  who  con- 
fess their  sins.  Two  benefits  are  spoken  of ;  yet,  though  separable  in  idea, 
they  are  not  divided  in  fact.  1.  Forgiveness  of  sins.  To  understand  what 
this  is  we  must  consider  what  effects  sin  produces  on  those  who  commit  it  in  their 
relations  towards  God.  (1)  It  calls  forth  the  anger  of  God.  (2)  It  condemns  the 
sinner  to  the  punishment  of  death.  "The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die " ;  "the 
wages  of  sin  is  death."  2.  Cleansing  from  unrighteousness  is  the  second  benefit 
which  God  bestows  on  those  who  confess  their  sins.  Righteousness  is  not  only 
imputed  to  us,  it  is  also  implanted  within  us.  We  are  renewed  unto  righteous- 
ness. III.  The  certainty  that  where  sin  is  confessed,  it  will  be  forgiven  and 
CLEANSED  AWAY.  1.  Because  He  is  faithful.  God  is  always  true  to  Himself ;  He 
cannot  deny  Himself.     One  is  true  to  himself  when  he  docs  that  which  he  must 


CHAP.  I.]  I,  JOHN.  61 

do,  according  to  the  constitution  of  his  whole  being.  And  so  it  is  with  God — "  God 
is  Light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all "  ;  He  is  only,  altogether,  and  always, 
Light ;  He  must,  therefore,  ever  manifest  Himself  as  such.  He  has  bound  Himself 
to  us  by  His  covenant  of  mercy,  and  His  covenant  is  inviolable.  If  we  confess 
our  sins,  we  are  walking  in  the  Light ;  and  God,  who  is  Light,  cannot  deny  Him- 
self, cannot  prove  unfaithful  to  that  fellowship  of  Light.  2.  But,  again,  our  con- 
fidence rests  not  only  upon  the  faithfulness  of  God,  but  also  upon  His  righteous- 
ness. The  righteousness  of  God  not  only  prompts  Him  to  punish  unrighteousness ; 
it  also  prompts  Him  to  cleanse  and  deliver  from  unrighteousness.  And  surely,  if 
the  righteousness  of  God  is  vindicated  and  magnified  in  the  punishment  of  men 
for  their  unrighteousness,  much  more  thoroughly  is  it  vindicated,  and  much  more 
illustriously  is  it  magnified,  in  delivering  men  from  their  unrighteousness.  Have 
we  not  here  a  hopeless  schism,  a  division  of  righteousness  against  itseK  ?  The 
solution  of  this  problem  depends  on  the  following  considerations :  (1)  All  things 
are  possible  with  God.  His  resources  are  infinite.  His  wisdom  is  unsearchable. 
We  may  be  sure  that  He  is  able  to  solve  the  problem,  that  He  is  able  to  meet  and 
satisfy  both  demands  of  righteousness.  (2)  God,  in  His  manifold  wisdom,  has 
solved  the  problem.  The  Cross  of  Christ,  the  death  of  God's  Son,  supplies  a  full 
answer  to  every  question.  Righteousness  has  been  satisfied,  in  aU  its  require- 
ments, by  the  sacrifice  which  was  offered  once  for  all  on  the  accursed  tree.  All 
unrighteousness  of  men  has  been  judged,  condemned,  and  punished  in  the  death  of 
Christ ;  all  unrighteousness  of  men  has  been  abolished,  cleansed,  and  purged  away 
in  the  death  of  Christ.  (3)  But,  again,  both  aspects  of  righteousness  are  conserved 
by  the  way  in  which  we  become  partakers  of  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus.  It  is,  as  we  have  seen,  by  confession  of  our  sins  that  we  attain  this.  Now, 
■when  we  confess  our  sins  we  do  two  things :  we  condemn  our  sins,  and  we  renounce 
them.  We  cease  to  yield  our  members  as  weapons  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin ; 
•we  henceforth  yield  our  members  as  weapons  of  righteousness  unto  God.  Being 
made  free  from  sin,  we  become  the  servants  of  righteousness.  All  this  is  brought 
about  through  our  being  made  partakers  of  Christ's  death.  [J.  J.  Glen-Kippen.) 
Confession  of  sin  : — I.  Confession  must  be  pakticulab.  WhUe  you  confess  only  in 
general  terms,  you  confess  others'  sins  rather  than  yours  ;  but  this  is  it  to  descend 
into  our  own  hearts,  and  find  out  our  just  and  real  debt ;  to  charge  ourselves  as 
narrowly  as  we  can,  that  He  may  discharge  us  fully,  and  forgive  us  freely.  11. 
Confession  must  be  universal,  that  is,  of  aU  sin,  without  partiality  or  respect  to 
any  sin.  I  doubt  if  a  man  can  truly  repent  of  any  sin,  except  he  in  a  manner 
repent  of  aU  sin,  or  truly  forsake  one  sin,  except  there  be  a  divorcement  of  the 
heart  from  and  forsaking  of  all  sin  ;  therefore  the  apostle  saith,  "  If  we  confess  our 
sins,"  not  sin  taking  in  all  the  body  and  collection  of  them.  Then  there  lies  a 
necessity  upon  us  to  confess  what  we  have;  we  have  all  sin,  and  so  should  confess 
all  sins.  III.  Confession  should  be  peepetuated  and  continued  as  long  as  we  are 
in  this  life.  That  stream  of  corruption  runs  continually,  let  the  stream  of  your 
contrition  and  confession  run  as  incessantly ;  and  there  is  another  stream  of  Christ's 
blood,  that  runs  constantly  too,  to  cleanse  you.  {H.  Binning.)  Hoiust  con- 
fession test : — If  you  have  done  wrong,  don't  go  days  and  weeks  under  conviction  of 
sin.  Suppose  that  I  had  lied  to  my  partner  in  business.  Suppose  he  were  to 
charge  it  upon  me,  and  I  were  to  try  to  evade  the  matter,  and  were  to  oblige  him 
to  chase  me  through  a  whole  week,  until  at  last  he  cornered  me  so  closely  that, 
seeing  escape  to  be  impossible,  I  gave  in,  and  said,  "  WeU,  I  have  lied,  and  I  am 
sorry,"  just  because  I  could  not  help  yielding.  How  mean  a  spirit  should  I  thus 
show !  How  much  better  if,  upon  sudden  press  of  temptation  I  had  sinned,  for  me 
to  stop  at  once  when  the  he  was  charged  upon  me,  and  say  honestly,  blushing  with 
shame,  "Yes,  I  am  wrong,  all  wrong.  I  am  sorry,  and  will  do  so  no  more."  Why 
will  not  men,  when  they  see  their  guilt  and  danger,  face  right  about,  and  make  short 
work  with  themselves?  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Insincere  confession: — Pastor  R.,  of 
Elberfeld,  was  once  sent  for  to  see  a  dying  man.  He  found  the  patient  really  very 
iU,  and  entered  at  once  into  an  earnest  conversation  about  the  state  of  his  soul. 
The  patient  began,  in  the  strongest  terms,  to  describe  himself  as  the  very  chief  of 
sinners,  and  declared  that  his  past  life  filled  him  with  abhorrence.  He  continued 
so  long  in  this  strain  that  the  pastor  could  scarcely  find  an  opportunity  to  speak. 
At  last,  taking  advantage  of  a  pause,  he  remarked  gently,  "  It  was  then  reaUy  true 
what  I  heard  of  you  ?  "  The  patient  raised  himself  in  the  bed,  stared  in  astonish- 
ment at  the  pastor,  and  demanded, "  What,  then,  have  you  heard  ?  No  one,  in  truth, 
can  say  anything  against  me ; "  and  continued,  in  a  strain  of  unbounded  self- 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

satisfaction,  to  tell  of  his  virtues,  and  recount  all  his  good  deeds,  pouring  out  at  the 
same  time  a  torrent  of  execrations  against  the  slanderers  who  had  tried  to  injure 
his  character.  "  It  was  not  from  foes  or  slanderers,"  said  the  pastor,  "  that  I  heard 
it,  but  from  yourself  ;  and  now  it  grieves  me  to  hear  that  you  do  not  believe  what 
you  said."      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Divine  forgiveness  : — Consciousness  of  sin  in 

every  man.  Hence  the  inevitable  need  of  forgiveness.  Is  there  any  answer  on 
the  part  of  God  to  this  need?  Current  answers — 1.  He  never  forgives:  He  cannot, 
in  the  nature  of  the  case.  Moral  forces  are  as  irresistible,  moral  laws  as  inexorable 
as  physical  laws.  The  man  who  breaks  law  must  take  the  consequences.  This  is 
the  answer  of  the  positivist  and  the  Deist.    A  terrible  response  to  our  keen  need. 

2.  He  forgives  capriciously  :  Those  born  of  good  parents,  who  have  lived  in  Christian 
society,  who  have  a  fortunate  mental  constitution,  who  have  done  nothing  flagrantly 
bad,  such  are  forgiven.  This  answer  is  still  more  terrible  than  the  other ;  it  shows 
favour  to  those  who  have  had  better  opportunities.  It  cannot  be  admitted.  3.  He 
forgives  universally :  without  reference  to  circumstances,  or  distinction  of  character, 
because  He  is  kind..  This  is  the  worst  answer  of  all.  By  it  moral  law  is  annulled, 
and  chaos  comes  into  the  spiritual  universe.  God  ceases  to  have  regard  to  His 
holiness.  It  is  incredible  that  this  should  be  the  answer  to  man's  need  of  forgive- 
ness. 4.  The  answer  of  the  gospel :  God  forgives  universally  on  the  ground  of  the 
atonement,  on  the  condition  of  repentance  and  faith.  This  answer  suits  God's 
character  and  man's  need.  It  makes  forgiveness  attainable,  and  upholds  moral 
order.  It  shows  the  preciousness  of  the  Bible,  argues  its  Divine  origin,  the 
privilege  of  accepting  God's  offer,  and  the  infinite  hazard  of  neglecting  or  refusing 
it.  (-R.  S.  Storrs.)  Justice  satisfied  (with  Eom.  iii.  27) : — When  the  soul  is 
seriously  impressed  with  the  conviction  of  its  guilt,  it  is  afraid  of  God.  It  dreads 
at  that  time  every  attribute  of  Divinity.  But  most  of  all  the  sinner  is  afraid  of 
God's  justice.  The  sinner  is  right  in  his  conviction  that  God  is  just,  and  he  is 
moreover  right  in  the  inference  which  follows  from  it,  that  because  God  is  just  his 
sin  must  be  punished.  Except  through  the  gospel,  justice  is  thine  antagonist.  It 
cannot  suffer  thee  to  enter  heaven,  for  thou  hast  sinned.  Is  it  possible,  then,  that 
the  sinner  cannot  be  saved  ?  This  is  the  great  riddle  of  the  law,  and  the  grand 
discovery  of  the  gospel.  I.  How  has  justice  been  put  aside  ?  or  bather,  how  has 
IT  been  so  satisfied  that  it  no  longer  stands  in  the  way  of  God's  justiftino  thb 
SINNER  ?  And  through  that  second  representative  of  manhood,  Jesus,  the  second 
Adam,  God  is  now  able  and  willing  to  forgive  the  vilest  and  justify  even  the 
ungodly,  and  He  is  able  to  do  so  without  the  slightest  violation  of  His  justice. 
1.  Note  the  dignity  of  the  victim  who  offered  Himself  up  to  Divine  justice.  2.  Think 
of  the  relationship  which  Jesus  Christ  had  towards  the  great  Judge  of  all  the  earth, 
and  then  you  will  see  again  that  the  law  must  have  been  fully  satisfied  thereby. 

3.  Furthermore,  consider  how  terrible  were  the  agonies  of  Christ,  which,  mark  you. 
He  endured  in  the  stead  of  all  poor  penitent  sinners,  of  aU  those  who  confess  their 
sins  and  believe  in  Him ;  I  say  when  you  mark  these  agonies,  you  will  readily  see 
why  justice  does  not  stand  in  the  sinner's  way.  II.  It  is  an  act  of  justice  on  God's 
part  to  forgive  the  sinner  who  makes  a  confession  of  his  sm  TO  God.  The  same 
Justice  that  just  now  stood  with  a  fiery  sword  in  his  hand,  like  the  cherubim  of  old 
keeping  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life,  now  goes  hand  in  hand  with  the  sinner. 
"  Sinner,"  he  says,  "I  will  go  with  thee.  When  thou  goest  to  plead  for  pardon  I 
will  go  and  plead  for  thee.  Once  I  spoke  against  thee  ;  but  now  I  am  so  satisfied 
with  what  Christ  has  done  that  I  will  go  with  thee  and  plead  for  thee.  I  will  not 
say  a  word  to  oppose  thy  pardon,  but  I  will  go  with  thee  and  demand  it.  It  is  but 
an  act  of  justice  that  God  should  now  forgive."  Sinner!  go  to  God  with  a  promise 
in  your  hand — "  Lord,  thou  hast  said,  '  He  that  confesseth  his  sin,  and  forsaketh 
it,  shall  find  mercy.'  I  confess  my  sin,  and  I  forsake  it :  Lord,  give  me  mercy  !  " 
Don't  doubt  but  that  God  will  give  it  you.  Take  that  pledge  and  that  bond  before 
His  throne  of  mercy,  and  that  bond  never  shall  be  cancelled  till  it  has  been  honoured. 
But,  again,  not  only  did  God  make  the  promise,  but  according  to  the  text  man  has 
been  induced  to  act  upon  it ;  and,  therefore,  this  becomes  a  double  bond  upon  the 
justice  of  God.  Do  you  imagine  when  God  has  brought  you  through  much  pain 
and  agony  of  mind  to  repent  of  sin,  to  give  up  self -righteousness,  and  rely  on  Christ, 
He  will  afterwards  turn  round  and  tell  you  He  did  not  mean  what  He  said  ?  It 
cannot  be.  No,  He  is  a  just  God,  "  Faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins  and  to 
cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  One  more  aspect  of  this  case.  God's  justice 
demands  that  the  sinner  should  be  forgiven  if  he  seeks  mercy,  for  this  reason : 
Christ  died  on  purpose  to  secure  pardon  for  every  seeking  soul.     Now,  I  hold  it  to 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  JOHN.  63 

be  an  axiom  that  whatever  Christ  died  for  he  will  have.  III.  I  must  just  enter  into 
some  httle  explanation  of  the  two  great  duties  that  abe  taught  in  the  two 
TEXTS.  The  first  duty  is  faith — "  believeth  in  Christ "  ;  the  second  text  is  confession 
— "  if  we  confess  our  sins."  I  will  begin  with  confession  first.  Whenever  grace 
comes  into  the  heart  it  will  lead  you  to  make  amends  for  any  injury  which  you 
have  done  either  by  word  or  deed  to  any  of  your  fellow-men  ;  and  you  cannot 
expect  that  you  shall  be  forgiven  of  God  until  you  have  forgiven  men,  and  have 
been  ready  to  make  peace  with  those  who  are  now  your  enemies.  If  you  have  done 
aught,  then,  against  any  man,  leave  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  and  make 
peace  with  him,  and  then  come  and  make  peace  with  God.  You  are  to  make 
confession  of  your  sin  to  God.  Let  that  be  humble  and  sincere.  Then  the 
next  duty  is  faith.  "  Whosoever  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  eternal 
life,  and  shall  never  come  into  condemnation."      (C.   H.   Spurgeon.)  God's 

justice  in  forgiveness  ; — Any  consideration  of  the  justice  of  forgiveness 
must  be  based  upon  a  true  estimate  of  what  sin  is,  and  what  punish- 
ment is.  We  must  clearly  recognise  that  sin  is  evil  in  itself  and  in  its 
inherent  effects  and  not  merely  evil  by  the  arbitrary  decree  of  the  lawgiver.  Sin 
is  that  which  is  absolutely  bad  for  man,  and  generally  speaking  it  is  not  bad 
because  forbidden,  but  forbidden  because  bad.  When  man  sins  he  is  doing 
something  unworthy  of  himself,  something  contrary  to  nature,  (if  by  nature  we 
understand  the  original  nature  in  which  God  first  created  him) .  Sin  being  thus 
man's  evil,  the  good  God,  because  He  is  good,  will  do  all  that  is  possible  to  keep 
His  children  from  sin.  And  one  of  the  ways  of  keeping  man  from  sin  is  by 
ordaining  punishment  for  sin.  Punishment  is  made  conditional  on  sin  in  three 
ways.  Sometimes  it  is  simply  a  sentence  pronounced  upon  sin  by  arbitrary  decree. 
Sometimes  it  is  the  fruit  of  sin,  growing  out  of  and  resulting  from  the  sin,  in  the 
nature  of  things.  Sometimes  it  is  the  sin  itself  intensified,  robbed  of  its  pleasure 
and  pressed  as  a  burden  and  a  curse  upon  the  man.  For  example :  if  a  schoolboy  is 
habitually  idle  and  neglects  his  studies  we  may  trace  out  a  retribution  connected 
with  the  sin  in  each  of  these  three  several  ways.  1.  The  master  punishes  the  boy 
for  his  idleness.  This  is  a  punishment  which  comes  a  simple  sentence  upon  the  sin, 
not  as  a  natural  or  necessary  consequence  of  the  sin.  2.  A  worse  retribution  comes 
upon  the  boy  when  he  grows  up.  He  finds  himself  not  fitted  for  the  position  in  life 
which  he  might  have  occupied  if  he  had  had  a  better  education.  3.  He  may 
experience  a  still  more  terrible  punishment.  He  did  not  learn  industiy  at  school 
and  his  idleness  clings  to  him  all  his  life.  Thus  he  has  a  triple  punishment. 
I  may  give  you  from  the  Bible  an  allusion  to  each  of  these.  For  the 
first  case  we  have  the  sentence  pronounced  upon  the  murderer  in 
Genesis  (ix.  6).  For  the  second  we  may  think  of  idleness  leading  to  want, 
that  natural  law  endorsed  by  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  (2  Thess.  ii.  10). 
For  the  third  we  may  take  the  solemn  sentence  (Kev.  xxii.  11).  With  this  third 
class  of  punishment  the  human  legislator  and  the  human  judge  have  little  or 
nothing  to  do.  God  alone  can  make  sin  to  be  its  own  punishment.  With  the 
second  class  the  legislator  rather  than  the  judge  is  concerned,  lest  unwise  legislation 
should  promote  wrong  doing  by  viciously  shielding  the  offender  from  the  natural 
consequences  of  his  sin.  The  first  class  of  punishment,  attending  upon  the  wisdom 
of  the  lawgiver  and  the  sentence  of  the  judge,  is  that  which  man  can  ordinarily 
inflict  or  remit.  And  it  is  in  studying  the  application  of  such  punishment  that  we 
shall  find  that  human  justice  which  is  to  be  a  light  to  show  us  something  of  Divine 
justice.  God's  ordinance  in  punishment  may  operate  to  keep  men  from  sin  in 
either  of  two  ways :  (1)  by  exhibiting  God's  sense  of  the  badness  of  sin,  and  so 
training  men  to  see  for  themselves  the  badness  of  sin,  and  to  avoid  it ;  or  (2)  by 
holding  forth  retribution  as  a  terror,  that  those  who  are  too  degraded  to  recognise 
the  evil  of  sin  may  be  deterred  from  sin  by  fear  of  the  evil  which  they  do  recognise, 
the  evil  of  pain  or  loss.  This  is  the  purpose  of  righteous  punishment.  However 
wicked  a  person  may  be,  to  inflict  pain  or  loss  upon  him,  which  is  not  calculated  to  do 
some  good  in  the  way  of  remedying  sin,  either  by  reforming  the  particular  offender 
or  by  deterring  others  from  wrong,  would  be  torture,  not  correction,  cruelty  and  not 
righteousness.  It  foUows  that  if  the  end  which  punishment  is  designed  to  accom- 
plish has  been  attained  by  some  other  means,  punishment  becomes  unrighteous, 
for  it  is  only  the  end  which  justifies  our  infliction  of  pain  or  loss  upon  our  brother. 
If  no  good  will  come  either  to  the  individual  or  to  the  world  from  our  inflicting  the 
punishment,  it  is  right  to  remit  the  punishment.  This  surely  must  be  the  key  to 
our  interpretation  of  the  statement  that  God  is  righteous  or  just  to  forgive  us  our 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

sins.  If  His  justice  is  analogous  to  man's  justice  then  His  purpose  in  punishment 
is  to  exhibit  His  own  sense  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin  and  to  deter  from  sin.  It  ia 
plain  that  before  He  can  remit  the  punishment  which  we  deserve,  some  other  means 
must  be  taken  to  show  the  world  how  God  esteems  sin.  It  is  plain  that  the  lesson 
of  God's  true  regard  for  sin  must  be  learned  by  the  sinner,  and  it  must  produce  in 
him  the  penitence  which  will  restrain  him  from  sin.  A  simple  gospel  of  the 
forgiveness  of  the  penitent  without  the  death  of  Christ  would  not  have  fulfilled 
these  three  conditions.  If  the  gospel  proclaims  the  remission  of  the  punishment 
which  was  to  evidence  God's  condemnation  of  sin,  this  evidence  must  be  displayed 
to  the  world  in  some  other  way.  It  is  displayed  from  the  Cross  of  Christ.  God 
exhibits  the  deathliness  of  sin,  not  in  the  death  of  the  sinner  but  in  the  death  of 
Christ.  But  the  sinner  to  be  forgiven  must  have  learnt  this  lesson.  Here  you  see 
the  necessity  of  faith  in  Christ  crucified  as  a  condition  of  pardon.  And  your  faith 
in  the  Cross  must  produce  penitence :  otherwise  there  is  nothing  to  supply  the  place 
of  punishment  to  deter  from  sin.  But  it  is  obvious  that  if  the  final  penalty  of  sin 
is  not  merely  attached  to  it  by  arbitrary  decree,  but  is  something  which  follows  as 
the  fruit  and  consequence  of  sin,  the  pardon  which  is  given  us  must  be  something 
more  than  an  arbitrary  warrant  of  acquittal ;  it  must  involve  in  some  way  a  change 
in  our  spiritual  growth  and  bearing;  for  the  fig-tree  cannot  bear  olive  berries 
neither  the  vine  figs,  nor  can  sin  grow  into  holiness  nor  a  wicked  heart  bear  fruit 
unto  eternal  life.  This  teaches  us  again  that  repentance  is  an  absolute  necessity 
as  a  condition  of  pardon.  Perhaps  we  may  sometimes  have  thought  of  repentance 
as  a  condition  arbitrarily  imposed :  we  may  have  said  that  God  does  not  choose  to 
forgive  us  unless  we  repent.  But  in  the  light  of  our  present  consideration  this 
would  seem  to  be  an  imperfect  statement  of  the  case.  We  must  rather  say  that  in 
the  nature  of  things  (if  punishment  is  the  growth  and  fruit  of  sin)  there  can  be  no 
such  thing  as  the  remission  of  punishment  without  a  change — a  conversion — of 
the  man.  It  is  this  thought  of  sin  becoming  ultimately  its  own  punishment  that 
stands  in  the  way  of  a  belief  in  a  universal  restoration,  a  universal  salvation.  But 
even  if  we  take  the  other  view  of  hell  and  think  of  it  simply  as  pain  arbitrarily 
imposed  as  a  penalty  for  sin  and  capable  of  being  arbitrarily  withdrawn,  there  is 
yet  an  objection  to  our  believing  in  any  ultimate  restoration.  We  might,  of  course, 
believe  that  when  a  sufficiency  of  punishment  has  been  inflicted,  the  soul  might  then 
be  delivered  from  hell.  But  what  then  ?  If  it  be  stUl  evil,  it  will  be  a  hell  to  itself. 
Yet  again,  the  good  God  will  do  all  that  may  be  for  us;  for  He  is  just  to  forgive  us 
our  sins.  But  it  may  be  said — if  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  is  thus  a  matter  of 
justice,  what  have  we  to  do  with  prayer  for  pardon  ?  God  will  forgive  us  if  it  is 
right :  He  will  not  forgive  us  if  it  is  not  right  to  forgive  us.  What  is  the  use  of 
confession  and  prayer?  The  answer  is,  that  the  right  or  wrong  of  forgiveness 
depends  on  the  disposition  of  the  sinner.  Has  he  or  has  he  not  learned  the  lesson 
of  the  Cross  ?  Is  he  or  is  he  not  firmly  convinced  of  the  deathliness  of  sin  ?  that  it  is  an 
evil  upon  which  God  cannot  look  with  indifference  ?  that  it  is  and  ever  must  be 
the  object  of  God's  wrath  and  condemnation?  And  if  the  sinner  is  in  that  state  of 
heart  and  mind  which  makes  forgiveness  fit  for  him,  then  confession  and  prayer  are 
the  spontaneous  expression  of  his  penitence.  (IF.  A.  Whitworth,  M.A.)  God's 
justice  in  forgiveness  : — In  a  conversation  which  the  Kev.  Mr.  Innes  had  with  an 
infidel  on  his  sick-bed,  he  told  him  that  when  he  was  taken  ill  he  thought  he  would 
rely  on  the  general  mercy  of  God  ;  that  as  he  had  never  done  anything  very  bad,  he 
hoped  all  would  be  well.  "  But  as  my  weakness  increased,"  he  added,  "  I  began  to 
think,  '  Is  not  God  a  just  being  as  well  as  merciful  ?  Now  what  reason  have  I  to 
think  He  will  treat  me  with  mercy,  and  not  with  justice?'  and  if  I  am  treated  with 
justice,"  he  said,  with  much  emotion,  "  wheee  am  I ?  "  "I  showed  him,"  says 
Mr.  Innes,  "  that  this  was  the  very  difiQculty  the  gospel  was  sent  to  remove,  as  it 
showed  how  mercy  could  be  exercised  in  perfect  consistency  with  the  strictest 
demands  of  justice,  while  it  was  bestowed  through  the  atonement  made  by  Jesos 
Christ.  After  explaining  this  doctrine,  and  pressing  it  on  his  attention  and 
acceptance,  one  of  the  last  things  he  said  to  me  before  leaving  him  was,  '  Well, 
I  believe  it  must  come  to  this.  I  confess  I  see  here  a  solid  footing  to  rest  on,  which, 
on  my  former  principles,  I  could  never  find.'  "  (K.  Arvine.)  Spiritual  cleansing : — 
The  trees  and  the  fields  are  clothed  new  every  year  in  the  freshest  and  purest  hues. 
In  the  spring  all  the  colours  are  bright  and  clean.  As  the  summer  goes  on  the 
leaves  get  dark  and  grimy.  Sometimes  a  shower  of  rain  makes  them  a  little  fresher, 
but  they  are  soon  dirtier  than  ever  again.  They  all  fall  in  the  winter.  The  tree 
cannot  cleanse  its  own  leaves,  diity  with  the  city's  smoke,  but  God  in  His  own  time 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  65 

cleanses  it,  and  gives  it  an  entirely  new  suit.  The  little  rain  cleansings,  soon  to  be 
dirtied  again,  are  the  partial  reformations  which  men  make  for  themselves,  saying : 
"  I  will  stop  this  habit,  or  that  other.  I  will  be  a  better  man  " — yet  not  doing  it  in 
God's  strength.  The  new  white  robe  which  God  gives  the  trees  is  the  robe  of 
Christ's  righteousness.  The  difference  is  that  in  the  eternal  kingdom  our  robe  of 
Christ's  righteousness  will  never  be  soiled,  for  there  is  none  of  the  defilement  of 
the  earth. 


CHAPTEE  n. 

Vers.  1-6.  My  little  children,  these  things  write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not — 

Preventatives  against  sin  : — The  connection  between  chapters  i.  and  ii.  seems  to  be 
this  :  I  have  taught  you  something  of  the  nature  and  universality  of  sin,  and  of  the 
deceivers  who  say  they  have  no  sin,  but  you  are  not  to  understand  me  as  teaching 
that  sin  is  an  element  of  our  being,  or  attached  to  us  by  any  absolute  necessity,  or 
infused  into  us  by  the  will  or  authority  of  the  Deity,  or  of  such  might  that  resistance 
is  vain  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  main  object  of  my  epistle  is,  "That  ye  sin  not."  Ye 
are  not  to  yield  to  sin,  but  to  resist  it  to  the  uttermost.  I.  The  childken  and  the 
Advocate.  1.  The  word  tekviu,  "  little  children,"  is  a  diminutive  from  tekvov,  and 
we,  having  no  principle  in  our  language  for  forming  diminutives,  or  perhaps  having 
lost  it,  must  translate  by  the  two  words  "  Uttle  children."  The  Latins  say  "Filioli," 
the  Germans  "  Kindlein,"  the  ItaUans  "  FiUoletti."  The  French  are  as  poor  as 
ourselves  in  this  respect,  and  must  say  "  Mespetits  enfans."  Such  forms  of  expres- 
sion in  all  languages  denote  endearment  and  affection.  All  the  most  valuable 
articles  in  nature  are  small — the  iron,  the  lead,  the  silver,  the  gold,  the  diamonds 
of  the  mine,  are  all  diminutives  compared  with  the  rocks,  the  mountains,  and  the 
strata  of  the  globe.  It  is  so  in  grace  also,  for  the  Church  of  the  Son  of  God,  though 
forming  an  innumerable  company  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  yet,  when  compared 
with  the  miUions  of  mankind  who  live  and  die  in  their  sins,  are  "  a  little  flock  " 
(Luke  xii.  32),  but  in  them  and  with  them  are  found  all  the  riches  of  Jehovah's 
mercy,  all  the  wondrous  manifestations  of  His  love,  all  the  glories  of  the  eternal 
kingdom.  (1)  The  name,  therefore,  refers  to  the  believer  as  an  object  of  special 
and  tender  care.  Ye  are  the  children  of  my  warmest  love  over  whom  I  rejoice 
continually.  Ye  are  separated  from  the  world,  but  ye  are  of  more  value  in  the 
sight  of  God  than  the  great  world  with  its  vanities,  which  are  all  destined  to  perish. 
(2)  The  purpose  of  my  writing  you  is,  that  ye  sin  not.  Ye  are  not  the  slaves  of  sin 
any  more,  but  the  freemen  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  (3)  I  take  "these  things"  to  refer 
generally  to  the  substance  of  the  whole  Epistle,  but  more  especially  to  the  first 
chapter ;  and  hence  we  may  learn  what,  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  are  the  best 
preventatives  against  sin.  The  preventatives  are  not  in  us,  but  in  God.  2.  Jesus, 
the  "  Advocate,"  is  now  brought  before  the  mind  of  the  children  of  God  as  the  one 
all-sufficient  fountain  of  forgiveness  for  the  transgressions  of  mankind.  IT.  Jesus 
THE  PROPITIATION.  1.  Then  it  is  a  fact  that  the  eternal  mercy  has  reached  us  in  the 
person  of  our  adorable  Eedeemer,  and  that  in  the  shedding  of  His  blood  we  have 
the  means  and  the  seal  of  peace  with  God.  2.  But  it  is  asserted  that  He  is  the 
propitiation  for  "  our  "  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world.  (1)  In  the  fullest,  freest,  and  most  admirable  maimer  He  has 
removed  every  barrier  between  us  and  God,  and  expiated  for  ever  all  our  sins.  (2) 
His  love.  His  Cross,  His  reUgion,  is  not  for  one  age,  but  for  all  ages,  not  for  one 
nation  or  country,  but  for  the  whole  world,  and  the  promises  of  God  give  us 
assurance  beforehand  of  its  final  triumph.  HI.  The  keeping  the  commandments 
OF  God.  1.  There  is  but  one  way  of  knowing  with  certainty  that  we  have  known 
God,  and  that  is  by  keeping  His  commandments.  The  knowledge  which  does  not 
lead  to  holiness  is  not  the  knowledge  of  God.  2.  There  are  two  great  centres  in  the 
moral  universe  around  which  the  events,  characters,  histories,  and  destinies  of  the 
species  gather,  the  true  one  and  the  false  one,  Christ  and  Satan,  the  author  of  all 
truth  and  the  father  of  lies.  The  "  he  "  is  the  black  bond  which  unites  us  to  the 
prince  of  darkness,  and  "  truth  "  is  the  golden  chain  which  binds  us  to  our  Head 
and  Master  in  heaven.  The  truth  signifies  in  the  New  Testament  the  Christian 
religion — the  genuine  faith  and  practice  of  the  gospel  (John  i.  14,  17,  viii.  32,  40, 

5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

45,  46,  xvi.  13,  xvii.  17,  xviii.  37  ;  Rom.  i.  8).  IV.  Keeping  God's  Word.  1.  The 
only  way  to  arrive  at  perfection  is  by  keeping  the  Word  of  God.  (1)  Love 
begins  in  the  circle  of  the  heart,  and  flows  forth  upon  its  objects  in  proportion 
to  its  fervour  and  strength.  We  cannot,  therefore,  even  pretend  to  love  God 
if  He  is  not  frequently  the  object  of  our  thoughts,  if  He  does  not  occupy  a 
conspicuous  place  in  our  hearts.  (2)  Love  is  a  strong  passion.  Its  existence 
is  easily  traced  by  the  joy  which  it  gives,  by  the  difficulties  it  surmounts,  by 
the  trials  which  it  endures,  and  by  the  deeds  which  it  accomplishes.  Love 
should  increase  and  strengthen  by  every  fresh  discovery  of  the  beauty  and 
excellence  of  its  object.  (3)  How  can  we  best  increase  this  love  to  God  ?  The 
answer  is  suggested  in  our  text,  namely,  by  "  keeping  the  Word  of  God."  The 
Bible  is  the  directory  of  the  saints,  and  holiness  consists  in  obedience  to  its 
commands.  V.  The  believer's  communion  with  Christ  and  walk  in  Him.  {W. 
Graham.)  Sinless  aim  of  the  guileless  spirit — provision  for  its  continued  sense  of 
sin  : — I.  Let  that  be  tour  aim,  to  "  sin  not."  Let  it  be  your  fixed  purpose,  not 
merely  that  you  are  to  sin  as  little  as  you  can,  but  that  you  are  not  to  sin  at  all. 

II.  But  not  only  would  I  have  you  to  make  this  your  aim,  I  would  have  tour  aim 
ACCOMPLISHED  AND  REALISED  ;  and  therefore  "  I  write  these  things  unto  you,  that 
ye  sin  not."  We  are  to  proceed  upon  the  anticipation  not  of  failure  but  of  success 
in  all  holy  walking  and  in  every  holy  duty.  Believe  these  things,  reaUse  them,  act 
them  out.  For  they  are  such  things  as,  if  thus  apprehended,  change  the  character 
of  the  whole  struggle.  They  transfer  it  to  a  new  and  higher  platform.  We  are 
brought  into  a  position  in  relation  to  God  in  which  holiness  is  no  longer  a  desperate, 
negative  strife,  but  a  blessed,  positive  achievement.     Evil  is  overcome  with  good. 

III.  WhT,    then,    IS   PROVISION   MADE    FOR   OUR    SINNING  STILL  ATTER  ALL  ?      Wc   haVO 

purposed  in  good  faith  that  we  will  not  offend.  We  rejoice  to  think  that  we  may 
now  form  that  purpose  with  good  heart ;  not  desperately,  as  if  we  were  upon  a 
forlorn  hope,  but  rather  as  grasping  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
For  He  cheers  us  on.  He  knows  how  at  every  step,  in  spite  of  all  the  encourage- 
ment given  us  beforehand,  that  we  may  hang  back,  fearing  with  too  good  ground 
that  even  if,  in  the  form  we  used  to  dread,  our  sin  shall  seem  to  give  way,  it  may 
in  some  new  manifestation  lie  in  wait  to  trouble  us.  And  therefore  He  assures  us 
that  He  is  always  beside  us,  "  our  advocate  with  the  Father."  We  need  not  there- 
fore be  afraid  to  walk  with  the  Father  in  the  light.  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.) 
Warning  and  encouragement : — I.  The  spirit  of  the  apostle's  address.  "  My 
little  children."  Such  words  are  felt  to  be  peculiarly  appropriate  in  him.  They 
are  suited  to  his  character.  He  was  gentle  and  loving.  They  are  suited  also  to  his 
age.  He  lived  to  be  the  oldest  of  all  his  companions  in  the  apostoUc  ministry.  It 
is  a  noble  triumph  of  godliness  when  age  is  redolent  with  piety  and  retains  the 
earnestness  and  diligence  of  youth.  We  may  be  also  assured  his  words  were  suited 
to  the  success  of  his  ministry.  Of  those  whom  he  addressed  it  might  be  presumed 
there  were  many  whom  he  might  regard  as  "  his  children  "  in  the  highest  and  best 
sense.  He  was  their  spiritual  father.  In  this  there  is  an  example  to  all  who 
would  be  the  teachers  of  others,  whether  pastors  or  parents,  or  any  who  would  be 
their  "  helpers  in  Christ  Jesus."  Their  spirit  should  be  affectionate,  "speaking 
the  truth  in  love,"  ever  "  in  meekness  instructing  those  who  oppose  themselves." 
And  their  object  should  be  the  conversion  of  souls.  II.  The  design  of  his 
WRITINGS.  "  These  things  write  I  unto  you  that  ye  sin  not."  His  reference  is 
manifestly  to  what  he  had  written  in  the  preceding  chapter.  And  it  is  only 
necessary  to  look  back  on  what  he  had  written  and  see  how  fitted  it  was  to  dis- 
courage sin.  Either  the  doctrine  of  the  apostle  or  the  practice  of  sin  must  be 
abandoned.  They  are  wholly  incompatible  with  one  another.  In  this  view  he  is 
not  singular.  Everywhere  in  the  Divine  Word  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  represented  to 
be  "  a  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness."  III.  The  words  of  warning.  "  If 
any  man  sin,"  implying  that,  notwithstanding  all  he  had  said,  "  any  man  "  might 
sin.  The  man  in  the  apostle's  view  is  the  believing  man.  He  may  sin.  Alas  !  no 
proof  is  necessary.  One  source  is  the  remaining  sinfulness  of  his  nature.  There 
is  no  doubt,  also,  that  this  tendency  to  sin  in  the  believer  is  mightily  strengthened 
by  the  temptation  of  the  wicked  one.  His  enmity  is  specially  directed  against  the 
godly.  Nor  must  we  omit  to  notice  the  extreme  danger  to  which  the  believer  is 
exposed  from  the  world.  Its  pleasures  and  honours  and  riches  are  dangerous  in 
the  extreme.  In  harmony  with  these  views  the  Divine  life  is  described  in  the 
Scriptures  as  a  constant  warfare.  It  need  scarcely  be  said  how  necessary  it  is  to  be 
vigilant  in  maintaining  it    Great  interests  are  at  stake.    The  law  is  that  as  sin 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  67 

enters  peace  departs.  The  credit  of  religion,  too,  is  bound  up  in  the  fidelity  of  those 
who  profess  it.  Above  all,  the  honour  of  Christ  is  concerned.  He  is  calumniated 
as  the  "  minister  of  sin  "  when  those  who  bear  His  name  dishonour  Him.     IV.  The 

DTJTT   AND   BEFUOE    OF   THOSE   WHO    ARE    07ERC0ME    BY   TEMPTATION  AND  BETRATED  INTO 

sm.  "  K  any  man  sin  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous."  Such  is  the  believer's  privilege,  but  let  us  not  overlook  the  duty 
involved  in  it.  We  must  bring  our  cause  to  our  great  Advocate  and  commit  it  to 
His  hands.  V.  The  encouragement  held  out  to  us  to  make  our  suit  to  oub 
GREAT  Advocate.  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sius,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but 
also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  (Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Believers  exhorted 
not  to  sin  : — I.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  command — "  That  ye  sin  not  "  ?  The 
general  meaning  of  the  word  "  sin  "  is  intelligible  to  all.  It  is  sin  to  violate  the 
commands  of  God ;  but  many  things  beside  the  direct  breach  in  act  of  a  positive 
injunction  are  sin  against  God.  It  is  sin,  according  to  the  language  of  St.  James, 
if  any  man  "  knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not."  Not  merely  are  sinful  words 
condemned,  but  we  are  admonished  that  God  regards  the  state  of  the  heart.  The 
Word  of  God  enlarges  the  sense  of  this  term  beyond  what  is  convenient  to  the  self- 
righteousness  of  men  to  aUow,  and  tells  us  that  even  ignorance  of  that  which  ia 
right  may  be  criminal  before  Him.  The  precept  which  bids  us  not  to  sin  enjoins 
upon  us  that  we  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  what  is  sin  and  what  is  duty.  II. 
Let  us  weigh  well  some  of  those  many  considerations  which  should  induce  us 
diligently  to  seek  to  accomplish  it  perfectly.  "  My  little  children,  these 
things  write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not."  1.  We  should  not  sin  because  God  is  a 
holy  God  and  cannot  endure  sin.  It  is  contrary  to  His  nature,  to  His  perfections, 
to  His  supremacy.  It  would  involve  the  universe  in  ruin  if  permitted,  2.  We 
should  not  sin,  because  that  Saviour  by  whom  we  hope  to  reach  eternal  happiness 
hates  sin.  It  dishonours  Him  amongst  men.  3.  Let  us  take  care  not  to  sin, 
because  by  that  we  grieve  and  we  quench  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  Again,  we  should  not 
sin  because  sin  indulged  involves  the  soul  in  everlasting  ruin.  5.  That  even  if  sin 
did  not  impair  the  hopes  that  a  Christian  entertains,  it  is  certain  to  diminish  the 
glorious  reward  which  remains  for  those  who  serve  Christ.  6.  Moreover,  in  sinning 
we  separate  ourselves  from  communion  with  Him  altogether  whUe  the  sin  lasts. 
7.  Let  us  recollect  that  when  we  sin  against  God  we  sin  against  our  f  eUow-creatures 
too,  because  it  is  almost  certain  that  our  own  sins  involve  others  in  our  guilt  and 
lead  them  to  sin  too.  {B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  The  gospel  prohibits  sin  : — It  is  not 
asserted  that  you  must  be  sinless  before  you  are  safe,  but  only  that  you  must  not 
presume  that  you  are  safe  before  the  grace  of  God  makes  you  long  to  be  sinless. 
A  soldier's  uniform  is  to  be  worn  only  by  a  soldier,  a  student's  gown  only  by  a 
student,  a  saint's  robe  only  by  a  saint.  As  we  call  him  a  soldier  who  has  only  just 
enlisted,  as  we  call  him  a  student  who  has  only  just  entered  college,  we  call  hirn  a 
saint  who  has  only  just  begun  to  believe  and  has  yet  everything  to  learn  and  every- 
thing to  feel  that  belongs  to  the  sanctified  life.  Still  a  saint  he  must  be,  one  whose 
vocation  it  is  to  be  holy,  and  who  strives  daily  to  obey  the  Divine  voice  within  hin^ 
that  is  ever  saying  "  Sin  not,  sin  not,  sin  not,"  or  he  can  have  no  interest  in  the 
Saviour's  righteousness.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  The  knowledge  of  God  preventive 
of  sin : — ^All  the  revelations  of  God  and  aU  His  works  in  every  department  of  His 
agency  cry  out  to  the  justified  man  in  one  language  and  say  to  him,  "  Sin  not." 
Call  God  what  you  wUl,  name  all  His  names,  styles,  and  titles,  speU  all  the 
characters  of  His  glory,  and  you  find  in  every  one  of  them  the  charge,  "  Sin  not." 
Is  He  Ught  ?  then  sin  not,  for  sin  is  darkness.  Is  He  life  ?  then  sin  not,  for  sin 
win  darken  your  souls  and  kiU  them.  Is  He  love  ?  then  sin  not,  for  sin  against 
Him  is  not  simple  disobedience,  it  hath  the  abominable  stain  of  ingratitude  on  it. 
Is  He  holy  ?  then  sin  not,  for  this  is  most  repugnant  to  His  holiness,  and  if  thou 
wouldst  have  Him  look  upon  thee  with  favour  thou  must  not  look  upon  sin  with 
favour  or  entertain  it  with  delight.  Is  He  great  and  powerful  ?  then  sin  not,  for 
that  were  madness.  Is  He  good  and  gracious?  then  sin  not,  for  that  were 
abominable  wickedness.  Is  He  just?  then  sin  not,  for  He  will  not  acquit  the 
wicked,  nor  hold  them  guiltless  who  do  acquit  themselves  and  yet  hold  by  their 
sins.  Is  He  merciful  ?  Oh,  then  sin  not,  for  wilt  thou  sin  against  the  mercy  that 
saveth  thee  ?  Look  upon  all  His  particular  acts  of  care  and  favour  towards  thee ; 
consider  His  judgments  upon  the  world,  upon  the  nation,  and  upon  thine  own 
person ;  put  to  thine  ear  and  hear — this  is  the  joint  harmonious  melody,  this  is  the 
proclamation  of  all,  that  we  sin  not.  (Hugh  Binning.)  Christians  have  delicate 
perceptions  of  sin : — A  soul  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ  has  very  delicate  percep- 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

tions.  {Stcinhofer.)  "Sin  not"  : — Once  I  was  travelling  in  Scotland,  and  I  saw 
two  people  at  a  railway  station  hunting  on  a  large  time-table  of  the  train  service 
for  a  local  train.  Written  on  the  time-table  in  great  big  letters  were  the  words, 
"  Sunday  trains  only."  These  people  wanted  the  week-day  train,  and  ignored 
altogether  the  great  big,  bold  letters  which  declared  all  the  trains  on  the  list  to  be 
special  trains  for  Sunday.  They  were  hunting  in  some  out-of-the-way  corner  for  a 
suitable  train,  utterly  ignoring  the  words,  "  Sunday  trains  only."  Whose  fault 
would  it  be  if  they  came  to  a  wrong  conclusion  ?  I  thought  to  myself  that  this  was 
just  the  mistake  so  many  Christians  make.  God  has  written  right  across  the  Bible 
in  great  big  words  that  no  one  should  mistake,  "  Sin  not,"  and  people  look  in  some 
corner  to  see  if  they  cannot  find  a  text  that  can  be  made  to  say  that  we  must  sin  a 
little.  The  whole  Bible  must  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  words,  "  These  things  have 
I  written  unto  you  that  ye  sin  not."  The  Bible  is  a  holy  book,  and  woe  be  to  the 
man  that  would  make  it  the  minister  of  sin  1  (Dudley  Kidd.)  Christian  sin : — 
A  friend  of  mine  was  staying  with  a  leader  of  a  certain  section  of  Christ's  Church 
who  believed  deeply  in  the  necessity  of  daily  "  Christian  sin."  On  Sunday  my 
friend  spoke  about  the  splendid  deliverance  at  our  disposal  in  Christ's  full  salva- 
tion. On  returning  home  to  dinner  my  friend  saw  that  he  had  offended  his  host  by 
his  bold  words.  "  I  am  sorry  you  spoke  such  unsound  words  this  morning,  as  you 
will  lead  the  young  people  especially  into  error,  and  discourage  the  little  ones  that 
believe  in  Christ,"  said  the  host.  When  my  friend  was  alone,  the  daughter  of  the 
host,  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  came  and  said,  "  Oh,  I  do  wish  I  had  only  heard 
Buch  words  long  ago.  You  spoke  so  differently  from  father ;  he  tells  us  we  must 
go  on  sinning  all  our  life,  and  that  thought  always  discourages  me,  so  that  I  have 
never  given  my  heart  to  Christ,  but  I  want  to  tell  you  that  I  did  so  this  morning  as 
you  were  speaking,  for  the  salvation  you  told  us  of  was  just  what  I  want."  Soon 
dinner  was  announced,  and  the  morning's  service  was  the  general  topic.  At  once 
the  daughter  told  of  her  new  joy,  and  explained  how  that  the  offer  of  such  a  full 
salvation  was  the  point  that  won  her.  Her  father's  face  fell  as  he  explained  that, 
in  spite  of  the  unpleasantness,  he  was  bound,  as  a  Christian,  to  expose  the  error 
taught  by  the  guest,  but  loyalty  to  the  truth  compelled  him  to  disregard  any  feelings 
of  difficulty.  The  daughter  felt  very  awkward,  and  said  in  her  girlish  way,  "  Then 
how  much  must  I  sin  every  day,  father?  For  I  want  to  sin  as  little  as  possible." 
The  question  went  like  an  arrow  to  the  father's  heart.  How  could  he  tell  his  child  to 
sin  even  a  little  every  day  ?  He  burst  into  tears  as  he  rushed  out  of  the  room,  and  was 
not  seen  tiU  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  he  came  in  with  a  beaming  face  to  beg  pardon 
of  his  child,  and  to  tell  from  a  glad  heart  the  power  of  Jesus  to  keep  from  all  sin.  (Ibid.) 
And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father. — Nature  and  ground  of 
ChruVs  advocacy  as  meeting  the  need  of  the  guileless  spirit : — The  manner  of  our 
restoration,  if  we  fall  short  of  the  sinless  aim,  not  less  than  the  sinless  aim  itself, 
is  fitted  to  guard  against  any  abuse  of  John's  doctrine  of  forgiveness.  It  is  thi-ough 
an  advocacy  altogether  incompatible  with  anything  like  the  toleration  of  evil.  I.  He 
IS  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  Jesus  !  He  is  called  Jesus  because  He  saves  His 
people  from  their  sins.  Christ  1  the  Anointed  1  whom  the  Father  anoints  through 
the  Spirit ;  whom  I  also,  through  the  Spirit,  in  sympathy  with  the  Father,  humbly 
venture  to  anoint !  His  Christ  and  mine  I  But  the  emphatic  word  here  is 
"  righteous."  This  term  may  be  understood  as  pointing,  not  to  the  legal  righteous- 
ness which  Christ  has — or  rather  which  Christ  is — but  to  the  righteousness  of  His  . 
character,  and  of  His  maimer  of  advocacy  with  the  Father  for  us.  In  any  court  in  -* 
which  I  had  a  cause  to  maintain  I  would  wish  to  have  a  righteous  advocate.  I  do 
not  want  one  to  tell  me  smooth  things,  putting  a  fair  face  on  what  will  not  stand 
close  scrutiny,  getting  up  untenable  lines  of  defence,  and  keeping  me  in  good 
humour  tiU  ruin  comes.  Give  me  an  advocate  who,  much  as  he  may  care  for  me, 
cares  for  honesty  and  honour,  for  law  and  justice,  still  more.  Such  an  advocate  is 
Jesus  Christ  for  us  in  the  high  court  of  heaven  ;  for  He  is  "  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous."  Such  an  advocate  is  He  also  when,  in  the  capacity,  as  it  were,  of 
chamber-counsel.  He  is  with  us  in  our  closet,  to  listen  to  all  that  we  have  to  say, 
to  all  our  confessions  and  complaints,  our  enumeration  of  grievances,  our 
unbosoming  ourselves  of  all  our  anxieties  and  all  our  griefs.  He  will  so  ply  His 
office,  and  travaQ  in  His  work  of  advocacy  between  the  Father  and  us,  as  to 
preserve  the  right  understanding  which  He  has  Himself  brought  about  and  obviate 
the  risk  of  renewed  separation.  He  will  make  it  all  subservient  to  our  more 
thorough  cleansing  from  sin  and  our  closer  walk  with  God;  our  being  "holy  as 
He  is  holy."    II.  •'  He  is  the  propitution  fob  oub  sins."    He  is  so  now.    He  is 


-^, 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  69 

present  with  us  now  as  our  advocate  with  the  Father ;  and  it  is  as  being  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins  that  He  is  present  with  us.  He  draws  near ;  the  Spirit  so 
taking  of  what  is  His  and  showing  it  to  me  as  to  bring  Him  near.  Can  I  touch 
these  hands  which  I  have  been  nailing  again  to  the  accursed  tree,  or  feel  them 
touching  me  again  to  bless  me,  without  my  whole  frame  thrilling  as  the  voice  runs 
through  my  inmost  soul — "  Sin  no  more  "  ;  "  Thou  art  dead  to  sin"  ?  IH.  There 
is  a  supplement  added  which  still  further  explains  the  sort  of  advocacy  which  Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous  carries  on.  He  is  "  the  propitiation  for  our  sins;  and  not  for 
ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  This  is  added  to  preclude  the 
possibility  of  a  believer  thinking  that,  if  he  lapses,  it  is  under  some  method  of 
recovery  different  from  that  which  is  available  for  all  mankind.  Where,  then,  ye 
children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day — ye  followers  of  the  Father  and  of  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ — where  is  your  peculiar  privilege  of  sinning  lightly  and  being  easUy 
restored  ?  What  is  there  in  that  sin  of  yours  that  should  make  it  lie  less  heavily 
on  your  conscience,  and  afflict  your  souls  less  grievously,  than  the  sins  which, 
when  you  were  of  the  world,  you  committed?  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  The 
advocacy  of  Christ : — I.  Odr  failure.  We  are  prone  every  moment  to  transgression. 
~  h,  if  we  could  take  a  survey  of  all  the  consequences  to  which  every  transgression 
on  our  part  gives  birth  in  an  unseen  world  we  should  feel  a  force  in  these  words, 
"  if  any  man  sin,"  that  would  prepare  our  hearts  to  contemplate  with  admiring 
gratitude  the  provision  which  even  in  such  a  case  is  made  for  ourselves.  H.  Our 
SECUKiTY.  "We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father."  The  law  of  God  does  not 
condemn  any  man  before  it  hears  him,  and  as  the  accused  cannot  appear  in  the 
courts  of  heaven  to  answer  for  themselves,  they  are  heard  there  in  the  person  of 
their  Advocate.  There  are  three  qualifications  necessary  to  constitute  a  powerful 
and  successful  advocate.  1.  The  first  is  zeal.  If  zeal  in  one  who  pleads  a  cause  be  a 
just  requisite,  then  where  would  you  find  an  advocate  so  admirably  qualified  for  his 
ofifice,  in  this  respect,  as  the  blessed  Saviour  ?  Think  of  His  love  for  your  soul. 
He  redeemed  us  to  God  by  His  blood.  Will  He  not  plead  for  that  which  He  has 
purchased  with  His  own  blood  ?  Think  of  the  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  you. 
It  is  your  friend,  your  brother,  who  is  your  advocate  with  the  Father.  Can 
He  be  otherwise  than  zealously  affected  in  your  favour  ?  Be  not  faithless,  but 
believing.  2.  There  is  another  qualification  for  the  work  of  an  advocate  not 
less  needful  than  zeal — I  mean  wisdom.  As  the  ability  of  a  general  consists 
much  in  his  skill  in  choosing  his  position  and  in  disposing  of  his  troops,  so  an 
advocate  has  need  of  wisdom  in  selecting  the  ground  on  which  he  may  act  with 
advantage  for  his  client.  What  consummate  wisdom  did  Moses  display  in  pleading 
the  cause  of  Israel  when  they  had  made  them  a  molten  image  in  Horeb,  and 
worshipped  the  golden  calf !  But  in  the  text  we  have  one  greater  than  Moses, 
even  Him  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  3. 
In  order  to  preclude  all  possibility  of  failure,  there  is  one  further  qualification 
requisite  in  an  advocate,  and  that  is  merit.  The  intercession  of  one  who  has  a 
claim  upon  the  person  with  whom  he  pleads  partakes  of  the  nature  of  a  demand, 
it  has  a  force  which  is  irresistible.  Our  cause  is  in  the  hands  of  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous,  who  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  What  further  can  we  desire  ? 
Now,  in  conclusion,  this  text  affords  no  ground  for — 1.  Presumption.  2.  Despair. 
(J.  Williams,  M.A.)  Christ  our  advocate  with  the  Father: — I.  The  fact  and 
PRESENCE  OF  SIN.  Considci  the  true  nature  of  the  exhortation,  "  that  ye  sin  not." 
Our  fellowship  with  God  does  not  influence  His  holy  nature  as  the  fellowship  of 
men  often  influences  us.  The  latter  makes  us  blind  to  their  faults.  But  our 
fellowship  with  God  cannot  lessen  in  any  degree  the  grief  for  sin,  or  anger  against 
it,  which  He  felt  at  first  when  the  rebel  angels  were  driven  from  His  presence. 
Now,  the  sins  which  believers  commit  against  God  may  be  divided  into  these  two 
great  classes : — 1.  Sins  of  ignorance  and  weakness.  2.  Sins  of  presumption 
committed  in  face  of  the  teaching  of  God's  Word  and  the  promptings  of  His  Holy 
Spirit.  The  teaching  of  Scripture  with  regard  to  this  subject  is  fitted  to  strike  us 
with  fear  and  trembling  (Numb.  xv.  30,  31 ;  Heb.  x.  26).  And  further,  is  there 
not  much  cause  for  serious  alarm,  seeing  that  acts  of  wilful  sin  soon  develop 
the  habit  of  wilful  sinning,  which  is  nothing  short  of  apostasy  from  the  faith  as  it 
is  in  Christ  ?  II.  The  provision  for  sin  :  an  advocate.  It  is  quite  true  that  God 
is  ready  to  forgive  ;  still,  He  is  ready  to  forgive,  not  as  an  indulgent  father  nor  as  a 
lax  judge,  but  only  through  the  irresistible  might  and  right  of  Christ's  advocacy, 
in.  The  believer's  advocate  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.  It  is  a  common 
remark  about  law-courts  that  "  he  who  appears  as  his  own  advocate  has  a  fool  for 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

his  client."  If  this  be  true  in  an  earthly  court  of  justice,  it  is  no  less  true  in  the 
court  of  heaven.  1.  For  he  who  is  arraigned  at  God's  bar  is  altogether  unfit  to 
plead  his  own  case.  Let  us  here  consider,  first,  the  unfitness  of  the  unbeliever  for 
this  work.  (1)  He  is  ignorant  of  God's  law.  (2)  He  is  ignorant  of  his  own  sin.  (3) 
He  is  ignorant  of  the  ruin  which  sin  works.  (4)  He  is  ignorant  of  the  holiness  and 
justice  of  God.  It  is  manifest  that  the  unbeliever  is  altogether  unfit  to  be  his  own 
advocate,  and  yet  this  is  the  office  which  those  who  reject  Christ  try  to  fill  for 
themselves.  2.  But  the  question  may  now  perhaps  be  asked,  Does  the  believer 
really  require  an  advocate  ?  He  is  not  entirely  ignorant  of  God's  law  and  his  own 
Bin.  But,  what  is  more  to  the  point,  his  knowledge  of  these,  however  imperfect  it 
may  be,  is  yet  sufficient  to  show  him  the  utter  hopelessness  of  his  case.  3. 
Christ  must  not  be  thought  of  as  loving  us  more  than  the  Father  loves  us,  as  more 
longsuffering,  more  easy-to-be-entreated,  showing  us  more  sympathy,  or  knowing 
better  the  weakness  of  our  nature.  Hence  when  Christ  appears  before  the  Judge 
and  Father  for  a  believer  who  has  sinned,  it  is  not  with  any  weak  form  of  inter- 
cession, but  as  our  advocate  at  God's  bar  of  judgment.  He  admits  the  sin ;  He 
approves  of  the  law ;  He  acknowledges  the  justice  of  the  penalty  ;  and  yet,  strange 
to  say.  He  obtains  for  the  accused  a  discharge  from  the  bar.  And  why  ?  Because 
He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sin.  {Jas.  Fenton,  M.A.)  Christ  our  advocate : — 
I.  What  is  the  idea  of  an  advocate  when  the  teem  is  used  to  express  a  govern- 
mental OFFICE  OR  relation  ?  An  advocate  is  one  who  pleads  the  cause  of  another  ; 
who  represents  another,  and  acts  in  his  name  ;  one  who  uses  his  influence  in  behalf 
of  another  by  his  request.  II.  Purposes  for  which  an  advocate  may  be  employed.  ^ 
1.  To  secure  justice,  in  case  any  question  involving  justice  is  to  be  tried.  2.  TC' 
'defend  the  accused.  8-!  To  secure  a  pardon  when  a  criminal  has  been  justly 
condemned  and  is  under  sentence.      III.    The   sense  in  which   Christ  is  the 

ADVOCATE  OF  SINNERS.       IV.  WhAT  IS  IMPLIED  IN  HiS  BEING  THE  ADVOCATE  OF  SINNERS. 

1.  His  being  employed  at  a  throne  of  grace  and  not  at  the  bar  of  justice,  to  plead 
for  sinners,  as  such,  and  not  for  those  who  are  merely  charged  with  sin  but  the 
charge  not  established.  2.  His  being  appointed  by  God  as  the  Advocate  of  sinners 
implies  a  merciful  disposition  in  God.  3.  That  the  exercise  of  mercy  on  certain 
conditions  is  possible.  4.  That  there  is  hope  for  the  condemned.  5.  That  there  is 
a  governmental  necessity  for  the  interposition  of  an  advocate ;  that  the  sinner's 
relations  are  such,  and  his  character  such,  that  he  cannot  be  admitted  to  plead  his 
own  cause  in  his  own  name.  V.  The  essential  qualifications  of  an  advocate 
UNDER  SUCH  CIRCUMSTANCES.  1.  He  must  be  the  uncomi^romising  friend  of  the 
government.  2.  He  must  be  the  uncompromising  friend  of  the  dishonoured  law. 
3.  He  must  be  righteous ;  that  is,  he  must  be  clear  of  any  complicity  in  the  crime 
of  the  sinner.  4.  He  must  be  the  compassionate  friend  of  the  sinner — not  of  his 
sins,  but  of  the  sinner  himself.  5.  He  must  be  able  sufficiently  to  honour  the  law, 
which  sinners  by  their  transgression  have  dishonoured.  6.  He  must  be  willing  to 
volunteer  a  gratuitous  service.  7.  He  must  have  a  good  plea.  He  must  be  able 
to  present  such  considerations  as  shall  really  meet  the  necessities  of  the  case,  and 
render  it  safe,  honourable,  glorious  in  God  to  forgive.  VI.  What  His  plea  in. 
BEHALF  OF  SINNERS  IS.  1.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  appeal  is  not  to  justice. •^'''^ 
Since  the  fall  of  man  God  has  suspended  the  execution  of  strict  justice  upon  our 
\  /ace.  2.  Christ's  plea  for  sinners  cannot  be  that  they  are  not  guilty.  3.  Christ  as 
//our  Advocate  cannot,  and  need  not,  plead  a  justification.  4.  He  may  not  plead 
//  what  wUl  reflect,  in  any  wise,  upon  the  law.  5.  He  may  not  plead  anything  that 
shall  reflect  upon  the  administration  of  the  Lawgiver.  In  that  case,  instead  of 
insisting  that  the  sinner  should  repent,  virtually  the  Lawgiver  would  be  called 
upon  Himself  to  repent.  6.  He  may  not  plead  any  excuse  whatever  for  the  sinner 
in  mitigation  of  his  guilt,  or  in  extenuation  of  his  conduct.  7.  He  cannot  plead  as 
our  Advocate  that  He  has  paid  our  debt,  in  such  a  sense  that  He  can  demand  our  y^ 
discharge  on  the  ground  of  justice.  8.  But  Christ  may  plead  His  sin-offering  to  *^ 
sanction  the  law,  as  fulfilling  a  condition  upon  which  we  may  be  forgiven.  9.  But 
the  plea  is  directed  to  the  merciful  disposition  of  God.  He  may  point  to  the 
promise  made  to  him  in  Isaiah,  chap,  lii.,  from  ver.  13  to  the  end,  and  chap,  liii., 
vers.  1,  2.  10.  He  may  plead  also  that  He  becomes  our  surety,  that  He  under- 
takes for  us,  that  He  is  our  wisdom  and  righteousness  and  sanctification  and 
redemption  ;  and  point  to  His  official  relations.  His  infinite  fulness,  willingness, 
and  ability  to  restore  us  to  obedience  and  to  fit  us  for  the  service,  the  employments, 
and  enjoyments  of  heaven.  11.  He  may  urge  as  a  reason  for  our  pardon  the 
great  pleasure  it  will  afford  to  God  to  set  aside  the  execution  of  the  law,     "  Mercy 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  71 

rejoiceth  against  judgment."  Judgment  is  His  strange  work  ;  but  He  delighteth  in 
mercy.  12.  He  may  urge  the  glory  that  will  redound  to  the  Son  of  God,  for  the 
part  that  He  has  taken  in  this  work.  13.  He  may  plead  the  gratitude  of  the 
redeemed  and  the  profound  thanks  and  praise  of  all  good  beings.  Conclusion : 
'  1.  You  see  what  it  is  to  become  a  Christian.  It  is  to  employ  Christ  as  your* 
Advocate,  by  committing  your  cause  entirely  to  Him.  2.  He  is  an  Advocate  that 
loses  no  causes.  3.  The  safety  of  beUevers.  Christ  is  always  at  His  post.  4.  The 
position  of  unbelievers.  You  have  no  advocate.  God  has  appointed  an  Advocate  ; 
but  you  reject  Him.  5.  I  ask.  Have  you  retained  Him  ?  Have  you,  by  your  own 
consent,  made  Him  your  Advocate  ?  6.  Do  any  of  you  say  that  you  are  unable  to 
employ  Him?  But  remember,  the  fee  which  He  requires  of  you  is  your  heart. 
All  may  employ  Him,  for  all  have  hearts.  7.  He  tenders  His  services  gratuitously  to 
all,  requiring  nothing  of  them  but  confidence,  gratitude,  love,  obedience.  8.  Can  any 
of  you  do  without  Him  ?  9.  Have  any  of  you  made  His  advocacy  sure  by  committing 
all  to  Him  ?  If  you  have.  He  has  attended  to  your  cause,  because  He  has  secured 
your  pardon  ;  and  the  evidence  you  have  in  your  peace  of  mind.  (C.  G.  Finney.) 
The  gracious  provision : — I.  It  is  univebsal.  II.  It  is  ample.  God  does  nothing 
by  halves.  The  salvation  promised  goes  down  to  the  very  roots  of  our  nature. 
Nothing  is  kept  back.  HI.  It  is  to  be  had  fob  the  asking.  Earthly  potentates 
require  great  influence  to  procure  an  audience  with  them,  and  then  there  is  no 
certainty  that  the  boon  sought  will  be  granted.  IV.  This  advocacy  can  be  had  at 
ONCE.  Delay  is  not  only  dangerous,  but  unnecessary.  V.  It  is  suee  in  its  effect. 
None  need  doubt  its  eflScacy  for  a  single  moment.  (J.  0.  Peck,  D.D.)  The  sinner^s 
advocate : — The  Apostle  John  presents  us  with  a  very  clear  and  emphatic  testimony 
to  the  doctrine  of  full  and  free  forgiveness  of  sin.  I.  The  saint  is  still  a  sinner. 
Our  apostle  says — "  If  any  man  sin."  The  "  if  "  may  be  written  in  as  small  letters 
as  you  wUl,  for  the  supposition  is  a  matter  of  certainty.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  deny 
that  Divine  grace  has  wrought  a  wondrous  change,  it  were  no  grace  at  all  if  it  had 
not.  It  will  be  well  to  note  this  change.  1.  The  Christian  no  longer  loves  sin ;  it 
is  the  object  of  his  sternest  horror.  The  head  and  the  hands  of  Dagon  are  broken, 
although  the  stump  remains.  2.  The  Christian  never  sins  with  that  enormity  of 
boasting  of  which  the  unregenerate  are  guilty.  His  heart  is  broken  within  him 
when  he  has  sinned.  3.  Nor  does  he  sin  with  the  fulness  of  deliberation  that 
belongs  to  other  men.  He  who  can  carefully  arrange  and  plot  a  transgression  is 
etui  a  true  child  of  the  old  serpent.  4.  And  again,  he  never  chews  the  cud  of  his 
sin ;  for  after  he  has  sinned,  however  sweet  it  may  have  been  in  his  mouth,  it 
becomes  bitterness  in  his  bowels.  5.  The  Christian,  unlike  other  men,  never  finds 
enjoyment  in  his  sin ;  he  is  out  of  his  element  in  it.  Conscience  pricks  him ;  he 
cannot,  even  if  he  would,  sin  like  others.  6.  You  will  notice,  too,  how  different  the 
Christian  is  as  to  the  habit  of  sin.  The  ungodly  man  is  frequent  in  overt  deeds  of 
rebellion,  but  the  Christian,  at  least  in  open  acts  of  crime  and  folly,  rather  falleth 
into  than  abideth  in  them.  There  are  all  these  degrees  of  difference  between  the 
Christian  and  the  ungodly  man,  and  far  more,  for  the  believer  is  a  new  creature, 
but  for  all  that  we  must  come  back  to  that  with  which  we  started — that  the  Chris- 
tian is  a  sinner  stUl.  1.  He  is  so  from  the  imperfection  of  his  nature.  2.  As  the 
Christian  thus  sias  in  his  devout  performances,  so  he  constantly  errs  in  the  every- 
day tenour  of  his  life.  Sins  of  omission,  to  wit,  how  many  of  these  may  be  com- 
pressed into  a  single  hour !  3.  Moreover,  many  Christian  people  sin  from  certain 
peculiar  infirmities.  Some  sin  through  shortness  of  temper.  There  are  others  who 
have  a  high  and  proud  spirit,  and  if  they  fancy  they  are  a  little  snubbed  or  put  into 
the  background  at  once  they  feel  inclined  to  resent  it.  How  many  we  know  who 
have  to  contend  with  constant  unbelief  brought  on  through  depression  of  spirits  1 
Their  nerves,  perhaps,  have  experienced  a  great  shock  at  some  period  in  life,  and 
constitutionally  they  look  always  at  the  black  side  of  affairs.  And  then  we  all  sin 
from  the  assaiilts  of  evil.  The  temptations  of  the  world,  when  we  are  thrust  into 
ungodly  company,  and  the  trials  of  business  and  even  of  the  household,  all  these  in 
unguarded  moments  may  take  the  Christian  off  his  feet.  H.  Oub  sins  do  not 
DEPEivE  us  OF  OUR  INTEREST  XN  Chbist,  "  If  any  man  sin  we  have  an  advocate." 
Yes,  we  have  Him  though  we  do  sin ;  we  have  Him  still.  He  chose  us  when  we 
•were  sinners ;  He  loved  us  when  we  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ;  and  He 
loves  us  stUl.  in.  The  advocate  is  provided  on  purpose  to  meet  the  fact  that 
WE  ABE  STILL  SINNERS.  1.  "  Jcsus."  Ah !  then  He  is  an  advocate  such  as  I  want, 
for  He  loves  me  and  takes  an  interest  in  me.  2.  "  Jesus  Christ,"  the  anointed. 
This  shows  His  authority  to  plead.     3.  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."     This  is  not 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n« 

only  His  character,  but  it  is  His  plea.  It  is  His  character,  and  if  my  advocate  be 
righteous  then  I  am  sure  He  would  not  take  up  a  bad  cause.  What  can  there  be 
asked  more  for  the  sinner  than  this  ?  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous  stands  up  to  plead 
for  me,  and  pleads  His  righteousness ;  and  mark,  He  does  this  not  if  I  do  not  sin, 
but  if  I  do  sin.  There  is  the  beauty  of  my  text.  IV.  This  truth,  so  evangelicaii 
AND  so  Divine,  should  be  peacticallt  remembered.  It  should  be  practically 
remembered  at  all  times.  Every  day  I  find  it  most  healthy  to  my  own  soul  to  try 
and  walk  as  a  saint,  but  in  order  to  do  so  I  must  continually  come  to  Christ  as  a 
sinner.  Make  this  essentially  the  rule  of  your  life  on  particular  occasions.  Here 
let  me  say  a  word  that  may  at  once  comfort  and  enlighten  some  who  are  in 
darkness.  Perhaps  you  will  teU  me  that  your  sin  has  had  some  gross  aggravation 
about  it.  If  you  are  a  Christian  it  has,  for  a  Christian  always  sins  worse  than 
other  men  ;  if  the  sin  be  not  in  itself  so  bad"  as  other  men's,  it  is  worse  in  you.  For 
a  king's  favourite  to  play  the  traitor  is  villainy  indeed.  Fly  with  a  humble,  contrite 
heart,  and  throw  thyself  at  the  feet  of  that  Advocate,  and  by  His  blood  He  will  plead 
for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  prevail.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  intercession  of  Christ : — 

I.  Who  is  it  that  appears  fob  us  an  Intercessor  in  heaven?  1.  It  is  not  a  poor 
sinner  like  ourselves,  who  has  need  first  to  intercede  for  the  forgiveness  of  his  own 
sins,  and  then  for  the  people.  2.  He  is  One  who  perfectly  understands  our  condi- 
tion and  exposures.  3.  He  is  not  only  in  certain  respects  a  member  of  the  human 
family,  and  acquainted  with  their  sufferings,  but  He  is  also  a  partaker  of  the 
essence  and  glory  of  the  Godhead.  4.  He  hath  peculiar  advantages  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  great  object  for  which  He  intercedes.     II.  The  fact  that  we 

HAVE  SUCH  an  INTERCESSOR  GIVES  RELIEF  TO  HOURS  OF  DARKNESS.  IH.  ThE  INTER- 
CESSION OF  Christ  is  an  encouragement  to  every  humble  believer  that  he  sHAiiii 

NOT  FINALLY  APOSTATISE  FROM  GoD.  IV.  ThE  INTERCESSION  OF  ChRIST  OUGHT  TO  BE 
REMEMBERED  BY  CHRISTIANS  AND  OFTEN  INVOKED  BY  THEM.       (J.  Foot,  D.D.)  Ckrist 

our  advocate : — I.  The  high  privilege  which  Christians  enjoy — they  "have  an 
advocate  with  the  Father."  All  the  spiritual  concerns  of  believers  are  lodged  in 
Christ's  hands.  Whatever  respects  their  present  or  future  happiness,  their  growth 
in  grace,  their  preservation  from  the  evil  in  the  world,  and  their  introduction  at  last 
into  the  presence  of  God  with  exceeding  joy,  are  matters  which  belong  to  Him.  He 
is  their  advocate,  and  pleads  their  cause  with  His  Heavenly  Father.  He  obtains  for 
them  aU  needful  blessings  to  conform  them  more  to  the  Divine  image — to  abide 
with  them  as  a  comforter — to  be  the  earnest  of  their  future  inheritance— to  lead 
and  guide  them  through  all  the  trials  of  life — and  finally  to  seal  them  to  the  day  of 
redemption.  II.  The  character  given  to  this  advocate — "Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous."  1.  He  is  righteous  before  God — perfectly  approved  by  Him.  2.  He  is 
righteous  in  the  view  of  Christians  themselves.  In  every  part  of  His  character, 
indeed.  He  is  the  object  of  their  approbation.  3.  He  is  righteous  in  aU  His  requests. 
in.  The  influence  which  this  high  privilege  of  Christians  has  to  relieve  the 
FEARS  which  A  SENSE  OF  REMAINING  SIN  OCCASIONS  THEM.  1.  It  securcs  them  against 
the  dread  of  condemnation,  on  account  of  daily  transgressions.  2.  It  promotes 
their  deliverance  from  remaining  corruption.  3.  It  secures  the  acceptance 
of  their  religious  duties.  The  Christian's  person  is  at  first  accepted  in  the 
Beloved,  and  his  religious  duties  are  accepted  in  the  same  way.  Con- 
clusion: 1.  How  well  qualified  Christ  is  to  be  a  Saviour!  2.  The  intercession 
of  Christ  is  a  full  proof  of  the  constancy  of  His  love.  3.  Be  exhorted 
to  a  thankful  improvement  of  your  privileges.  {W.  F.  Ireland,  D.D.) 
The  true  pleader ; — I.  Christ  is  the  universal  pleader.  The  high  priest  under 
the  Jewish  dispensation  exercised  his  intercession  for  a  nation,  Christ  for  all. 

II.  Christ  is  a  faithful  pleader.  Some  will  take  bribes.  IH.  Christ  is  a 
SUCCESSFUL  pleader.  IV.  Christ  is  a  sympathetic  pleader.  V.  Christ  is  a 
perpetual  pleader.  Many  priests  passed  away,  Christ  "  abideth."  VI.  Christ 
is  a  SURE  GROUND  for  pleading.  (G.  Calvert.)  Christ  our  propitiatory  Sacrijice 
and  our  advocate  : — I.  Let  us  begin  with  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  ;  for 
although  Christ's  advocacy  is  first  mentioned  in  the  text,  yet  His  propitiation  is 
the  foundation  upon  which  His  advocacy  is  built,  and  without  the  latter  the 
former  would  be  utterly  unavailing.  1.  The  propitiatory  sacrifice  of  Christ  was 
vicarious ;  that  is,  it  was  offered  for  the  sins  of  others.  2.  The  propitiatory 
sacrifice  of  Christ  was  appointed  by  God.  3.  The  propitiatory  sacrifice  of  Christ 
was  necessary.  The  known  character  of  God  clearly  evinces  the  truth  of  this 
assertion.  God  is  a  being  possessed  of  infinite  knowledge  and  wisdom.  By  His 
nnlimited  knowledge  He  is  acquainted  with  every  possible  scheme  by  which  any 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  73 

end  may  be  accomplished;  and  by  His  perfect  wisdom  He  always  chooses  that 
particular  plan  which,  upon  the  most  extensive  view  of  things,  is  best  for  carrying 
His  designs  into  effect.  We  are  sure  that  God  loved  His  Son  too  dearly  to  give 
Him  up  to  the  most  unexampled  sufferings,  if  these  had  not  been  necessary  for 
the  expiation  of  our  sins.  4.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  has  fuUy  answered  the  end 
for  which  it  was  appointed.  It  were  absurd  to  suppose  that  a  plan  originating 
from  the  most  perfect  wisdom  should  fail  of  accomplishing  the  purpose  intended. 
Besides,  let  us  reflect  for  a  moment  upon  the  nature  of  that  sacrifice  which  was 
offered  for  our  sins,  and  we  must  be  convinced  that  it  has  made  complete  satis- 
faction. Our  text  informs  us  that  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  He  ! 
n.  Let  us  now  consider  Christ's  advocacy  with  the  Father.  The  particular 
manner  in  which  Christ  pleads  our  cause  at  the  court  of  heaven  is  a  point  upon 
which  mortals  cannot  speak  with  certainty.  Whether  He  employs  words  in  His 
intercession  in  the  same  manner  that  He  did  upon  earth  is  a  question  which  we  are 
not  quaUfied  to  decide.  If  He  does,  it  must  be  only  in  a  general  manner,  because 
it  is  impossible  that  His  humanity,  which  is  finite  in  its  nature,  can  employ 
language  capable  of  representing  the  boundlessly  diversified  circumstances  of  His 
people.  It  must  also  be  evident  that  Christ's  advocacy,  in  whatever  it  consists,  is 
not  intended  to  produce  any  alteration  in  the  Divine  mind  towards  His  people. 
1.  Christ  is  completely  quahfied  for  being  our  Advocate.  2.  Christ's  advocacy  ia 
founded  upon  His  propitiation.  His  advocacy  is  not,  properly  speaking,  a  suppli- 
cation ;  it  is  a  claim  founded  upon  right.  3.  Christ's  advocacy  with  the  Father  ia 
always  prevalent.  {D.  Inglis.)  Christ  the  Advocate  of  sinners  : — I.  The  nature 
OF  THE  office.  It  supposes — 1.  An  offender.  "  All  have  sinned."  A  man  cannot 
deny  this  without  contradicting  God's  word.  2.  An  accuser.  Alas,  we  have  many 
accusers.  Our  own  consciences  accuse  us.  The  devil  accuses  us.  The  law 
of  God  accuses  us.  3.  A  judge.  God  the  Father  is  the  Judge.  It  is  He 
whom  we  have  offended.  4.  A  defence.  II.  The  suitableness  of  the  office. 
1.  His  person.  "  Jesus  Christ."  Jesus,  a  Divine  Saviour.  Christ,  the  Messiah, 
anointed  of  God  to  the  office  of  mediator.  We  are  not  trusting  our  eternal 
interests  in  the  care  of  one  of  whom  we  know  nothing,  or  one  who  bears 
no  endearing  relation  to  us ;  but  One  whose  personal  excellences  we  are  well 
acquainted  with.  2.  His  qualifications.  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  He 
is  righteous  in  the  most  extensive  and  unlimited  sense.  His  human  nature 
was  without  spot.  His  Divine  nature  threw  unexampled  merit  into  every  action. 
3.  His  plea.  He  admits  the  claims  of  God's  law  and  the  justice  of  its  denun- 
ciations, but  pleads  that  He  has  borne  the  curse  for  us,  and  that  therefore  pardon 
and  justification  may  be  safely  extended  to  us.  4.  His  petitions.  What  does  He 
plead  for  ?  For  everything  that  a  sinner  needs  for  His  present  and  eternal  weKare. 
Conclusions  :  1.  Let  every  man  consider  the  importance  of  committing  His  eternal 
interests  to  the  advocacy  of  Christ.  This  is  to  be  done  by  faith  in  Christ,  and 
prayer  to  God  in  reliance  on  Christ.  2.  Let  no  one  doubt  whether  Christ  will 
undertake  His  cause.  3.  Would  you  be  sure  you  have  Christ  for  your  advocate  ? 
Prove  it  by  obedience  to  Him.  {Essex  Remembrancer.)  Christ  our  Advocate  : — 
I.  The  notion  of  Christ's  advocacy;  or  explain  His  character  as  an  Advocate. 
It  conflicts  in  the  three  following  particulars.  1.  Christ's  exhibiting  or  presenting 
Himself  above  in  heaven,  before  His  Father,  in  our  name  and  behalf.  2.  This  is 
also  performed  by  a  signification  of  His  mind  and  will  on  our  behaK;  though  I 
take  it  to  consist  chiefly  in  actions,  yet  not  wholly,  as  some  do.  There  is,  moreover, 
I  apprehend,  as  belonging  to  it,  a  making  known  of  requests.  3.  We  may  reckon, 
as  comprised  within  the  advocacy  of  Christ,  His  presenting  and  recommending  our 
regular  prayers  and  requests  to  the  Father,  so  as  to  procure  acceptance  and 
success  to  these.  They  pass,  as  it  were,  through  His  hands,  and  He  consecratea 
them  aU.  II.  His  properties  as  an  advocate.  1.  He  is  a  common  Advocate  for 
the  whole  household  of  faith.  2.  He  is  an  Advocate  as  fully  qualified  as  we  could 
wish.  For — (1)  He  is  One  who  does  not  act  without  a  proper  commission.  (2)  He 
must  be  a  very  able  Advocate.  Men  may  elect  or  appoint  to  offices  those  that  are 
insufficient  and  no  ways  equal  to  them.  (3)  He  is  an  acceptable  Advocate,  one 
highly  esteemed  and  well-beloved  of  Him  with  whom  His  business  thus  considered 
lies.  (4)  He  is  a  holy,  sinless  Advocate.  This  is  the  most  proper  signification  of  the 
■word  we  translate  "  righteous."  (5)  He  is  a  faithful  Advocate.  Disappointment 
shall  never  shame  any  of  the  hopes  which  are  built  upon  Him.  (6)  He  is  a  kind, 
gracious,  affectionate  Advocate.  The  term  righteous  may  likewise  lead  our 
thoughts  to  these  properties  as  belonging  to  Him.     He  bears  a  true  affection  and 


74  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

goodwill  to  all  His  clients.  (7)  He  is  a  constant,  perpetual  Advocate.  This  ia 
thought  to  be  clearly  held  forth  in  the  apostle's  saying,  We  "  have  "  Him  with  the 
Father.  He  speaks  in  the  present  tense,  to  signify  the  duration,  as  well  as 
certainty  hereof.  He  resides  always  in  the  presence  of  the  Father.  He  is  ready 
to  put  in  a  plea  upon  every  fresh  matter  of  charge  that  our  adversary  can  bring 
against  us.  (8)  He  is  a  prevalent  Advocate.  There  is  no  danger  of  His  miscarrying 
in  any  cause  which  He  solicits.  If  we  consider  Him  in  the  greatness  of  His  person, 
or  in  the  near  relation  He  has  to  the  Father,  it  will  help  to  convince  us  that  He 
cannot  solicit  in  vain.  Consider  Him  as  a  Son  performing  obedience  at  the  call 
of  the  Father,  and  for  the  manifestation  of  His  glory;  and  as  this  cannot  but 
increase  paternal  affections  towards  Him,  so  it  must  facilitate  His  speeding  in  His 
addresses,  and  render  the  Father  more  inclinable  to  fulfil  all  His  petitions. 
Further,  the  consideration  of  His  being  righteous  or  holy  strengthens  the  argument 
for  the  successfulness  of  His  advocacy.  Again,  considering  the  objects  of  Hia 
intercession,  those  for  whom  He  lives  as  an  Advocate,  we  shall  find  it  helps  to 
prove  that  He  cannot  but  succeed.  They  are  those  whom  the  Father  is  well 
affected  to  and  loves ;  not  enemies  nor  strangers,  nor  servants  and  friends  only, 
but  children.  I  might  further  suggest,  as  what  will  make  the  proof  yet  more 
strong,  of  His  being  successful,  that  the  matters  of  His  intercession  are  all 
perfectly  agreeable  to  the  Father's  will.  1.  Let  those  be  convinced  of  their 
unhappy  fate  and  circumstances  who  remain  uninterested  in  the  advocacy  of 
Christ,  and  are  excluded  the  benefit  hereof.  2.  Have  we  who  are  true  believers  and 
Christians  indeed  an  Advocate  in  heaven,  even  Jesus  Christ  ?  Let  us  keep  up  an 
affectionate  esteem  of  Him,  and  be  more  duly  thankful  for  Him  thus  considered. 
3.  How  careful  ought  persons  to  be  of  intrenching  upon  and  likewise  abusing  the 
office  of  this  glorious  Advocate  1  4.  Let  us  have  daily  frequent  recourse  to  Christ  our 
Advocate,  learn  to  live  more  by  faith  upon  Him  thus  considered,  especially  in  case 
of  many  remarkable  miscarriages.  Faith  ought  then  to  be  exercised  in  Him 
afresh.  5.  Let  the  advocacy  of  Christ  be  improved  for  our  consolation  and  joy. 
6.  Let  us  be  studying  through  our  whole  lives  suitable  returns  to  our  blessed  Lord 
for  what  He  does  for  us  as  our  Advocate.  Love  is  evidently  one  of  these  returns. 
Oh  that  we  might  learn  to  carry  Christ's  name  upon  our  hearts,  as  He  does  ours 
upon  His  heart !  Again,  the  consideration  of  His  advocacy  should  teach  us  to 
persist  in  a  course  of  zealous,  faithful  service  to  Him.  Does  He  live  for  us,  and 
shall  we  not  be  hereby  constrained  to  live  for  Him?  7.  The  consideration  of 
Christ  being  our  Advocate  with  the  Father  is  proper  to  elevate  our  minds  and 
hearts  from  inferior  things,  and  make  us  aspire  heavenwards.  (J.  Gibbs.)  Our 
Advocate  on  high : — The  word  "  advocate  "  is  applied  elsewhere  to  the  Spirit  of 
God.  The  word  does  not  simply  represent  one  who  pleads  in  a  court  of  justice,  but 
a  friendly  pleader ;  also  a  patron  and  a  sponsor.  The  idea  here  seems  to  be  not  so 
much  that  of  an  intercessor  as  that  of  a  representative,  including  an  intercessor, 
but  compassing  much  more  than  an  intercessor.  The  idea  is  brought  out  by  the 
prophet  Isaiah,  when  he  says,  speaking  of  a  sort  of  middleman,  a  sort  of  mediator, 
"He  is  near  that  justifieth  me."  Job  brings  out  the  idea  when  he  says,  "  if  there 
be  a  messenger  with  them" — a  representative,  an  interpreter — "one  among  a 
thousand."  The  same  thought  runs  all  through  the  72nd  Psalm,  where  the  kmg's 
son  is  represented  as  defending  and  as  pleading  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  the 
needy.  Now  the  righteousness  of  an  advocate  is  introduced  in  contrast  with  the 
sinfulness  of  those  whom  He  represents.  The  Advocate  represents  sinners,  but 
He  is  not  a  sinner.  He  is  the  sponsor  of  sinners,  but  He  is  not  a  sinner.  He 
is   an   ambassador  for   a   race   of   sinners,   but  He   is   not   a   sinner.     I.  Thb 

GKACIOUS  PROVISIONS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  DISPENSATION  DO  NOT  ENCOURAGE,  BUT  DIS- 
COURAGE SINNING.  The  simple  fact  that  God  seeks  to  save  us  from  sin  shows  as 
that  in  His  sight  sinning  is  a  terrible  evil.  The  mediation  which  God  provides 
reveals  the  extreme  peril  to  which  sin  exposes  the  transgressor.  What  must  that 
peril  be  when  God  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  to  be  a  Saviour  ? 
We  often  sin  through  ignorance.  We  sin  through  carelessness — the  Christian 
dispensation  makes  us  serious  concerning  sin.  We  sin  through  moral  deadness — 
the  Christian  dispensation  is  a  ministration  by  which  the  living  God  seeks  to  restore 
life  to  us.  We  sin  sometimes  through  despair — the  Christian  dispensation  fills  us 
with  hope.  We  sin  often  through  feverishness  and  through  restlessness  of  spirit — 
the  Christian  dispensation  imparts  peace,  restores  quiet  to  our  disturbed  nature. 
We  sin  through  weakness — the  Christian  dispensation  imparts  power.  We  sin  by 
force  of   evil   motives — the  Christian  dispensation  changes  our  motives ;  so  that 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  75 

if  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature.     II.  The  sins  of  the  Cheistians 

SHALL    NOT    LEAD    THEM    INTO    DESPONDENCT    AND    DESPAIR.       "  TheSe   things    Wtite    I 

unto  you,"  not  that  ye  sin,  but  "  that  ye  sin  not."  If  any  man  sin,  there  is 
cause  for  sorrow,  and  cause  for  fear,  but  none  for  despair ;  none  even  for 
despondency.  For,  mark,  we  are  not  left  to  plead  our  own  cause.  Nor  are 
we  left  to  seek  an  Advocate  or  a  Representative.  A  Bepresentative  is  provided 
for  us,  and  revealed  to  us ;  and  the  Advocate  that  we  have  is  God's  Christ 
— Jesus — devoted  to  salvation — and  Himself  without  sin.  "Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous."  The  advocacy  of  such  a  sponsor  must  prevail.  Where,  there- 
fore, is  there  room  for  despair,  or  even  for  despondency?  {S.  Martin.) 
ChrisVs  intercession : — How  divine  is  the  gospel !  "  Sin  not."  "  If  any  man  sin." 
It  gives  us  comfort  against  the  demerit  of  sin  without  encouraging  the  acts  of  sin. 
No  reUgion  is  so  pure  for  the  honour  of  God  nor  any  so  cordial  for  the  refreshment 
of  the  creature.  I.  Cheist  is  as  much  an  advocate  as  He  is  a  sacrifice,  as  God 
is  as  much  a  governor  as  He  was  a  creator.  As  we  say  of  Providence,  it  is  a  con- 
tinued creation;  so  of  intercession,  it  is  a  continued  oblation.  1.  This  office  of 
advocacy  belongs  to  Him  as  a  priest,  and  it  is  apart  of  His  priestly  office.  As  He  wag 
a  priest  upon  the  Cross  to  make  an  expiation  for  us,  so  He  is  our  priest  in  the  court  of 
heaven  to  plead  this  atonement,  both  before  the  tribunal  of  justice  and  the  throne 
of  mercy,  against  the  curses  of  the  law,  the  accusations  of  Satan,  the  indictments 
of  sin,  and  to  keep  off  the  punishment  which  our  guUt  had  merited.  2.  This, 
therefore,  was  the  end  of  His  ascension  and  sitting  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
His  mediation  kept  the  world  from  ruin  after  man's  faU,  and  His  intercession 
promotes  the  world's  restoration  after  His  own  Passion.  3.  This  advocacy  is 
founded  upon  His  oblation.  His  plea  depends  upon  the  value  and  purity  of  His 
sacrifice.  4.  The  nature  of  this  advocacy  differs  from  that  intercession  or  advocacy 
which  is  ascribed  to  the  Spirit.  Christ  is  an  advocate  with  God  for  us,  and  the 
Spirit  is  an  advocate  with  God  in  us  (John  xiv.  17).  Christ  is  our  advocate,  plead- 
ing for  us  in  His  own  name ;  the  Spirit  is  an  advocate,  assisting  us  to  plead  for 
ourselves  in  Christ's  name.  11.  What  kind  of  advocate  Christ  is.  1.  Authori- 
tative. He  intercedes  not  without  a  commission  and  command  (Jer.  xxx.  21).  2. 
Wise  and  skiKul.  He  has  an  infinite  knowledge  as  God  and  a  fuU  and  sufficient 
knowledge  as  man.  3.  Righteous  and  faithful.  As  He  was  manifested  to  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil,  so  He  is  exalted  to  perfect  the  conquest  by  His  intercession. 
If  He  had  sin  He  could  not  be  in  heaven,  much  less  a  pleader  there.  4.  Compas- 
sionate. His  intercession  springs  from  the  same  tenderness  towards  us  as  His 
oblation,  and  both  are  but  the  displaying  of  His  excessive  charity.  5.  Ready  and 
diligent.  He  is  passed  into  the  heaven,  seated  there  in  a  perpetual  exercise  of  this 
office,  to  entertain  all  comers  at  all  times ;  and  can  no  more  be  sleepy  than  He  can 
be  cruel,  no  more  cease  to  be  diligent  than  He  can  be  bereaved  of  His  compassions. 
6.  Earnest  and  pressing.  He  was  not  more  vehement  to  shed  His  blood  than  He  is 
to  plead  it.  No  man  is  more  sohcitous  to  increase  the  honour  and  grandeur  of  his 
family  than  Christ  is  to  secure  the  happiness  of  His  people.  For  to  what  purpose 
did  He  carry  up  human  affections  to  heaven  but  to  express  them  in  their  livelinesg 
and  vigour  for  us  and  to  us?  7.  Joyful  and  cheerful.  He  hath  not  a  sour 
kind  of  earnestness,  as  is  common  among  men ;  but  an  earnestness  with  a  joy,  as 
being  the  delight  of  His  heart.  8.  Acceptable.  He  is  the  favourite  of  the  court. 
9.  Alone.  Since  Christ  trod  the  wine-press  alone  He  solicits  our  cause  alone, 
intercession  being  founded  upon  propitiation ;  He,  therefore,  that  is  the  sole  pro- 
pitiator is  the  sole  intercessor.  As  God  never  gave  any  commission  to  redeem  us 
to  any  other,  so  He  never  gave  a  commission  to  any  other  to  appear  for  us  in  that 
court.  HI.  How  Christ  doth  manage  this  advocacy  and  intercession.  1.  Christ 
is  not  an  advocate  in  heaven  in  such  a  supplicating  manner  as  He  prayed  in  the 
world.  This  servile  way  of  praying,  as  they  call  it,  because  it  was  performed  by 
Christ  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  is  not  agreeable  to  His  present  glorious  estate.  It 
is  as  unsuitable  to  His  state  in  heaven  as  His  prayers  with  strong  cries  were  suit- 
able to  His  condition  on  earth.  Nor  is  it  a  supplication  in  the  gesture  of  kneeling, 
for  He  is  an  advocate  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  where  He  is  always  expressed  as 
sitting,  and  but  once  as  standing  (Acts  vii.  55).  2.  Yet  it  may  be  a  kind  of  petition, 
an  expressing  His  desires  in  a  supplicatory  manner.  Though  He  be  a  king  upon 
His  throne,  yet  being  settled  in  that  royal  authority  by  His  Father,  as  His  delegate, 
He  is  in  regard  of  that  inferior  to  the  Father,  and  likewise  in  the  economy  of 
mediator.  And  also  as  His  human  nature  is  a  creature.  He  may  be  a  petitioner 
without  any  debasement  to  Himself,   to  that  power,  by  whose   authority  He  is 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ii. 

settled  in  His  dignity,  constituted  in  His  mediatory  office,  and  was  both  made  and 
continues  a  creature.  3.  It  is  sucti  a  petition  as  is  in  the  nature  of  a  claim  or 
demand.  4.  This  intercessory  demand  or  asking  is  accompanied  with  a  presenting 
the  memorials  of  His  death.  5.  It  is  a  presenting  our  persons  to  God,  together 
•with  His  blood,  in  an  affectionate  manner  (Exod.  xxviii.  29 ;  Cant.  viii.  6  ;  Eev.  iii.  5). 
rv.  Christ  doth  perpetually  manage  this  office.  1.  The  first  evidence  is  in 
the  text,  "  We  have  an  advocate  "  ;  we  have  at  this  present ;  we  in  this  age,  we  in  all 
ages,  till  the  dissolution  of  the  world,  without  any  faintness  in  the  degrees  of  His 
intercession,  without  any  interruption  in  time.  2.  There  can  be  no  cessation  of  His 
work  till  His  enemies  be  conquered  and  His  whole  mystical  body  wrapped  up  in 
glory.  3.  It  is  necessary  it  should  be  so.  (1)  Because  it  is  founded  upon  His  death. 
It  is  an  "eternal  redemption"  (Heb.  ix.  12),  and  therefore  an  eternal  intercession. 

(2)  The  exercise  of  this  office  must  be  as  durable  as  the  office  itself.  His  priest- 
hood is  for  ever,  therefore  the  act  belonging  to  His  priesthood  is  for  ever.  (3)  This 
was  both  the  reason  and  end  of  His  advancement.  The  intercession  He  made  for 
transgressors  was  one  reason  why  God  would  "  divide  Him  a  portion  with  the 
great "  (Isa.  liii.  12) ;  "  because  He  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors."  It  was 
also  the  end  of  His  advancement  (Heb.  x.  12).  V.  The  efficacy  of  this  inter- 
cession (Eom.  v.  10).  VI.  The  particularity  of  this  intercession.  1.  For 
believers  only.  He  manages  no  man'g  cause  that  is  not  desirous  to  put  it  into  His 
hands.  2.  For  every  believer  particularly.  VII.  What  doth  Christ  intercede 
FOR  ?  In  general  His  intercession  for  believers  is  as  large  as  the  intent  of  His  death 
for  them.  (S.  Charnock,  B.D.)  Christ's  intercession : — He  is  an  advocate  to  the 
Father,  not  only  to  Him  at  a  distance,  but  with  Him.  1.  This  was  typified.  2. 
It  was  prophesied  of  Christ  (Psa.  xxi.  2).  3.  God  never  denied  Him  any  request 
which  He  put  up  upon  the  earth  for  the  Divine  glory  and  His  people's  good, 
and  Christ  Himself  acknowledges  it.  "I  know  that  Thou  hearest  Me  always  " 
(John  xi.  42).  Now  this  intercession  must  needs  be  efficacious,  if  you  consider — 
1.  His  person.     (1)  The  greatness  of   it.      (2)  His  near  relation  to  the  Father. 

(3)  The  special  love  God  bears  to  His  person  for  what  He  hath  done  in  the 
earth  and  doth  yet  in  heaven.  2.  It  must  needs  be  efficacious  in  regard  of  the 
pleas  themselves,  the  matter  of  them.  (1)  The  matter  of  His  plea  is  holy.  (2) 
It  is  nothing  but  what  He  hath  merited.  (3)  Whatsoever  He  pleads  for  is  agree- 
able to  the  will  of  His  Father.  3.  In  regard  of  the  foundation  of  His  intercession, 
His  death.  4.  In  regard  of  the  persons  He  intercedes  for.  They  are  those 
that  are  the  special  gift  of  God  to  Him,  as  dear  to  the  Father  as  to  Christ  (John 
xvii.  9).  5.  It  is  evidenced  by  the  fruit  of  it.  (1)  Before  His  sacrifice.  The 
text  intimates  it;  as  He  was  a  propitiation  for  the  whole  world.  (2)  After  His 
sacrifice,  in  the  first-fruit  of  it,  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  (a)  For  believers 
only,  (b)  For  every  behever  particularly  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  6.  What  doth 
Christ  intercede  for?  (1)  Justification.  (2)  Daily  pardon.  (3)  Sanctification.  (4) 
Strength  against  temptation.  (5)  Perseverance  in  grace.  (6)  Acceptation  of  our 
services.  (7)  Salvation.  This  is  the  main  end  of  His  intercession  (Heb.  vii.  25). 
1.  Use  of  information.  (1)  Here  is  an  argument  for  the  Deity  of  Christ.  (2) 
Here  is  a  ground  to  conclude  the  efficacy  of  His  death.  (3)  See  the  infinite  love  of 
God  and  Christ.  (4)  How  little  ground  is  there  to  dream  of  such  a  thing  as 
perfection  in  this  life !  If  we  stand  in  need  of  a  perpetual  intercession  of  Christ 
in  this  life  we  have  not  then  a  perfection  in  this  life :  intercession  supposeth  imper- 
fection. (5)  Hence  it  follows  that  the  Church  is  as  durable  as  the  world.  (6)  If 
Christ  be  an  advocate,  the  contempt  or  abuse  of  His  intercession  is  very  unworthy. 
(7)  If  Christ  be  our  advocate  it  is  a  dishonourable  thing  to  yoke  saints  as  mediators 
of  intercession  with  Him.  (8)  If  Christ  be  our  advocate,  how  miserable  are  those 
that  have  no  interest  in  Him !  2.  Use  of  comfort.  His  design  in  uttering 
His  prayer  on  earth,  the  model  of  His  intercession,  was  for  the  joy  of  His  people 
(John  xvii.  13).  (1)  There  is  comfort  in  the  perpetuity  of  this  intercession.  (2) 
There  is  comfort  in  the  prevalency  of  it.  (3)  Hence  ariseth  comfort  to  us  in 
our  prayers.  (4)  Hence  ariseth  comfort  against  all  the  attempts  and  accusations 
of  Satan  and  the  rebellion  of  our  own  corruption.  3.  Use  of  exhortation.  (1) 
Endeavour  for  an  interest  in  this  advocacy.  To  this  purpose — (1)  We  must  have 
a  sincere  faith.  (2)  We  must  have  a  sincere  resolution  of  obedience.  (3)  Have 
a  daily  recourse  to  this  Advocate  and  advocacy.  3.  Let  our  affections  be  in 
heaven  with  our  Advocate.  (4)  Glorify  and  love  this  Advocate.  (Bishop  Racket.) 
Man's  advocate  xvith  the  Father : — 1.  Advocates  amongst  men  frequently  deny  the 
allegation  brought  against  their  clients,  but  Christ  admits  the  charge   brought 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  77 

against  humanity.  2.  Advocates  amongst  men,  if  they  admit  the  charge, 
frequently  seek  to  justify  it.  Sometimes  they  set  up  the  plea  of  ignorance,  or 
accident,  or  self-defence.  But  Christ  pleads  no  palliation.  3.  Advocates  amongst 
men  undertake  their  work,  not  from  the  love  of  justice  or  humanity,  but  from 
personal  considerations.  4.  Advocates  amongst  men  seek  to  influence  the  mind  of 
the  adjudicating  parties.  But  Christ  seeks  to  influence  the  accused.  The  great  Judge 
cannot  and  need  not  be  influenced.  In  what  respects,  then,  can  Chiist  be  called  an 
advocate  ?  I.  He  is  an  advocate  inasmuch  as  He  is  a  helper  of  the  accused.  II. 
He  is  an  advocate  inasmuch  as  He  is  a  governmentallt  recognised  functionary. 
The  great  Governor  of  the  universe  has  appointed  Christ  to  the  work.  He  occupies 
His  position  by  a  Divine  right.  HI.  He  is  an  advocate  inasmuch  as  He  seeks 
TO  deliver  the  accused  in  a  WAT  HONOURABLE  TO  LAW.  Christ  Undertakes  two 
things  : — 1.  That  if  the  sinner  is  delivered  no  wrong  shall  be  done  to  the  universe. 
2.  He  pledges  that  if  the  sinner  is  delivered  his  life  shall  henceforth  be  holy. 
(D.    Thomas,   D.D.)  Chrisfs   acquaintance   with  man's   case  : — Many   a   man 

whose  friends  have  long  defended  him  against  an  adverse  opinion  has  lost  all  that 
defensive  sympathy  as  soon  as  the  facts  of  his  case  became  fully  known.  It  has 
happened  before  now,  even  in  forensic  history,  that  an  advocate  has  felt  forced  to 
relinquish  his  brief  in  consequence  of  some  unexpected  disclosure  that  made 
proceeding  with  the  case  a  course  that  would  hurt  his  self-respect  or  compromise 
Ms  reputation.  Secrets  have  come  to  light  in  the  life  of  a  child  that  have  silenced 
even  a  mother's  advocacy,  and  made  love  itself  confess  that  it  had  no  more  to  say. 
But  you  never  need  fear  that  for  reasons  like  these  Christ  will  abandon  your  cause 
or  faU  in  your  defence.  Before  you  confide  to  Him  a  single  secret  His  acquaint- 
ance with  your  whole  life  is  intimate  and  perfect.  (C.  Stanford.)  And  He  is  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins;  and  not  for  ours  only. — Christ  our  propitiation: — 
The  propitiation  made  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the 
whole  system  of  Christianity,  so  that  a  weakness  there  involves  a  weakness  every- 
where. I.  By  propitiation  is  meant  the  complete  satisfaction  of  the  claims  of 
the  law  on  the  sinner  by  the  infliction  of  the  law's  penalty  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  sinner's  substitute ;  and  our  first  business  will  be  to  consider  the 
principle  in  which  the  whole  originates.  This  principle  is,  that  the  authority  of  law 
must  be  maintained  by  the  lawgiver,  and  that  when  the  law  has  been  broken  the 
sentence  of  the  law  must  be  carried  into  effect  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  3).  But  if  law  is 
maintained  it  will  lead  in  many  cases  to  a  conflict  between  law  and  love.  There 
must  have  been  just  such  a  conflict  in  the  mind  of  Brutus  when  his  sons  were 
convicted  of  conspiracy  against  the  republic.  In  that  case  law  said  they  must  die, 
but  love  must  have  said,  "  Let  them  Uve."  Law  said,  "  Condemn,"  and  love  must 
have  said,  "  Have  mercy."  We  have  a  similar  illustration  of  this  conflict  between  law 
and  love  in  the  case  of  David.  When  Absalom  had  murdered  his  brother  Amnon,  he 
fled  to  Geshur,  and  there  remained  for  three  years  in  banishment.  "  The  soul  of  King 
David  longed,"  or  "  was  consumed,"  "  to  go  forth  unto  Absalom."  Love,  therefore, 
would  have  restored  him,  but  law  forbade  his  restoration.  David  was  king,  and  there- 
fore responsible  for  the  administration  of  law.  He  was  compelled,  therefore,  to  keep 
Absalom  in  banishment  at  the  very  time  that  his  own  soul  was  consumed  by  the 
tender  love  he  felt  towards  him.  Now,  cannot  we  beheve  in  exactly  the  same 
conflict  between  law  and  love  in  the  mind  of  a  perfectly  holy  God  ?  There  is  in 
Him  a  righteousness  infinitely  more  righteous,  and  a  love  infinitely  more  tender, 
than  was  ever  known  in  man  ;  and  can  any  one  be  surprised  either  that  His  law 
cannot  be  set  aside,  or  that  His  love  yearns  over  the  sinner  even  at  the  very  time 
that  He  passes  His  own  just  sentence  on  the  sin  ?  People  speak  of  the  punishment 
of  sin  as  if  it  were  cruel  and  vindictive ;  but  it  may  be  a  stern  necessity  imposed  on 
a  tender  heart  by  the  righteous  claims  of  a  violated  law.  Now,  then,  we  are 
brought  face  to  face  with  the  great  difficulty  that  has  called  forth  the  gospel,  viz.  this : 
In  what  way  can  the  law  be  vindicated,  and  yet  the  sinner  who  has  broken  it  be 
saved  ?  There  is  a  very  remarkable  passage  in  the  words  of  the  woman  of  Tekoah, 
when  she  went  to  David  respecting  the  restoration  of  Absalom,  in  which  she  said  of 
God,  God  does  not  "respect  any  person:  yet  doth  He  devise  means,  that  His 
banished  be  not  expelled  from  Him"  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14).  According  to  that  state- 
ment, He  shows  no  partiaUty  ;  but  yet  without  partiaUty  He  has  contrived  a  plan  by 
which  the  offender  may  be  forgiven.  What,  then,  is  this  plan?  This  plan  is 
propitiation.  It  is  none  other  than  that  proposed  by  Judah,  when,  having  under- 
taken to  be  surety  for  Benjamin,  he  said  to  Joseph  (Gen.  xliv.  33),  "Now  therefore, 
I  pray  thee,  let  thy  servant  abide  instead  of  the  lad  a  bondman  to  my  lord ;  and  let 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  lad  go  up  with  his  brethren."  His  proposal  was  that  there  should  be  an  act  of 
substitution.  So,  in  His  boundless  grace  and  mercy,  our  righteous  God  gave  the 
Son  to  be  bondsman  in  our  place,  and  the  Son  accepted  the  suretyship  and 
suffered.  Thus  the  law  has  been  vindicated  and  the  sin  punished,  while  at 
the  same  time  the  love  is  satisfied  and  the  sinner  set  free.  This  is  what  is 
meant  by  propitiation  (Rom.  iii.  26).  I  am,  of  course,  perfectly  aware  that 
there  are  those  who  reject  this  doctrine  of  substitution,  and  others  who,  while 
they  accept  it,  see  in  it  difficulties  which  they  find  it  hard  to  explain.  This 
is  the  one  Divine  plan  which  is  taught  throughout  the  Scriptures.  It  was  prefigured 
in  type  as  in  all  the  sacrifices  of  the  Levitical  typical  system ;  and  pre-eminently 
in  the  type,  of  the  scapegoat  (Lev.  xvi.  21).  It  was  predicted  in  prophecy,  as,  for 
example,  by  Isaiah  (Isa.  liii.  6).  So  it  was  taught  by  the  apostles  (Gal.  iii.  13; 
1  Pet.  iii.  18;  1  John  iv.  10).  And,  above  all,  by  the  mysterious  conduct  of  our 
Lord  Himself  as  His  death  was  drawing  near,  which,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm, 
can  be  explained  on  no  other  supposition.     II.  This,  then,   being  the  principle, 

THEKE  AEE  THEEE  GREAT  CONCLUDING  TRUTHS  TO  BE  FOR  EVER  WRITTEN  ON  OUR 

MEMORIES  AND  HEARTS.  1.  The  Divine  propitiation  is  complete.  The  whole  and 
every  part  is  completed  for  ever.  In  the  typical  sacrifices  there  were  two  parts  in 
each  typical  propitiation — the  death  of  the  substitute,  and  the  offering,  or  presenta- 
tion, of  the  blood  before  one  of  the  altars,  or  the  mercy-seat.  The  atonement  was 
not  completed  by  the  death  alone,  but  it  was  necessary  that  the  death  should  be 
followed  up  by  the  presentation  of  the  blood.  Now,  in  the  Divine  propitiation  both 
parts  have  been  completed.  The  one  sacrifice  has  been  once  offered,  and  the  whole 
is  finished.  The  blood  was  shed  on  Calvary,  and  sprinkled  or  presented,  when  "  by 
His  own  blood  He  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us  "  (Heb.  ix.  25,  26).  The  death  and  the  offering  were  two  parts 
of  the  one  transaction,  and  the  whole  of  that  transaction  was  complete  when  He 
rose  from  the  dead,  and  was  accepted  as  the  beloved  Son  completely  free  from  the 
killing  guilt  of  imputed  sin.  2.  The  Divine  propitiation  is  final.  If  there  were 
the  possibility  of  any  repetition,  there  is  no  room  left  for  it.  "  Where  remission  of 
these  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin"  (Heb.  x.  18).  If,  therefore,  remission  is 
granted  according  to  the  covenant  of  God,  if  we  are  enjoying  His  promise,  "  their 
sins  and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more,"  and  if,  according  to  verse  14, 
"by  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified,"  what  place  is 
there  for  any  further  propitiatory  offering  of  any  kind  whatever  ?  Who  can  perfect 
that  which  God  has  already  perfected  ?  3.  And  this  brings  me  to  my  last  point — 
the  Divine  propitiation  is  sufficient.  By  this  I  mean  that  it  is  so  complete  and 
perfect  in  the  covenant  of  God  that  those  who  are  saved  by  it  are  made  partakers 
of  a  complete  reconciliation.  There  are  many  persons  who  appear  to  be  satisfied 
with  what  I  may  call  a  partial  reconciliation.  They  dare  not  accept  the  position  of 
one  whose  every  sin  has  been  blotted  out,  and  to  whom  there  is  no  barrier  in  the  way 
of  a  full,  free,  unfettered  enjoyment  of  the  love  of  God.  They  are  not  unlike 
Absalom  when  he  returned  from  Geshur  and  remained  three  years  at  Jerusalem 
without  being  permitted  to  see  his  father's  face.  They  are  not  as  he  was  when  in 
Geshur,  for  they  are  in  the  midst  of  religious  life  as  he  was  in  Jerusalem,  but  they 
are  not  fully  restored.  The  result  is  that  their  religion  is  one  of  little  more  than 
anxiety,  and  they  begin  to  think  that  it  was  almost  better  with  them  when  they 
were  altogether  in  the  world.  But  this  is  not  the  result  of  an  all-sufficient  Divine 
propitiation.  There  is  nothing  in  this  half-and-half  character  in  our  Heavenly 
Father's  provision  for  us.  The  veil  of  separation  has  been  rent  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom,  and  as  the  curse  of  all  sin  has  been  completely  and  for  ever  borne,  it  is  the 
privilege  of  every  soul  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  to  approach  the  mercy-seat  of  our 
most  holy  God  with  the  same  peaceful,  loving,  filial  trust  that  he  would  have  felt 
if  he  had  never  known  sin.  {E.  Hoare,  M.A.)  Propitiation  for  sin  : — I.  Thb 
NEED  OF  PROPITIATION.  To  propitiate  is  to  turn  away  wrath.  We  would  rather  not 
think  of  the  wrath  of  God,  but  "propitiation"  has  no  meaning  unless  the  wrath 
of  God  be  real.  Hardly  anything  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  an  inadequate  sense 
of  sin  and  its  desert.  If  we  ask  how  God's  wrath  utters  itself,  we  may  venture  to 
reply.  In  His  separation  from  the  sinner.  Can  anything  be  worse  than  that?  can 
"  outer  darkness  "  exceed  what  it  is  for  a  soul  to  be  left  with  its  sins  cut  off  from 
God  ?  But  why  propitiation  ?  If  a  parent  can  lay  aside  his  anger  merely  on  the 
child's  contrition,  cannot  God  ?  That  is  not  a  correct  statement  of  the  case. 
God  has  said  that  sin  is  such  an  evil  that  He  cannot  pass  it  by  without  penalty ;  if 
a  parent  has  so  said  of  the  child's  fault,  the  question  is  not  whether  he  can  pass  it 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  79 

by  without  penalty,  but  whether  he  ought  to.  Divine  love  would  deserve  no 
reverence  did  it  ignore  righteousness.  II.  The  propitiation  pbovided.  1.  This 
is  a  propitiation  provided  and  made  by  God  Himself.  It  was  no  laying  our  sin  on 
another,  it  was  the  taking  it  upon  Himself.  2.  This  propitiation  is  by  the  substi- 
tutionary offering  of  God  the  Son.  3.  This  propitiation  is  sufficient  for  the  sins  of 
the  world.  We  cannot  doubt  that  if  we  remember  by  whom  it  was  made.  III. 
The  propitiation  made  use  of.  Propitiation  does  not  save :  it  makes  it  possible 
for  God.  Propitiation  removes  the  hindrance  to  the  prodigal  son  going  home,  and 
when  he  says  "  I  wiU  arise  and  go  to  my  Father,"  Faith  is  the  going.  The  end  of 
it,  therefore,  is  the  filial  relationship  fulfilled,  and  that  is  salvation.  (C.  New.) 
The  propitiation  of  Christ  : — I.  The  propitiation  of  Christ  was  Divine  in  its 
provision  and  appointment.  The  full  meaning  of  the  expression  may  be  thus 
brought  out:  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous  is  the  propitiator  who  has  made  propitia- 
tion for  our  sins.  For  Christ  is  at  once  the  selected  victim,  the  sacrifice  offered, 
the  sacrificing  priest,  the  altar  on  which  the  sacrifice  was  offered,  and  the  propitia- 
tion made  for  sin.  II.  Vicarious  in  its  nature.  He  is  the  propitiator  who  has 
made  propitiation  "for  our  sins."  "  He  is  Jesus  Christ  the  Eighteous " — not  the 
innocent  merely.  HI.  Propitiatory  in  its  offering.  The  oflfice  of  a  propitiator, 
like  that  of  a  mediator,  of  which  it  is  the  foundation  or  groundwork,  is  to  produce 
a  state  of  reconciliation  between  parties  at  variance,  by  removing  the  cause  of 
offence,  propitiating  the  offended,  and  thus  opening  a  way  for  a  real  and  lasting 
reconciliation.  .By  the  constitution  of  His  person  He  was  weU  qualified  to  act  as 
"  daysman  betwixt  us,  and  to  lay  His  hand  upon  us  both."  IV.  Universal  in 
EXTENT.  1.  Suited  to  the  whole  world.  "  The  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness," 
says  John,  and  therefore  the  whole  world  needs  a  propitiation  for  its  wickedness. 
And  the  propitiation  made  is  suited  to  its  needs.  For  it  was  made  in  the  nature 
which  had  sinned  in  this  world.  2.  Sufficient  for  the  whole  world.  The  proof  of 
this  is  not  far  to  seek.  John  himself  furnishes  it  when  he  says,  "The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  The  blood  shed  was  indeed  human, 
but  the  person  of  His  Son  was  Divine.  It  is  an  adequate  "  ransom  for  all,"  a 
sufficient  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  No  other  and  no  grep+cr 
sacrifice  would  have  been  required  to  secure  the  salvation  of  all  men.  3.  Available 
for  the  whole  world.  V.  Unchanging  in  its  efficacy.  It  has  lost  none  of  its 
value  and  its  virtue  by  the  lapse  of  time,  the  course  of  ages,  the  change  of  customs, 
the  vicissitudes  of  nations,  or  by  the  ignorance  and  neglect,  the  arts,  the  dis- 
coveries, the  inventions,  and  the  advancement  of  mankind.  This  subject  shows  to 
us — 1.  The  manifestation  of  God's  love  to  the  world.  2.  The  foundation  of  the 
world's  hope  toward  God.  3.  The  cause  of  the  believer's  life.  Christ  died  that  we 
might  live — Uve  by  Him  and  for  Him.  [George  Robson.)  Insufficiency  of  the 
subjective  view  of  the  atonement  : — 1.  If  the  Cross  was  nothing  more  than  the 
revelation  of  God's  love,  the  power  of  the  Cross  was  manifestly  limited  to  those 
who  knew  of  it.  This  surely  could  not  be  called  a  "larger  view."  Rather  it 
belittled  the  Cross  and  limited  its  power.  There  were  men  and  women  who  lived 
before  Christ  came ;  had  they  no  share  in  the  Cross  ?  There  were  millions  of 
heathen  in  the  world ;  were  they  untouched  by  the  passion  of  God  ?  There  were 
unbelievers  around,  some  willing,  some  unwilling ;  were  they  all  quite  shut  out 
from  the  Cross  because  they  knew  not  the  love  revealed?  "I  beheld,  and  lo  a 
Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  The  Cross  was  in  heaven  as  well  as  upon  earth.  It 
touched  God  as  well  as  man ;  it  had  a  meaning  and  a  blessing  for  every  human 
soul.  2.  The  subjective  view  failed  to  explain  the  whole  ritual  of  the  Jewish 
sacrifices.  3.  It  failed  to  explain  terms  and  phrases  of  very  frequent  occurrence  in 
the  New  Testament,  such  as  "  reconciliation,"  "  peace  by  the  blood  of  His  Cross," 
"  saved  from  wrath,"  &c.  To  say  that  Evangelical  Christians  put  a  heathen 
meaning  into  these  terms  and  phrases,  they  would  naturally  ask  how  it  came  to  pass 
that  inspired  men  were  allowed  to  use  words  that  would  so  easily  slip  into  heathen 
meanings.  The  words  were  misleading  if  the  atonement  was  not  a  power  on  God 
as  well  as  on  man.  4.  The  subjective  theory  failed  to  satisfy  the  nature  of  man. 
Man  had  a  conscience  as  well  as  a  heart.  A  clergyman  of  Norfolk,  once  a 
Unitarian  minister,  said  he  should  never  forget  his  experience  as  he  stood  one  day 
by  the  death-bed  of  a  poor,  wretched  man  in  a  workhouse.  He  had  just  come  to 
see  that  the  Cross  meant  more  than  he  had  previously  thought,  "and  for  the  first 
time  in  his  life  he  had  a  plea  for  the  awakened  conscience."  Nothing  can  satisfy 
the  moral  nature  that  does  not  meet  God's  love  of  righteousness.  (G.  S.  Barrett, 
D.D.)         Is  there  a  doctrine  of  the  atonement  in  Scripture  ? — For  my  own  part  I 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

have  no  doubt  the  New  Testament  does  contain  a  theory,  or,  as  I  should  prefer  to 
say,  a  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  The  work  of  Christ  in  relation  to  sin  is  not 
a  naked  fact,  an  impenetrable,  unintelligible  fact ;  it  is,  in  the  New  Testament,  a 
luminous,  interpretable,  and  interpreted  fact.  The  love  of  Christ,  says  St.  Paul, 
constraineth  us,  because  we  thus  judge  ;  i.e.,  because  we  can  and  do  put  a  certain 
intellectual    construction    upon  it.     (James    Denney,  D.D.)  The  propitiation 

intelligible : — An  absolutely  unintelligible  fact,  to  an  intelligent  being,  is  exactly 
equivalent  to  zero.  (Ibid.)  Redemption  for  the  whole  world  : — When  in  London 
I  like  to  visit  one  of  the  great  hospitals,  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  over  its  gates 
these  generous  words,  "Eoyal  Free  Hospital,  strangers,  foreigners,  &c.,  may  freely 
partake  of  the  benefits  of  this  hospital."  When  I  see  "  et  cetera,"  I  thank  God, 
and  I  am  delighted  that  there  is  one  institution  in  our  land  that  welcomes  the 
"etcetera."  It  means,  "and  the  rest,"  the  anybody  and  everybody  of  mankind. 
Likewise  this  healing  power  of  the  Cross  of  Jesus  is  for  the  "  et  cetera."  The  saving 
power  of  the  Cross  is  for  aU  sick  people  who  want  to  be  healed.  [W.  Birch.) 
For  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  : — When  John  Elias  was  preaching  at  an  association 
meeting  at  Llangefni  to  five  or  six  thousand  people  from  1  John  ii.  2,  he,  as  a  high 
Calvinist,  and  partly  for  an  oratorical  purpose,  laid  great  stress  on  the  pronoun  "  our" 
— "  our  sins  1 "  "  and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,"  repeating  the  word  again 
and  again.  Catherine  Rondol,  a  peculiar  and  eccentric  Welsh  woman,  impatient 
at  his  not  quoting  the  whole  verse,  shouted  out,  "  Yes,  Elias,  and  not  for  ours 
only,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  1  "  There  is  no  need  to  say  that  EUas 
had  no  chance  with  the  audience  after  that  remark  of  Catherine's.  (Sword  and 
Trowel.)  Man  lives  in  a  redeemed  world: — Christ  "is  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole  world."  It  is  not  merely 
that  He  will  be,  if  you  repent  and  believe ;  He  is  so  already.  Apart  from  your 
choice,  Christ  is  the  propitiation  for  your  sin.  We  are  not,  therefore,  born 
into  a  lost  world  —  but  into  a  world  redeemed  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of 
Man,  who  is  also  the  Son  of  God.     (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  3-5.  And  hereby  we  know  that  we  do  know  Him,  if  we  keep  His  commandments. 

— The  guileless  spirit  realising  through  obedience  the  knowledge  of  God  as  the  means  of. 
being  and  abiding  in  God  : — This  is  a  more  literal  explanation  of  the  Divine  fellow- 
ship, considered  as  a  fellowship  of  hght,  than  has  been  given  before.  The  light 
which  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  fellowship,  or  the  medium  of  vision  and  sympathy 
through  which  it  is  realised,  is  the  light  of  knowledge,  the  light  of  the  knowledge 
of  God.  For  the  fellowship  is  intelligent  as  weU  as  holy — intelligent  that  it  may 
be  holy.  I.  Theee  were  those  in  John's  day  who  aefected  to  know  God  very 
deeply  and  intimately,  in  a  very  subtle  and  transcendental  way.  And  through  this 
knowledge  of  Him  they  professed  to  aspire  to  a  participation  of  His  godhead ;  their 
souls  or  spiritual  essences  being  themselves  effluences  and  emanations  of  His 
essence ;  and  being,  therefore,  along  with  all  other  such  effluences  or  emanations, 
ultimately  embraced  in  the  Deity  of  which  they  formed  part.  So  they  "  knew 
God."  But  how  did  they  know  that  they  knew  Him  ?  Was  it  because  they  kept 
His  commandments  ?  Nay,  their  very  boast  was  that  they  knew  God  so  well  as  to 
be  raised  far  above  that  commonplace  keeping  of  the  commandments  which  might 
do  for  the  uninitiated,  but  for  which  they  had  neither  time  nor  taste.  John 
denounces  strongly  their  impious  pretence.  To  affect  any  knowledge  of  God  that 
is  not  to  be  itself  known  and  ascertained  by  the  keeping  of  His  commandments  is 
to  be  false  to  the  heart's  core.  God  is  knpwn  in  Christ.  And  how  may  I  know 
that  I  do  really  know  Him  thus  ?  How  otherwise  than  by  my  keeping  His  command- 
ments ?  For  this  knowledge  is  intensely  practical,  not  theoretic  and  speculative. 
Is  my  proud  will  subdued  and  my  independent  spu  i,  broken  ?  Moved  and  melted 
by  what  I  know  of  God,  do  I,  as  if  instinctively,  cry,  "  Lord,  what  wouldst  Thou 
have  me  to  do  ?  "  Then,  to  me,  this  word  is  indeed  a  precious  word  in  season  ; 
'  hereby  we  do  know  that  we  know  Him,  if  we  keep  His  commandments  "  (ver.  3). 
II.  For  while  "  he  that  saith,  I  know  Him,  and  keepeth  not  His  commandments,  is 
a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him  "  (ver.  4) ;  "  whoso  keepeth  His  word,  in  him 
VERILY  is  the  LOVE  OF  GoD  PERFECTED"  (vcr.  5).  The  change  of  expression  here  is 
surely  meant  to  be  significant.  The  keeping  of  His  word  is,  as  it  were,  the  con- 
centrated and  condensed  spirit  and  essence  of  the  keeping  of  His  commandments. 
The  knowing  ones  stigmatised  as  liars  pretended  to  know  God,  not  as  speaking,  but 
simply  as  being ;  not  by  communication  from  Him,  but  by  insight  into  Him ;  not 
by  His  word,  but  by  their  own  wisdom.    But  you  know  Him  by  His  word.    And 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  81 

that  word  of  His,  when  you  keep  it,  perfects  the  good  understanding,  the  covenant 
of  love,  between  Him  and  you.  III.  And  thus  "  we  know  that  we  aee  in  Him  " 
(ver.  5).  This,  as  it  would  seem,  is  the  crown  and  consummation  of  aU.  First,  to 
be  in  Him ;  in  a  God  whom  we  know,  and  between  whom  and  us  there  is  a  real 
and  perfect  covenant  of  peace  and  love — that  must  be  an  attainment  worth  while 
for  us  to  realise  ;  worth  while  for  us  to  know  or  be  sure  that  we  reaUse.  But  it  is 
rather  what  on  our  part  this  phrase  implies  that  we  are  here  led  to  consider.  What 
insight !  What  sympathy !  What  entering  into  His  rest !  What  entering  into 
His  working  too  !  What  a  fellowship  of  light !  We  are  in  Him  !  We  are  in  His 
mind.  I  would  be  so  in  Him  that  there  should  be,  as  it  were,  but  one  mind 
between  us.  Oh  to  be  thus  in  God,  of  one  mind  with  God  !  We  are  in  His  heart. 
He  lets  us  into  His  heart — that  great  heart  of  the  everlasting  Father  so  warmly  and 
widely  opened  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  And  therefore,  secondly,  to  know  that  we 
are  thus  iu  God  cannot  but  be  a  matter  of  much  concern.  Who,  on  such  a  point, 
would  run  the  risk  of  self-deception — nay,  of  being  found  "  a  har,  not  having  the 
truth  in  him "  ?  How  am  I  at  once  to  aim  at  being  in  Him,  more  and  more 
thoroughly  and  unequivocally,  and  also  to  aim  at  verifying  more  and  more  satis- 
factorily and  surely  my  being  in  Him  ?  For  these  two  aims  must  go  together ; 
they  are  one.  Keep  His  word,  is  the  reply.  [B.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Doing  and 
knowing  : — It  is  a  curious  phrase,  "  we  do  know  that  we  know  Him."  But  it  is  a 
familiar  one  to  us  in  other  apphcations.  I  say  to  a  friend,  "  Are  you  sure  that  you 
know  that  man  ?  You  see  him,  perhaps,  every  day  ;  you  work  with  him ;  you  talk 
with  him.  But  do  you  know  that  you  know  him?  Have  you  got  any  real  insight 
into  his  character  ?  "  Sometimes  the  answer  is  quite  confident.  "I  am  certain 
that  he  is,  or  that  he  is  not,  an  honest,  or  a  kind,  or  a  wise  man."  And  yet  it  may 
not  inspire  us  with  confidence.  We  may  say  or  we  may  think,  "  You  are  deceived 
in  that  man."  But  now  and  then  one  has  a  strong  conviction  that  a  friend  does 
imderstand  the  man  we  are  asking  him  about,  does  appreciate  him.  Now  St.  John 
assumes  that  the  knowledge  of  God  is  as  possible,  is  as  real  for  human  beings,  as 
any  knowledge  they  can  have  of  each  other.  Nay,  he  goes  farther  than  this. 
There  are  impediments  to  our  knowledge  of  each  other,  which  he  says  do  not  exist 
with  reference  to  that  higher  knowledge.  There  is  an  uncertainty,  a  capricious- 
ness,  a  mixture  of  darkness  with  light,  in  every  human  being,  which  make  us 
hesitate  a  httle,  even  when  we  think  he  has  given  us  the  clearest  evidence  of  what 
he  is.  We  may  know  that  we  know  Him  if  we  keep  His  commandments.  I  some- 
times suspect  that  we  give  too  loose  a  sense  to  that  word  "keep."  No  doubt  it 
means  to  "  obey  "  ;  it  does  not  mean  more  than  that,  for  obedience  is  very  com- 
prehensive. The  word  "  keep,"  if  we  consider  it,  may  help  us  to  know  what 
obedience  is,  and  what  it  is  not.  A  friend  gives  me  a  token  to  keep  for  him ;  he 
■wishes  that  it  should  remind  me  of  him,  that  it  should  recall  days  which  we  have- 
spent  together.  Perhaps  it  may  be  only  a  flower  or  a  weed  that  was  gathered  in  a 
certain  place  where  we  were  walking  or  botanising ;  perhaps  it  is  something 
precious  in  itself.  If  instead  of  giving  me  anything  he  enjoins  me  to  do  a  certain 
act,  or  not  to  do  a  certain  act,  I  may  be  said  as  truly  to  keep  that  injunction  as  to 
keep  the  flower.  To  fulfil  it  is  to  remember  him  ;  it  is  a  token  of  my  fellowship  ta 
him,  of  my  relation  with  him.  "  He  that  saith,  I  know  Him,  and  keepeth  not  His 
commandments,  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him."  The  apostle  uses  strong 
language,  for  this  lie  was  spreading  in  the  Church  of  his  own  day,  and  would 
spread,  he  knew,  further  and  further  in  the  times  that  were  coming.  There  were 
many  in  that  time  who  used  this  very  phrase,  "  We  know  God,"  and  used  it  for  the 
purpose  of  self-exaltation ;  therefore  for  an  immoral,  destructive  purpose.  "  There- 
are  a  set  of  common  Christians,"  they  said,  "  vulgar  people,  who  may  learn  certain, 
lower  lessons  ;  they  are  capable  of  nothing  better.  The  law  is  very  good  for  them. 
But  we  can  enter  into  the  Divine  mysteries ;  we  can  have  the  most  magnificent 
conceptions  about  the  spiritual  world  which  Christ  has  opened.  What  are  the- 
commandments — what  is  common  earthly  morality — to  us  ?  "  "I  tell  you,"  says 
St.  John,  broadly  and  simply,  "  that  if  they  are  nothing  to  you,  God  is  nothing  to 
you.  You  may  use  what  fine  language  you  wiU  ;  you  may  have  what  fine  specula- 
tions you  Uke  ;  but  it  is  in  practice,  in  the  struggle  with  temptation  which  besets  us 
all  in  different  ways  and  forms,  that  we  come  to  know  Him  ;  thus,  and  only  thus." 
And  he  adds  words  which,  if  understood  rightly,  were  even  more  crushing  to  the 
pride  of  these  haughty  men  than  those  which  were  aimed  at  themselves.  "  But 
whoso  keepeth  His  word,  in  him  verily  the  love  of  God  is  perfected ;  hereby  know 
"we  that  we  are  in  Him."     As  if  he  had  said,  "You  talk  about  the  perfect,  the 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

initiated  man,  and  the  mere  beginners  or  novices.  I  will  teU  you  who  is  the  perfect 
or  initiated  man.  Look  at  that  poor  creature  who  is  studying  hard,  in  the  midst  of 
all  opposition  from  his  own  ignorance,  to  be  right  and  to  do  right ;  who  is  trying  to 
hold  fast  that  word  which  is  speaking  to  him  in  his  heart,  though  he  can  form  no 
high  notions  at  all  about  things  in  earth  or  heaven.  There  is  the  initiated  man ; 
he  is  the  one  who  is  learning  the  perfect  lore ;  for  God's  own  love  is  working  in 
him ;  God's  own  love  is  perfecting  itself  in  him.  He  is  keeping  the  command- 
ments, and  they  are  teaching  him  that  in  himself  he  is  nothing ;  that  in  God  he 
has  everything  that  he  wants."  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  great  change  and 
its  evidences  : — I.  The  great  change  is  desckibed.  For  this  purpose  three  phrases 
are  used  by  the  apostle  in  verses  3  to  6.  1.  "We  know  Him."  Knowledge  is  the 
result  of  observation  and  experience.  It  implies  certainty.  We  know  that  bread  is 
nutritive,  because  we  have  eaten  it  and  found  it  to  be  so.  We  know  that  honey  is 
sweet,  because  we  have  tasted  it.  Now  this  is  precisely  the  force  of  the  term  when 
we  speak  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  Hence  it  is  that  we  know  His  power,  for  we 
have  proved  it ;  His  wisdom,  for  we  have  been  guided  by  it ;  His  love,  for  we  have 
enjoyed  it ;  and  we  know  His  truth,  for  we  have  ever  found  Him  faithful.  How 
thankful  we  should  be  this  is  the  nature  of  true  religion.  It  is  not  a  speculation 
about  which  there  is  uncertainty.  It  is  not  a  doubtful  opinion.  It  is  a  reaUty  of 
which  we  may  have  experience.  They  who  have  attained  to  it  may  say,  "  We  Imow 
Him."  2.  "We  are  in  Him."  This  expression  brings  us  into  still  closer  com- 
munion with  Christ.  Not  only  are  we  brought  to  Him,  to  converse  with  Him,  but 
we  are  made  to  dwell  in  Him.  This  union  of  the  believer  with  Christ  is  the  source 
of  all  the  blessings  of  which  he  becomes  the  partaker  by  the  knowledge  of  Him.  3. 
"  He  abideth  in  Him."  Had  Noah  left  the  ark  while  the  deluge  continued,  he  must 
have  perished.  If  the  man-slayer  went  out  of  the  city  of  refuge,  it  was  at  the 
hazard  of  his  life.  When  Shimei  violated  his  pledge  to  Solomon,  and  passed 
beyond  the  bounds  of  Jerusalem,  he  brought  upon  himself  the  sentence  of  death. 
And  so  with  the  believer  it  is  essential  to  his  safety  that  he  shall  abide  in  Christ. 
How  forcibly  is  this  lesson  taught  by  our  Lord  Himself  (John  xv.  4,  5).  11.  The 
evidences  of  this  gbacious  state.  These  are  equally  clear  with  the  description  of 
that  state.  And  it  is  observable  that  each  feature  in  the  description  is  accompanied 
by  a  corresponding  evidence.  The  variety  of  the  evidence  is  a  testimony  to  the 
supreme  importance  of  the  inquiry.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  faithfully 
examine  ourselves  by  it.  1.  "  If  we  keep  His  commandments."  "  By  their  fruits 
ye  shall  know  them."  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments."  He  taught  us 
how  His  people  might  be  known  by  others.  Then  in  the  same  way  they  ought  to 
know  themselves.  2.  "  Whoso  keepeth  His  word."  There  is  a  close  and  natural 
connection  between  this  evidence  and  the  former.  The  word  is  the  directory  of  the 
conduct.  Whenever  the  knowledge  of  Christ  has  been  obtained.  His  word  is 
obeyed  exclusively  and  universally.  Exclusively,  for  no  other  authority  is 
admitted.  Universally,  for  whatever  it  forbids  is  avoided,  and  whatever  it  requires 
is  done.  3.  "  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  Him,  ought  to  walk  even  as  He 
walked."  This  evidence  is  the  completion  of  the  two  former.  It  consists  in  the 
imitation  of  the  example  of  Christ.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Our  attitude  towards  the 
commandments  of  God  are  evidence  of  Christian  life : — I.  Oub  attitude  towabds 
THE  COMMANDMENTS  OF  GoD.  "Hereby  know  we  that  we  know  (i.e.,  have  fellow- 
ship with)  Him,  it  we  keep  His  commandments."  A  commandment  is  an  order,  a 
charge,  a  definite  and  authoritative  expression  of  a  superior  will  concerning  some 
particular  detail  of  duty.  There  must  be  no  ambiguity  in  a  commandment — no 
room  for  misunderstanding.  Well,  God  has  expressed  Himself  so  about  many 
things.  Now  let  us  try  our  religion  by  these  commandments.  How  do  these  fare 
at  our  hands?  Do  we  keep  them,  i.e.,  watch,  observe,  take  steps  to  carry  out, 
God's  orders  ?  If  so,  then  we  know  that  we  know  Him.  These  commandments 
are  not  arbitrary  edicts  of  capricious  power.  They  are  the  spontaneous  growths  of 
immaculate  holiness  and  eternal  love.  If  the  commandments  are  no  longer  mere 
bundles  of  dry  roots  packed  away  in  some  dark  corner,  but  are  beginning  to  grow 
in  your  life,  that  is  a  proof  that  you  have  passed  into  a  new  climate  of  being,  and 
that  God's  own  life  has  entered  yours.  You  are  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature. 
"But  he  that  saith,  I  know  Him,  and  keepeth  not  His  commandments" — who 
treats  these  clear,  authoritative  declarations  of  God's  sovereign  will  as  mere  nothing 
— "  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him  "  — not  in  him  anywhere — not  in  him 
at  all.  n.  The  commandments  of  God,  which  abe  so  many  and  so  vabious,  ark 
ALL  gathered  UP  INTO  ONE  WORD.     "  Whoso  kccpcth  His  word,  in  him  verily  hath 


CHIP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  83 

the  love  of  God  been  perfected."  "His  word"  is  the  inner  spiritual  unity  of 
aU  His  commandments.  There  are  many  commandments,  but  one  spirit.  I  once 
saw  two  pieces  of  sculpture  in  a  cathedral.  One  was  the  figure  of  the  Vu'gin  Mary, 
with  the  child  Jesus  in  her  arms,  therefore  a  professedly  sacred  subject.  And 
yet  there  was  nothing  sacred  about  it — it  was  simply  a  piece  of  stone  ;  and  looking 
at  it,  one  felt  nothing  more  sacred  than  a  shudder  at  the  coldness,  deadness,  stoni- 
ness  of  the  thing.  The  other  was  the  figure  of  a  young  mother  asleep  with  her 
firstborn  on  her  breast  in  a  little  side  chapel.  It  was  not  a  conventionally  sacred 
piece — merely  a  figure  on  the  tomb  of  a  dead  young  wife  and  her  babe ;  yet  love 
had  so  informed  the  sculptor's  skill  that  every  line  of  the  figure  seemed  to  live. 
There  was  heart  in  it.  The  work  had  not  been  done  to  order,  nor  for  a  price.  The 
man  who  did  it  was  first  a  husband  and  father,  and  then  a  sculptor.  Well,  there 
is  a  Christianity  with  and  a  Christianity  without  the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Christianity  without  the  heart  of  Jesus  is  the  coldest,  stoniest  thing  that  ever  came 
into  this  poor  world.  Truth  is  means  to  an  end.  The  end  itself  is  love,  and  whoso 
keepeth  not  only  His  commandments  in  their  multitude,  but  also  His  word  in  its 
spiritual  unity,  in  him  only  hath  the  love  of  God  been  perfected.  HI.  Again,  as 
the  many  commandments  are  one  word  in  their  spirit,  so  the  word  became  a  life 
IN  Christ's  example.  That  Life  Beautiful  is  not  placed  before  us  in  the  gospel  to 
be  admired  and  worshipped,  but  to  be  imitated  and  reproduced  in  our  own  lives. 
That  Life  is  our  standard.  IV.  Finally,  as  the  commandments  are  all  summed  up 
in  the  life  of  Christ,  so  that  life  is  summed  up  in  the  love  of  Christ. 
"  Beloved,  no  new  commandment  write  I  unto  you  .  .  .  again  a  new  command- 
ment vnrite  I  unto  you,  which  thing  is  true  in  Him  and  in  you."  The 
mark  he  sets  before  us  is  not  ordinary  love,  everyday  benevolence;  but 
this — this  love  that  summed  up  and  crowned  the  life  of  Christ.  (J.  M.  Gibhon.) 
Sincerity  and  duplicity: — I.  The  knowing  of  Christ.  To  "know"  is  a  word 
used  in  Scripture  in  several  senses.  1.  Sometimes  it  means  to  acknowledge. 
Christ  says  that  His  sheep  "know"  His  voice.  They  acknowledge  His  voice  as 
being  the  voice  of  their  Shepherd,  and  cheerfully  follow  where  their  Shepherd  leads. 
Now,  it  is  a  matter  of  the  first  necessity  to  acknowledge  Christ,  that  He  is  God, 
that  He  is  the  Son  of  the  Father,  that  He  is  the  Saviour  of  His  people,  and  the 
rightful  Monarch  of  the  world — to  acknowledge  more,  that  you  accept  Him  as  your 
Saviour,  as  your  King,  as  your  Prophet,  as  your  Priest.  2.  The  word  "know" 
means,  in  the  next  place,  to  beUeve ;  as  in  that  passage,  "  By  his  knowledge  shall 
My  righteous  servant  justify  many  "  ;  where  it  is  evidently  meant  that  by  the 
knowledge  of  Him,  that  is  to  say,  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  would  justify  many.  3. 
The  word  to  "know"  often  means  experience.  It  is  said  of  our  Lord  that  "He 
knew  no  sin "  ;  that  is  to  say,  He  never  experienced  sin ;  He  never  became  a 
sinner.  To  know  Christ,  then,  we  must  feel  and  prove  His  power.  His  pardoning 
power.  His  power  of  love  over  the  heart,  His  reigning  power  in  subduing  our 
passions.  His  comforting  power.  His  enlightening  power.  His  elevating  power,  and 
all  those  other  blessed  influences  which  through  the  Holy  Spirit  proceed  from 
Christ.  4.  And  once  more,  to  "  know  "  in  Scripture  often  means  to  commune. 
Eliphaz  says,  "Acquaint  thyself  with  God,  be  at  peace  with  Him"  ;  that  is  to  say, 
commune  with  Him,  get  into  friendship  and  fellowship  with  Him.  So  it  is  needful 
that  every  believer  should  know  Christ  by  having  an  acquaintance  with  Him,  by 
speaking  with  Him  in  prayer  and  praise  ;  by  laying  bare  one's  heart  to  His  heart ; 
receiving  from  Him  the  Divine  secret,  and  imparting  to  Him  the  fuU  confession  of 
all  our  sins  and  griefs.  H.  The  two  characters  that  are  portratted  in  the 
TEXT.  With  respect  to  the  one — those  who  know  that  they  know  Him.  Oh,  it  is 
veiy  urgent  that  we  should  know  that  we  know  Him  1  Dost  thou  ask  what  service 
it  would  render  thee  ?  1.  It  would  give  thee  such  comfort  as  nothing  else  could. 
If  I  know  that  I  know  Christ,  then  aU  things  are  mine.  Things  present  and  things 
to  come  are  alike  in  the  covenant  of  grace.  2.  Nor  is  it  joy  alone  you  would  find 
from  this  knowledge ;  it  would  no  less  certainly  bring  you  confidence.  When  a 
man  knows  that  he  knows  Christ  what  confidence  he  has  in  meeting  temptations  t 
"  Shall  such  a  man  as  I  flee?"  What  confidence  in  prayer  1  he  asks  beUevlngly, 
as  children  beloved  ask  of  a  generous  parent.  And  what  a  confident  air  thia 
assurance  before  God  would  give  us  with  the  sons  of  men  !  Our  courage  would  no 
more  fail  us  in  the  pestilential  swamps  of  the  world  than  our  enthusiasm  would 
subside  in  the  fertile  garden  of  the  Church,  knowing  that  we  shall  not  be  ashamed 
nor  confounded  world  without  end.  8.  And  this  certainty  that  you  know  Christ 
would  kindle  in  you  the  very  highest  degree  of  love.    Observe  the  prescription. 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  n. 

"  Hereby  we  know  that  we  do  know  Him  if  we  keep  His  commandments."  It  is  in 
the  keeping  of  His  commandments  that  this  sound  state  of  the  soul's  health  la 
enjoyed.  Do  you  ask  for  further  explanation?  1.  It  means  to  keep  His  com- 
mandments in  our  minds  and  hold  them  fast  in  our  memory  with  devout  reverence. 
If  Christ  hath  said  it  I  dare  not  cavil,  argue,  or  question,  much  less  rebel.  2.  But 
to  keep  them  in  our  hearts  we  must  earnestly  desire  to  fulfil  them.  By  reason  of 
the  fall  we  cannot  perfectly  keep  the  commands  of  Christ,  but  the  heart  keeps  them 
as  the  standard  of  purity,  and  it  would  be  perfect  if  it  could.  The  Christian's  only 
desire  is  to  be  exactly  like  Christ.  III.  A  momentous  chakge  against  dissemblers. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  saying  that  we  know  Christ ;  but  if  any  man  say  that  he 
knows  Christ,  and  keeps  not  His  commandments,  such  a  man  is  a  liar — plain 
speech  this.  Point  out  some  of  those  characters  upon  which  the  brand  must  be 
fixed — they  are  liars.  There  have  been  persons  who  have  professed  their  faith  in 
Christ,  but  who  have  been  in  the  habit  of  acting  dishonestly.  They  have  been 
negotiating  fictitious  bills,  they  have  been  purloining  small  articles  out  of  shops, 
they  have  been  dealing  with  short  weights,  and  selling  wares  with  wrong  marks, 
and  all  this  time  they  have  said  that  they  knew  Christ.  Now,  one  of  His  com- 
mandments is,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  and  another  one  is, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  steal,"  and  in  not  keeping  these  they  have  proved  themselves  to 
be  liars,  though  they  called  themselves  Christians.  Some  who  have  professed  faith 
in  Christ  have  been  drunkards.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  those  who,  while  making 
a  profession  of  religion,  have  been  addicted  to  uncleanness  ?  The  covetous !  the 
grasping  !  those  who  see  their  brethren  have  need,  and  shut  up  the  bowels  of  their 
compassion!  to  each  of  you  the  Master's  words  are  very  strong:  "Howdwelleth 
the  love  of  God  in  him  ?  "  And  are  there  not  others,  whose  tongue  is  perverse  and 
unruly  and  their  conversation  often  far  from  pure  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Theology 
and  morality  : — The  text  suggests  two  thoughts  concerning  morality.  I.  It  is  the 
ONLY  PEOOF  OF  A  TRUE  THEOLOGY.  "  Hereby  wc  do  know  that  we  know  Him,  if  we 
keep  His  commandments."  1.  Obedience  is  the  certain  result  of  a  true  theology. 
To  know  God  is  to  love  Him.  If  we  love  Him  we  shall  keep  His  commandments. 
(1)  Keep  them  heartily.  (2)  Keep  them  joyously.  What  we  do  in  love  we  always  do 
joyously.  2.  Disobedience  is  a  proof  of  a  false  theology.  "He  that  saith,  I 
know  Him,  and  keepeth  not  His  commandments,  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in 
him."  There  is  another  thought  suggested  by  the  text  concerning  morality.  II. 
Its  spirit  is  the  development  of  true  theology.  What  is  the  spirit  of  genuine 
morality  ?  Love.  1.  And  this  love  is  in  the  obedient  man.  2.  And  this  love  in 
him  assures  him  of  his  xmion  with  God.  "  Hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in  Him." 
{Homilist.)  The  saving  knowledge  of  Christ  evinced  by  a  practical  attention  to 
His  commandments  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  saving  knowledge  of  Christ.  1. 
It  is  not  a  mere  speculative  knowledge.  2.  It  is  a  real,  internal,  spiritual  revelation 
or  manifestation  of  Him  to  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  day  of  conversion. 
3.  It  is  the  best  and  most  excellent  that  can  come  within  the  reach  of  man.  4.  It 
is  greatly  inferior  as  to  degree,  and  different  as  to  the  manner  of  knowing,  from 
what  they  will  have  in  heaven.  5.  It  produces  distinguishing  effects — effects  which 
distinguish  it  from  all  other  knowledge.  (1)  It  humbles  those  who  have  it.  (2) 
Such  as  savingly  know  Christ  put  their  trust  in  Him  (2  Tim.  i.  12).  (3)  It  is 
transforming ;  it  changes  behevers  into  His  likeness  (2  Cor.  iii.  18)  in  holiness, 
meekness,  patience,  love,  and  every  other  imitable  perfection.  11.  What  sort  of 
obedience  to  the  commands  of  Christ  is  the  undoubted  evidence  of  the 
SPIRITUAL  SAVING  KNOWLEDGE  OF  HiM  ?  1.  It  is  hearty,  springing  from  love  to 
Christ,  as  the  governing  principle  of  it.  2.  It  is  voluntary.  David  says,  "  I  have 
chosen  Thy  precepts  "  (Psa.  cxix.  173).  3.  It  is  universal.  All  the  commands  of 
Christ  are  respected ;  not  only  those  of  easy  observance.  4.  It  is  constant  and 
persevering.  The  true  servants  of  Christ  obey  Him  in  holiness  and  righteousness 
all  the  days  of  their  lives  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  And  His  command  to  them  is  Eev. 
ii.  10.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Whoso  keepeth  His  word,  in 
him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected. — The  keeping  of  the  Divine  word  : — I. 

The    KEEPING    IS    IN    DIRECT    OPPOSITION    TO    LOSING    IT,    LETTING    IT    ESCAPE    FROM   US. 

II.  The  KEEPING  IT  IMPLIES  A  CARE  TO  RETAIN  IT.  To  retain  it  in  the  under- 
standing, in  the  conscience,  in  the  affections,  and  in  the  practice.  In  what  aspects 
the  word  of  God  so  kept  is  regarded  by  the  Christian.  1.  As  a  law  to  govern  him. 
2.  As  a  revelation  of  the  grace  which  saves  him.  3.  As  a  promise  of  Divine  good- 
ness to  cheer  him.  4.  As  a  pledge  of  eternal  life  to  animate  him.  5.  As  a  means 
of  communion   with  God  to  sanctify  him.     (Homilist.)        The  keeping  of  God't 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  85 

commandments  is  undoubtedly  and  truly  the  perfection  of  our  love  to  God: — I.  What 

IS  HERE  MEANT  BY  PERFECTION?  II.  HoW  DOES  SUCH  A  KEEPING  OF  THE  COM- 
MANDMENT ARGUE  LOVE  TO  BE  PERFECT  ?  1.  There  is  a  perfection  of  all  the  parts  of 
love  in  such  men.  (1)  An  affection  unto  fellowship  with  Christ.  (2)  An  affection 
to  be  doing  good  to  Him.  2.  In  perfection  there  is  a  readiness  to  a  work ;  so  such 
a  man  as  keeps  God's  commandments,  his  love  is  ready,  he  is  forward  to  every 
good  duty,  because  it  is  a  commandment  of  God.  3.  There  is  perfect  love  in  him, 
because  it  is  constant  and  durable  and  will  not  change.     III.  Wherein  does  it 

APPEAR    that    if    I    KEEP    God's    COMMANDMENT    MY    LOVE    IS    PERFECT  ?       1.    FrOm    the 

contrariety  of  our  tempers  naturally  to  any  commandment,  so  that  if  you  see  any 
one  willing  and  ready  to  be  at  God's  command  you  may  say,  certainly  the  love  of 
God  hath  overcome  him.  2.  You  may  know  such  a  man's  love  to  be  perfect  that 
keeps  His  commandments,  because  whatsoever  weak  beginnings  of  love  you  find  in 
such  as  keep  God's  commandments,  that  man's  love  grows  moi-e  perfect  every  day; 
such  a  man  still  grows  in  f ruitfulness ;  he  grows  ready  to  every  good  work  (John 
XV.  2),  so  that  the  love  of  God  is  perfected  in  him  by  obedience.  Uses  :  1.  For  trial 
of  our  love  to  God,  whether  it  be  perfect  or  no,  sincere  or  counterfeit,  how  dost  thou 
find  thy  heart  affected  to  God's  commandments  ?  2.  For  direction  to  all  such  as 
desire  perfection  of  love  to  Christ — keep  His  commandments  ;  take  heed  of  breaking 
any  one  of  them.  3.  Of  consolation  to  all  such  as  apply  themselves  to  be  doing  of 
God's  commandments.  (John  Cotton,  B.D.)  The  love  of  God : — The  simple 
phrase,  "the  love  of  God,"  may  of  course  mean  God's  love  to  man  ;  but  it  may  also 
mean  man's  love  to  God  ;  and  that  we  take  to  be  the  meaning  in  the  text.  For  two 
men  to  be  thus  distinguished  from  each  other,  by  one  having  this  affection  and  the 
other  having  it  not — why,  it  is  a  greater  distinction,  when  you  come  to  think  of  it, 
than  belonging  to  a  different  species  of  being.  I.  It  is  possible  to  love  God. 
Human  nature  has  its  intellect  and  affections,  and  a  capacity  for  reason,  thought, 
and  sentiment.  The  being  that  can  love  one  thing  can  love  another  ;  the  man  that 
loves  a  creature,  a  person  manifested  to  him  in  the  flesh,  may  love  the  infinite 
Person.    II.  Without  love  to   God  you   can  hardly  conceive  of  there  being 

ANYTHING,    IN    HiS    ESTIMATION,    LIKE    MORAL    WORTH    OR    EXCELLENCE    IN    MAN.        Take 

the  case  of  a  family  presided  over  by  a  loving  and  virtuous  parent.  It  is  very 
possible  to  conceive  of  the  children  of  that  family  outwardly  appearing  to  tender 
him  the  expressions  of  filial  obedience  and  respect ;  but  if  they  had  not  a  particle  of 
love  in  their  hearts  to  that  father — if  their  hearts  were  altogether  given  to  some  one 
else,  and  if  there  were  to  come  on  the  parental  heart  the  conviction  that  with  all 
their  displays  of  respect  they  had  not  an  atom  of  love  towards  him,  how  could  there 
be  any  feeling  of  delight  towards  them  in  the  parental  breast  ?  III.  The  love  of 
God  is  not  a  spontaneous  and  instinctive  affection  of  the  human  heart. 
Human  beings  come  into  the  world  with  certain  tendencies,  affections,  and 
sympathies,  and  have  the  affection  of  love  among  the  rest.  I  think  there  is  rather 
a  tendency  in  little  children  to  like  to  hear  about  God,  and  heaven,  and  Jesus  and 
His  influence.  But  human  nature  needs  to  be  operated  upon  from  without ;  there 
must  be  external  instrumentality  in  order  to  the  development  and  manifestation  of 
anything  ;  and  if  you  leave  it  to  itseK  it  will  grow  up  just  a  bundle  of  appetites — a 
brutal,  ferocious,  obscene  thing.  IV.  The  gospel  is  intended  to  excite  and  to 
SUSTAIN  this  affection  IN  MAN.  I  think  we  may  say  here  that  the  thing  to  be 
achieved  has  this  difficulty  about  it ;  it  is  to  be  the  reproduction  of  an  extinguished 
affection.  And  then,  when  the  love  of  God  is  excited,  it  is  to  expand  and  bring 
forth  fruit ;  so  that,  in  accordance  with  the  statement  of  the  text,  the  individual  is 
not  to  be  satisfied  with  the  luxury  of  the  sentiment — he  is  not  to  lose  himself  (as 
some  mystics  have  thought)  in  perpetual  contemplation,  as  though  the  love  of  God 
were  to  be  perfected  in  that  manner.  We  live  in  a  world  of  action,  and  in  which 
the  great  thing  is  to  do  and  act  according  to  the  will  of  God ;  and  if  the  human 
heart  is  brought  into  this  condition,  and  really  loves  God,  then  it  will  seek  to 
perfect  that  love,  by  its  manifestation,  in  keeping  God's  word,  in  doing  whatsoever 
God  willeth.  "  Let  me  have  Thy  word,  and  the  strong  impulse  of  Divine  affection 
shall  be  manifested  and  perfected."  Then  supposing  that  to  be  done,  the  text  says, 
the  result  and  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  is  that  "  hereby  "  the  individual 
"  knows  that  he  is  in  Him  "  ;  that  is,  in  Christ.     (T.  Binney.) 

Ver.  6.  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  Him  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even 
as  He  walked. — llie  Cliristlike  walk  of  one  with  guileless  spint  abiding  in  God: — 
To  "  walk  as  Christ  "  walked  is  essential  to  our  "abiding  in  God  "  ;  not  merely 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

'  •'  being  in  God,"  as  it  is  put  in  the  previous  verse,  but  being  in  Him  permanently. 
It  is  therefore  the  test  of  our  truth  when  we  "  say  that  we  abide  in  God  "  ;  it  is 
the  very  means  by  which  we  abide  in  Him.     I.  It  is  sometimes  said  of  Christ 

SIMPLY  THAT    He  WALKED,  WITHOUT  ANYTHING  TO  DEFINE  OR   QUALIFY   THE    EXPRESSION 

(John  vii.  1 ;  Luke  xiii.  33  ;  John  xii.  9,  10).     Jesus  then  walked.     His  life  was  a 

V  walk.  The  idea  of  earnestness,  of  definiteness  of  purpose,  of  decision  and  progress, 
is  thus  suggested.  Now,  "  he  that  saith  he  abideth  in  God,  ought  himself  also  so  to 
walk  even  as  Jesus  walked."  It  was  as  always  "  abiding  in  God "  that  He 
"  walked."    While  His  feet  were  busy  walking.  His   soul  was  resting   in  God. 

•  Outward  movement,  inward  repose ;  the  whole  man  Christ  Jesus — mind,  spirit, 
heart,  all  bent  upon  the  road ;  and  yet  ever,  at  the  same  time,  the  whole  man 
Christ  Jesus  dwelling  in  the  Father's  bosom,  as  calmly  as  in  that  unbroken  eternity, 
ere  He  became  man.  He  had  been  wont  to  dwell  there :  so  he  walked,  abiding  in 
God.  So  you  also  ought  to  walk  even  as  He  walked,  "  abiding  in  God."  But 
some  one  may  say.  Is  not  this  too  high  an  ideal  ?  Is  it  not  the  setting  up  of  an 
inimitable  model?  Not  so.  For,  first,  He  fully  shares  with  us  whatever  dis- 
advantage as  regards  His  walking,  may  be  implied  in  His  being  a  son  of  man. 
And,  secondly.  He  would  have  us  fully  to  share  with  Him  whatever  advantage 
there  is  in  His  being  the  Son  of  God.  For  both  reasons  our  life  may  be  a3 
much  and  as  truly  a  walk  as  His  was.     H.  Let   some  particulars  about  this 

y  WALK  BE  noticed.  1.  If  we  say  that  "we  abide  in  God,"  we  ought  to  walk 
as  seeing  God  in  all  things  and  all  things  in  God;  for  so  Christ  walked.  2. 
"  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  God "  ought  to  walk  as  one  subordinating  himself 
always  in  all  things  to  God,  submitting  himself  to  God,  committing  himself 
to  God.  3.  "  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  God "  ought  to  walk  in  love.  If 
we  abide  in  God,  we  abide  in  the  great  source  and  fountain  of  love — in  the 
infinite  ocean  of  pure  and  perfect  benevolence.  4.  "  He  that  saith  he  abideth 
in  God  "  ought,  in  a  word,  to  walk  in  unity  with  God,  as  being  of  one  mind  with 
God  and  of  one  heart.    So  Jesus  walked.     {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)        In  Him :  like 

4  Him  : — The  first  thing  about  a  Christian  is  initiation  into  Christ ;  the  next  thing  is 
the  imitation  of  Christ.  We  cannot  be  Christians  unless  we  are  in  Christ ;  and  we 
are  not  truly  in  Christ  unless  the  life  of  Christ  is  lived  over  again  by  us  according 
to  our  measure.  I.  Consider  how  this  obligation  is  proved.  Why  ought  we  to 
walk  as  Jesus  did  ?  1.  First,  it  is  the  design  of  God  that  those  who  are  in  Christ 
should  walk  as  Christ  walked.  It  is  a  part  of  the  original  covenant  purpose ;  for 
"  whom  He  did  foreknow  He  also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
His  Son."  2.  Observe,  again,  another  point  of  this  necessity :  it  is  necessary  to 
the  mystical  Christ  that  we  should  walk  as  He  walked,  for  we  are  joined  unto  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  one  body.  3.  And  this,  again,  must  all  be  the  fruit  of  the  one  Spirit 
that  is  in  Christ  and  in  us.  The  Father  anointed  Christ  of  old  with  the  same 
anointing  which  rests  on  us  in  our  measure.  The  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon 
Him,  and  we  have  an  unction  from  the  same  Holy  One.  4.  I  would  have  true 
Christians  remember  that  this  is  one  article  of  the  agreement  which  we  make  with 
Christ  when  we  become  His  disciples.  We  put  ourselves  into  Christ's  hands 
unreservedly,  and  we  said,  "Lord,  sanctify  me,  and  then  use  me.  Reign  in  me ; 
rule  me  absolutely,  sovereignly,  always  and  alone.  I  do  not  ask  to  be  my  own,  for 
I  am  not  my  own,  I  am  bought  with  a  price."  II.  Consider  wherein  this  walking 
with  Christ  as  He  walked  consists.  1.  To  put  it  all  together  in  one  word, 
',  the  first  thing  that  every  Christian  has  to  see  to  is  holiness.  You  know  what 
wholeness  is — a  thing  without  a  crack,  or  flaw,  or  T)reak ;  complete,  entire, 
uninjured,  whole.  Well,  that  is  the  main  meaning  of  holy.  If  you  wish  to  see 
holiness,  look  at  Christ.  In  Him  you  see  a  perfect  character,  an  all-round 
character.  He  is  the  perfect  one ;  be  ye  like  Him  in  all  holiness.  2.  We  must  go 
a  little  into  detail ;    so  I  say,  next,  one  main  point  in  which  we  ought  to  walk 

■y  according  to  the  walk  of  our  great  Exemplar  is  obedience.  It  is  the  Lord's  will  that 
in  His  house  His  word  should  be  the  supreme  Taw,  for  so  only  can  our  fallen 
natures  be  restored  to  their  original  glory.  It  is  ours  to  walk  in  cheerful  sub- 
servience to  the  mind  of  the  Father,  even  as  Jesus  did.  Does  this  strike  you  as  an 
easy  thing?     It  is  child's  work,  certainly;    but  assuredly  it  is  not  child's  play. 

,    8.  Such  a  life  would  necessarily  be  one  of  great  actiyijty,  for  the  life  of  Jesus  was 

intensely   energetic.     There   is  never  an   idle  tour  in  the  life  of   Christ.     It  is 

wonderful  how  He  sustained  the  toil.     Perhaps  He  measured  out  His  zeal  and  His 

open  industry  by  the  fact  that  He  was  only  to  be  for  a  short  time  here  below. 

1./  4.  Next  we  ought  to  walk  as  Christ  did  in  the  matter  of  self-denial.     So  walk  as 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  87 

He  did  who  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  but  took  upon  Himself  the  form  of  a 
Bervant,  and  who,  though  He  was  rich,  brought  Himself  down  to  poverty  for  our 
Bakes,  that  we  might  be  rich  unto  God.    Think  of  that.    5.  Another  point  in  which 
we  ought  to  imitate  Christ  most  certainly  is  that  of  lowliness.    You  never  detect  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  any  tendency  towards  prido  or  self-exaltation.     Quite  the 
reverse :  He  is  ever  compassionate  and  condescending  to  men  of  low  estate.    6.  And 
then  note  again  another  point,  and  that  is  His  great  tenderness,  and  gentleness,  ., 
and  readiness  to  forgive.    Did  He  not  set  us  an  example  of  bearing  and  Forbearing  ? 
7.  There  is  one  word  which  tells  us  more  than  all  this  about  how  Christ  walked, 
and  that  is  the  word  Move."    Jesus  was  incarnate  love.     Only  he  that  loves  can  i' 
live  in  heaven,  for  heaven  is  love ;   and  you  cannot  go  to  glory  unless  you  have 
learned  to  love  and  to  find  it  your  very  life  to  do  good  to  those  about  you.     Let  me 
add  to  all  this,  that  he  who  says  that  Christ  is  in  him  ought  also  to  live  as  Christ 
lived  in  secret.    And  how  was  this  ?     8.  His  life  was  spent  in  abounding  devotion,  y 
He  was  pure  and  holyj  and  yet  He  must  needs  wait  upon  God  all  dayTong,  and 
often  speak  with  His  Father ;  and  then  when  the  night  came,  and  others  went  to 
their  beds,  He  withdrew  Himself  into  the  wilderness  and  prayed.    If  the  Lord  Jesus 
be  in  you,  you  must  walk  as  He  walked  in  that  matter.    And  then  think  of  His 
deUght  in  God.    He  was,  it  is  true,  "a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief"; 
but  stUl  there  was  a  deep  spring  of  wondrous  happiness  in  the  midst  of  His  heart, 
which  made  Him  always  blessed.    And  you  and  I  also  must  delight  in  God.     This 
charming  duty  is  far  too  much  neglected.     Strange  that  this  honey  should  so 
seldom  be  in  men's  mouths!      9.  We  ought  to  walk  in  holy_contentment.     The  i^ 
cravings  of  covetousness  and  pinings  of  ambition  never  touched  our  Lord.    In  a 
word,  Christ  lived  above  this  world ;   let  us  walk  as  He  walked.     Christ  lived  for 
God,  and  for  God  alone ;  let  us  live  after  His  fashion.    And  Christ  persevered  in 
such  Uving ;  He  never  turned  aside  from  it  at  all ;  but  as  He  Uved  so  He  died, 
obedient  to  His  Father's  will.     May  our  lives  be  a  mosaic  of  perfect  obedience,  and 
our  deaths  the  completion  of  the  fair  design.     HI.    CoNsroER  what  is  needful  to 
jjjj  THIS.      1.  It  is  needful  to  have  a  nature  like  that  of  Christ.     You  cannot 
give  out  sweet  waters  so  long  as  the  fountains  are  impure.     "  Ye  must  be  bom 
again."    2.    That  being  done,  the  next  thing  that  is  necessary  is   a  constant 
anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     3.  Then,  again,  there  must  be  in  us  a  strong  resolve 
that   we  will  walk  as   Christ  walked;   for  our  Lord  Himself  did  not  lead  that 
holy  life  without  stern  resolution.    4.  I  add  that  if  we  want  to  walk  as  Christ 
waUied  we  m  -ist  have  much  communion  with  Him.     We  cannot  possibly  get  to  be 
like  Christ  except  by  being  with  Him.     A  person  has  written  to  me  to  say  that 
he  has  painted  my  portrait,  but  that  he  cannot  finish  it  until  he  sees  me.     I  should 
think  not.     Certainly  you  cannot  paint  a  portrait  of  Christ  in  your  own  life  unless 
you  see  Him — see  Him  clearly,  see  Him  continually.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        The   f  j 
example  of  Christ: — Example,  it  has  often  been  remarked,  exerts  a  much  more  [  i 
powerful  influence  upon  men  than  precept.     The  nature  and  excellence  of  God's 
commandments  are  more  perfectly  seen  in  those  actions  which  are  conformed  to 
His  law  than  in  the  abstract  contemplation  of  the  commandments  themselves. 
To  this  peculiarity  in  our  mental  constitution  God  hath  kindly  accommodated  His 
holy  Word.    Although  the  example  of  holy  men  of  ancient  times  is  made  use  of  as 
a  motive  to  particular  excellences,  yet  none  of  them  is  proposed  in  general  terms 
as  a  pattern  for  our  imitation.     This  honour  is  given  to  Christ  alone.     Not  only  are 
particular  virtues  enforced  by  a  reference  to  His  character  and  conduct,  but  His 
conversation  in  general  among  men,  or  the  whole  of  His  life  on  earth  is  exhibited 
as  a  pattern  to  be  imitated  by  all  His  disciples.     I.  The  example  of  Christ  is 
PERFECT.    Neither  positive  evil  nor  negative  defect  can  be  laid  to  His  charge.     In 
contemplating    the  pattern  which  it  presents  we  are    never  perplexed  by  the 
necessity  of  separating  the  good  froiii  the  bad,  that  which  should  be  imitated  from 
that  which  should  be  avoided.    II.   The  example  of  Christ  is  easy  of  imitation. 
It  is  calculated  to  allure  rather  than  to  repel  the  attempts  of  the  meek  and  humble 
to  copy  it.     The  incidents  by  which  it  was  diversified  are  such  as  frequently  occur 
in  the  ordinary  lot  of  man,  and  His  conduct  in  reference  to  them  was  in  every 
respect  such  as  we  might  desire  and  expect  any  pious  and  benevolent  individual 
to  exemplify.     It  was  human,   devoid   of   everything  impracticable.     HI.   The 
example  OF  Christ  is  highly  influential.     It  is  fitted  to  extract  the  attention  and 
command  the  imitation  of  men.     Who  will  refuse  to  imitate  the  pattern  furnished 
in  His  obedience  and  sufferings  when  he  recollects  that  He  obeyed  and  suffered  in 
our  room  ?    The  example  of  ^  Divine  person  is  indeed  of  infinite  authority  to  all 


83  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

creatures;  but  the  obligation  of  gratitude  has  an  attractive  influence  which  the 
consideration  of  duty  alone  does  not  possess.  IV.  The  example  of  Christ  is  op 
UNIVERSAL  APPLICATION.  It  is  Suited  to  men  of  all  classes  and  of  every  peculiarity 
of  natural  disposition.  Had  He  come  in  all  the  glory  of  temporal  royalty  His 
example,  however  conspicuous  and  however  perfect,  could  have  been  useful  to  but 
a  limited  extent.  (D.  Duncan.)  Of  the  imitation  of  Christ  in  holiness  of  life, 
and  the  necessity  of  it  in  believers : — I.  What  the  saint's  imitation  of  Christ 
SUPPOSES  AND  comprises.  1.  That  no  Christian  is,  or  may  pretend  to  be,  a  rule  to 
himself ;  for  as  no  man  hath  wisdom  enough  to  direct  himself,  so  if  his  own  will 
were  made  the  rule  of  his  own  actions  it  would  be  the  highest  invasion  of  the 
Divine  prerogative.  2.  That  as  no  man  is  his  own  guide,  so  no  mere  man,  how 
wise  or  holy  soever,  may  pretend  to  be  a  rule  to  other  men ;  but  Christ  is  the  rule 
of  every  man's  walking.  3.  The  necessity  of  sanctification  in  all  His  followers, 
forasmuch  as  it  is  impossible  there  should  be  a  practical  conformity  in  point  of 
obedience  where  there  is  not  a  conformity  in  spirit  and  in  principle.  4.  That  the 
Christian  religion  is  a  very  precise  and  strict  religion,  no  way  countenancing 
licentiousness ;  it  allows  no  man  to  walk  loosely  and  inordinately.  5.  The  imper- 
fection of  the  best  of  men  in  this  life  ;  for  if  the  life  of  Christ  be  our  pattern,  the 
holiest  of  men  must  confess  they  come  short  of  the  rule  of  their  duty.  6.  The 
transcending  holiness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  His  holiness  is  gi-eater  than  the  hoUness  of 
all  creatures,  "  For  only  that  which,  is  first  and  best  in  every  kind  is  the  rule  and 
measure  of  all  the  rest."  7.  It  necessarily  implies  sanctification  and  obedience  to 
be  the  evidences  of  our  justification  and  interest  in  Christ :  assurance  is  unattainable 
without  obedience  ;  we  can  never  be  comfortable  Christians  except  we  be  strict  and 
regular  Christians.     II.  In  what  things  all  who  profess  Christ  are  obliged  to 

</  the  imitation  of  Him.  1.  And  first  of  all,  the  purity  and  hoUness  of  the  life  of 
Christ  is  proposed  as  a  glorious  pattern  for  the  saint's  imitation  (1  Pet.  i.  15). 
(1)  He  was  truly  and  sincerely  holy,  without  fiction  or  simulation ;  and  this 
appeared  in  the  greatest  trial  of  the  truth  of  holiness  that  ever  was  made  in  this 
world  (John  xiv.  30).  (2)  Christ  was  uniformly  holy  at  one  time  as  well  as  another, 
in  one  place  and  company  as  well  as  another.  So  must  His  people  be  holy 
in  all  manner  of  conversation.  (3)  Christ  was  exemplarily  holy;  a  pattern 
of  holiness  to  all  that  came  nigh  Him,  and  conversed  with  Him  :  oh,  imitate 
Christ  in  this.  (4)  Christ  was  strictly  and  precisely  holy :  "  Which  of  you 
convinceth  Me  of  sin?"  The  most  envious  eyes  could  not  pick  a  hole  or  find 
a  flaw  in  any  of  His  words  or  actions  (Phil.  ii.  15).  (5)  Christ  was  perseveringly 
holy— holy  to  the  last  breath ;  as  He  began,  so  He  finished  His  whole  life.  It 
becomes  not  any  of  His  people  to  begin  in  the  spirit  and  end  in  the  flesh.  (6) 
In  a  word,  the  delight  of  Christ  was  only  in  holy  things  and  holy  persons — they 
were  His  chosen  companions;   even  so  it  becometh  His  people  to  have  all  their 

,^  delights  in  the  saints  and  in  the  excellent  of  the  earth  (Psa.  xvi.  3).  2.  The 
obedience  of  Christ  to  His  Father's  will  is  a  pattern  for  the  imitation  of  all 
Christians.  (1)  Christ's  obedience  was  free  and  voluntary,  not  forced  or 
compulsory;  it  was  so  from  the  very  first  undertaking  of  the  work  of  our 
redemption  (Prov.  viii.  30,  31).  (2)  The  obedience  of  Christ  was  universal  and 
complete  ;  He  was  obedient  to  all  the  will  of  God,  making  no  demur  to  the  hardest 
service  (Phil.  ii.  8).  (3)  The  obedience  of  Christ  was  sincere  and  pure,  without  any 
base  or  by-end,  purely  aimmg  at  the  glory  of  God  (John  xvii.  4).  (4)  The  streams  of 
Christ's  obedience  flowed  from  the  fountain  of  ardent  love  to  God  (John  xiv.  31). 
(5)  The  obedience  of  Christ  was  constant  (Rom.  ii.  7).  3.  The  self-denial  of  Christ 
is  the  pattern  of  believers,  and  their  conformity  unto  it  is  their  indispensable  duty 
(Phil.  ii.  4-6;  2  Cor.  viii.  9).  4.  The  activity  and  diligence  of  Christ  in  finishing 
the  work  of  God  which  was  committed  to  Him  was  a  pattern  for  all  beUevers  to 
imitate.  (1)  His  heart  was  intently  set  upon  it  (Psa.  iv.  8).  (2)  He  never  fainted 
under  great  discouragements  (Isa.  xliii.  4).  (3)  The  shortness  of  His  time 
provoked  Him  to  the  greatest  diligence  (John  ix.  4).  (4)  He  improved  all  oppor- 
tunities, companies,  and  occurrences  to  further  the  great  work  which  was  under 
His  hand  (John  iv.  6-10).  (5)  Nothing  more  displeased  Him  than  when  He  met 
with  dissuasions  in  His  work  (Matt.  viii.  33).     (6)  Nothing  rejoiced  His  soul  more 

/  than  the  prosperity  and  success  of  His  work  (Luke  x.  20,  21).  5.  Delight  in  God 
and  in  His  service  was  eminently  conspicuous  in  the  life  of  Christ,  and  is  a  rare 
pattern  for  believers'  imitation  (John  iv.  32,  34).  (1)  The  nature  of  it,  which 
consisteth  in  the  complacency,  rest,  and  satisfaction  of  the  mind  in  God  and 
spiritual  things.     (2)  The  object  of  spiritual  delight,  which  is  God  Himself  and 


GHAP,  II.]  I.  JOHN.  89 

the  things  which  relate  to  Him  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25).  (3)  The  subject  of  spiritual 
delight,  which  is  a  renewed  heart,  and  that  only  so  far  as  it  is  renewed  (Rom.  vii. 
22).  (4)  The  principle  and  spring  of  this  delight,  which  is  the  agreeableness  of 
spiritual  things  to  the  temper  and  frame  of  a  renewed  mind.  6.  The  inoffensive- 
ness  of  the  life  of  Christ  upon  earth  is  an  excellent  pattern  to  all  His  people ;  He 
injured  none,  offended  none  (Heb.  vii.  26).  He  denied  His  own  liberty  to  avoid 
occasion  of  offence ;  as  in  the  case  of  the  tribute-money  (Matt.  xix.  27).  (1)  For 
the  honour  of  Jesus  Christ  be  you  inoffensive — His  name  is  called  upon  you  (James 
ii.  7).  Your  inoffensive  carriage  is  the  only  means  to  stop  the  mouths  of  detractors 
(1  Pet.  ii.  15).  (2)  For  the  sake  of  souls  be  wary  that  you  give  no  offence  (Matt, 
xiii.  7).  (3)  By  the  holiness  and  harmlessness  of  your  lives  many  may  be  won  to 
Christ  (1  Pet.  iii.  1).  7.  The  humility  and  lowliness  of  Christ  is  propounded  by 
Himself  as  a  pattern  for  His  people's  imitation  (Matt.  xi.  29).  8.  The  contentation 
of  Christ  in  a  low  and  mean  condition  in  the  world  is  an  excellent  pattern  for  His 
people's  imitation.  (1)  The  meanest  and  most  afflicted  Christian  is  owner  of  many 
rich,  invaluable  mercies  (Eph.  i.  3 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  33).  (2)  You  have  many  precious 
promises  that  God  will  not  forsake  you  in  your  straits  (Heb.  xiii.  5 ;  Isa.  xli.  17). 
(3)  How  useful  and  beneficial  are  all  your  afflictions  to  you  !  They  purge  your  sins, 
prevent  your  temptations,  wean  you  from  the  world,  and  turn  to  your  salvation ; 
and  how  unreasonable,  then,  must  your  discontentedness  at  them  be  ?  (4)  The  time 
of  your  relief  and  full  deliverance  from  all  your  troubles  is  at  hand  (1  Cor.  vii.  26). 
(5)  Your  lot  falls  by  Divine  direction  upon  you,  and  as  bad  as  it  is  it  is  much 
easier  and  sweeter  than  the  condition  of  Christ  in  this  world  was.  Yet  He  was 
contented,  and  why  not  you  ?  III.  The  necessity  of  this  imitation  of  Christ 
WILL  CONVINCINGLY  APPEAB  DivEKS  WAYS.  1.  From  the  established  order  of  salvation, 
which  is  fixed  and  unalterable.  God  that  hath  appointed  the  end  hath  also 
established  the  means  and  order  by  which  men  shall  attain  the  ultimate  end.  Now 
conformity  to  Christ  is  the  established  method  in  which  God  will  bring  souls  to 
glory  (Rom.  viii.  29).  2.  The  nature  of  Christ-mystical  requires  this  conformity, 
and  renders  it  indispensably  necessary.  Otherwise  the  body  of  Christ  must  be 
heterogeneous,  of  a  nature  different  from  the  head ;  and  how  uncomely  would  this 
be?  3.  This  resemblance  and  conformity  to  Christ  appears  necessary  from  the 
communion  which  aU  believers  have  with  Christ  in  the  same  spirit  of  grace  and 
holiness.  Believers  are  called  Christ's  fellows,  or  co-partners  (Psa.  xlv.  7),  from 
their  participation  with  Him  of  the  same  spirit  (1  Thess.  iv.  8).  4.  The  necessity 
of  this  imitation  of  Christ  may  be  argued  from  the  design  and  end  of  Christ's 
exhibition  to  the  world  in  a  body  of  flesh.  For  though  we  detest  that  doctrine 
which  makes  the  exemplary  life  of  Christ  to  be  the  whole  end  of  His  incarnation, 
yet  we  must  not  run  so  far  from  an  error  as  to  lose  a  precious  truth.  5.  Our 
imitation  of  Christ  is  one  of  those  great  articles  which  every  man  is  to  subscribe 
whom  Christ  will  admit  into  the  number  of  His  disciples  (Luke  xiv.  27).  6.  The 
honour  of  Christ  necessitates  the  conformity  of  Christians  to  His  example.  How 
can  wisdom  be  justified  of  her  children  except  it  be  this  way?  Inferences: 
1.  If  all  that  profess  interest  in  Christ  be  strictly  bound  to  imitate  His  holy 
example,  then  it  follows  that  religion  is  very  unjustly  charged  by  the  world 
with  the  scandals  and  evils  of  them  that  profess  it.  2.  If  all  men  forfeit 
their  claim  to  Christ  who  endeavour  not  to  imitate  Him  in  the  holiness  of  His 
life,  then  how  small  a  number  of  real  Christians  are  there  in  the  world !  3. 
What  blessed  times  should  we  aU  see  if  true  religion  did  once  generally  obtain 
and  prevail  in  the  world !  4.  Hence  it  also  follows  that  real  Christians  are  the 
sweetest  companions.  5.  In  a  word,  if  no  men's  claim  to  Christ  be  warranted 
but  theirs  that  walk  as  He  walked,  how  vain  and  groundless  then  are  the  hopes 
and  expectations  of  all  unsanctified  men  who  walk  after  their  own  lusts  ? 
1.  Christ  hath  conformed  Himself  to  you  by  His  abasing  incarnation ;  how  reason- 
able therefore  is  it  that  you  conform  yourselves  to  Him  in  the  way  of  obedience 
and  sanctification  I  2.  You  shaU  be  conformed  to  Christ  in  glory ;  how  reason- 
able therefore  is  it  you  should  now  conform  yourselves  to  Him  in  hohness ! 
(chap.  iii.  2).  3.  The  conformity  of  your  lives  to  Christ,  your  pattern,  is  your 
highest  excellency  in  this  world  :  the  measure  of  your  grace  is  to  be  estimated  by 
this  rule.  4.  So  far  as  you  imitate  Christ  in  your  lives,  and  no  farther,  you  will  be 
beneficial  to  the  world  in  which  you  live  ;  so  far  as  God  helps  you  to  follow  Christ 
you  will  be  helpful  to  bring  others  to  Christ,  or  build  them  up  in  Christ.  5.  To 
walk  as  Christ  walked  is  a  walk  only  worthy  of  a  Christian  ;  this  is  to  "  walk 
worthy  of  the  Lord  "  (1  Thess.  ii.  12 ;  Col.  i.  10).     6.  How  comfortable  will  the 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

close  of  your  life  be  at  death  if  you  have  walked  after  Christ's  example  in  this 
world  1  A  comfortable  death  is  ordinarily  the  close  of  a  holy  life  (Psa.  xxxvii.  37). 
Lastly,  I  would  leave  a  few  words  of  support  to  such  as  sincerely  endeavour, 
according  to  the  tendency  of  their  new  nature,  to  foUow  Christ's  example,  but 
being  weak  in  grace  and  meeting  with  strong  temptations  are  frequently 
carried  aside  from  the  holy  purposes  of  their  well-meaning  hearts.  1.  Such 
defects  in  obedience  make  no  flaw  in  your  justification ;  for  your  justification 
is  not  built  upon  your  obedience,  but  upon  Christ's  (Rom.  iii.  24).  2.  Your  deep 
troubles  for  the  defectiveness  of  your  obedience  do  not  argue  you  to  be  less,  but 
more  sanctified,  than  those  who  make  no  such  complaints.  3.  The  Lord  makes 
excellent  uses  even  of  your  failings  to  do  you  good  ;  for  by  these  defects  He  hides 
pride  from  your  eyes.  He  beats  you  off  from  self-dependence,  He  makes  you  to 
admire  the  riches  of  free  grace,  He  makes  you  to  long  more  ardently  for  heaven 
and  entertain  the  sweeter  thoughts  of  death.  4.  Your  bewailed  infirmities  do  not 
break  the  bond  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  6.  Though  the  defects  of  your 
obedience  are  grievous  to  God,  yet  your  deep  sorrows  for  them  are  weU- 
pleasing  in  His  eyes  (Psa.  li.  17).  6.  Though  God  has  left  many  defects 
to  humble  you,  yet  He  hath  given  many  things  to  comfort  you.  This  is  a 
comfort,  that  the  desire  of  thy  soul  is  to  God.  This  is  a  comfort,  that  thy 
sins    are    not    thy    delight    as    once    they    were.      {John    Flavel.)  Abiding 

in    Christ  to  be   demonstrated  by  walking  as    Christ  did : — I.   The  apostles  do 

ON  AliL  OCCASIONS  ASSUME  THE  PRACTICE  OF  ChRIST  AS  AN  UNQUESTIONABLE  GROUND 
OP  OBLIGATION  AND  AN  EFFECTUAL  INDUCEMENT  THERETO.  H.  DoiNG  SO  HATH  A 
BEASONABLENESS    GROUNDED    ON    OUR    RELATIONS    TO    ChRIST it    is    COmcly    th?.t    the 

manners  of  the  disciple  should  be  regulated  by  those  of  his  Master ;  that  the  servant 
should  not,  in  his  garb  and  demeanour,  dissent  or  vary  from  his  Lord ;  that  the  subject 
should  conform  his  humour  to  the  fashion  of  his  Prince.     HI.  Following  Christ's 

EXAMPLE  is  requisite  TO  DEMONSTRATE  THE  SINCERITY  OF  OUR  FAITH,  LOVE,  AND 
REVERENCE  TO  HiM.  IV.  Bt  PRETENDING  TO  BE  CHRISTIANS  WE  ACKNOWLEDGE  THE 
TRANSCENDENT    GOODNESS,    WORTH,    AND    EXCELLENCY    OF    OUR    SaVIOUR  ;     that    He   WaS 

incomparably  better  and  wiser  than  any  person  ever  was  or  could  be;  that  He 
always  acted  with  the  highest  reason,  out  of  the  most  excellent  disposition  of  mind, 
in  order  to  the  best  purposes ;  and  that  His  practice,  therefore,  reasonably  should  be 
the  rule  of  ours.  V.  The  practice  of  our  Saviour  did  thoroughly  agree  with  His 
DOCTRINE  AND  LAW — He  required  nothing  of  us  which  He  did  not  eminently  perform 
Himself.  He  fulfilled  in  deed,  as  well  as  taught  in  word,  aU  righteousness.  VI.  It 
being  the  design  of  Divine  goodness,  in  sending  our  Saviour,  to  render  us  good  and 
happy,  to  deUver  us  from  sin  and  misery,  there  could  not  be  devised  any  more 

powerful  means   or   more    convenient   method    of  accomplishing    those   EXCELLENT 

PURPOSES  than  by  propounding  such  an  example  and  obliging  ua  to  comply  there- 
with. 1.  Good  example  is  naturally  an  effectual  instrument  of  good  practice ;  for 
that  it  doth  most  compendiously,  pleasantly,  and  easily  instruct ;  representing  things 
to  be  done  at  one  view,  in  a  full  body,  clothed  with  all  their  modes  and  circum- 
stances; it  kindleth  men's  courage  by  a  kind  of  contagion,  as  one  flame  doth  kindle 
another ;  it  raiseth  a  worthy  emulation  of  doing  laudable  things  which  we  see  done, 
or  of  obtaining  a  share  in  the  commendations  of  virtue.  2.  More  especially  the 
example  of  Christ  doth,  in  efficacy  and  influence  on  good  practice,  surpass  all  others. 
(1)  In  that  it  is  a  sure  and  infallible  rule,  a  perfect  rule  of  practice :  deficient  in  no 
part,  swerving  in  no  circumstance  from  truth  and  right,  which  privileges  are  com- 
petent to  no  other  example.  (2)  In  that  He  was,  by  the  Divine  providence,  to  this 
very  purpose  designed  and  sent  into  the  world,  as  well  by  His  practice  as  by 
His  doctrine  to  be  the  guide  and  master  of  holy  life.  (3)  In  that  it  was,  by  an 
admirable  temperament,  more  accommodated  for  imitation  than  any  others  have 
been ;  for  though  it  were  written  with  an  incomparable  fairness,  delicacy,  and  even- 
ness, not  slurred  with  any  foul  blot,  not  anywhere  declining  from  exact  straightness, 
yet  were  the  lineaments  thereof  exceedingly  plain  and  simple,  not  by  any  gaudy 
flourishes  or  impertinent  intrigues  rendered  diificult  to  studious  imitation ;  so  that 
even  women  and  children,  the  weakest  and  meanest  sort  of  people,  as  well  as  the 
most  wise  and  ingenious,  might  easily  perceive  its  design,  and  with  good  success 
write  after  it.  (4)  In  that  it  is  attended  with  the  greatest  obligations  (of  gratitude 
and  ingenuity,  of  justice,  of  interest,  of  duty),  mightily  engaging  us  to  foUow  it. 
{I$aac  Barrow,  D.D.)  Imitation  of  the  example  of  Christ  in  His  temper  and 
life: — I.  In  what  respects  Christ  is  an  example  to  Christians  and  they  are  to 
ruiTATE  Him.     Christ  is  only  our  example  as  to  those  things  that  are  common 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  91 

between  Him  and  us,  but  not  as  to  those  in  which  we  can  have  no  participation  with 
Him  or  He  with  us.     His  part  was  to  become  our  mediator  with  God.     U.  How 

BUITABLE    AN    EXAMPLE    ChEIST    IS   TO    US   AND   HOW   EXPEDIENT   IT    IS   FOR   US   TO   HAVE 

SUCH  AN  EXAMPLE.     1.  The  example  of  Christ  is  exceedingly  suitable  to  mankind. 

(1)  From  the  humanity  of  it.  (2)  The  notoriety  of  Christ's  example  makes  it  fit  for 
general  use.  The  most  exemplary  transactions  of  His  holy  life  are  transmitted  to  us 
in  exact  narratives.  (3)  His  example  was  very  extensive.  It  either  directly  exempli- 
fies or  contains  a  lively  instruction  into  the  duties  of  almost  every  station  and 
relation  in  human  Ufe.  (4)  Christ's  example  is  absolutely  perfect.  2.  How  very 
expedient  it  is  for  mankind  to  have  such  an  example  set  before  them.  (1)  This  use 
and  expediency  appears  in  that  it  tends  to  impress  the  mind  with  a  strong  sense  of 
the  reasonableness  and  excellency  of  that  universal  rectitude  which  the  law  requires, 
and  to  guard  us  against  light  and  favourable  thoughts  of  any  deviation  or  iniquity. 

(2)  It  stiU  adds  more  weight  to  this  use  of  Christ's  example,  to  consider  the  Divinity 
of  His  person.   In  this  way  God  has  glorified  a  state  of  obedience  to  Himself.  IH.  The 

OBLIGATIONS    AND    ENGAGEMENTS   WHICH    CHRISTIANS   ARE    UNDER    TO    IMITATE     THIS    SO 

SUITABLE  AND  EXPEDIENT  EXAMPLE.  This  is  the  natural  tendency  of  all  Christian 
graces ;  so  that  where  they  are  in  truth  they  cannot  but  work  this  way,  and  otherwise 
they  are  only  in  appearance,  not  in  reality.  (John  Hubbard.)  The  Christian's 
imitation  of  Christ  .-—First,  for  the  conditional  "  If."  Is  it  not  a  precedent  condition 
of  life ;  for  a  man  cannot  first  walk  as  Christ  walked,  and  then  be  in  Christ.  A 
graft  cannot  live  the  Ufe  of  the  stock  and  then  be  inoculated  into  the  stock.  The 
first  act  is  before  the  latter  act :  life  before  the  actions  of  life — "  so  walk  as  Christ 
walked,"  this  notes  the  actions  of  life.  Now  a  man  must  first  be  in  Christ 
before  he  can  walk  as  Christ  walked.  Indeed,  this  condition  is  first  to  our 
knowledge :  but  it  is  not  first  in  its  own  nature.  So,  then,  to  walk  as  Christ  walked, 
being  a  necessary  consequence  of  being  in  Christ,  we  cannot  be  in  Christ  if  we  walk 
not  as  Christ  walked.  If  there  be  any  commandment  of  Christ  in  aU  the  gospel 
that  you  will  not  conform  to,  it  is  an  evident  sign  that  ye  abide  not  in  Christ's 
love.  Secondly,  for  the  exemplary,  "  As,"  even  as  He  walked.  Can  any  man  walk 
as  Christ  walked  ?  Is  it  possible  that  dust  and  ashes,  that  is  corrupt  with  sin,  can 
walk  as  He  walked?  This  word  "as"  hath  a  twofold  signification — (1)  such  as 
imports  equality,  or  (2)  similitude.  As  this  "  as "  imports  an  equality,  so  it  is 
impossible  that  any  flesh  can  walk  as  Christ  walked — so  purely,  so  unspottedly,  so 
steadily,  so  effectually  as  He  lived.  A  scholar  writes  as  his  master's  copy  directs 
him.  Though  there  be  no  equality,  he  cannot  write  one  stroke  or  dash  with  his  pen 
so  well  as  his  master,  yet  he  doth  write  as  his  master  sets  his  copy :  his  hand  foUows 
his  master's  hand.  Even  as  less  white  is  like  more  white,  though  not  alike  in  the  same 
degree,  yet  in  the  same  nature,  there  is  the  same  nature  in  the  lesser  that  there  is  in 
the  bigger.  So  we  must  have  the  same  life,  obey  the  same  commandments,  be  guided 
by  the  same  rule,  swayed  by  the  same  motions,  led  by  the  same  Spirit  that  was  in 
Chi^st  (Eom.  viii.  9).  Thus  you  see  the  explanation  of  the  doctrine;  come  we  now 
to  the  reasons,  which  are  principally  these  four : — 1.  The  first  reason  is  taken  from 
the  scope  and  end  for  which  the  Lord  did  send  His  Son  into  the  world:  as  to  justify 
the  ungodly,  so  also  to  conform  aU  those  that  are  justified  to  the  image  of  Christ. 
2.  The  second  reason  is  taken  from  the  practice  of  Christianity.  In  vain  are  we 
called  Christians  if  we  be  not  imitators  of  Christ.  The  disciples  are  called  Christians 
(Acts  xi.  26) ;  the  very  name  teUs  us  that  we  must  be  followers  of  Christ.  3.  The 
third  reason  is  taken  from  the  essential,  or  rather  from  the  integral  union  that  is 
between  Christ  and  all  those  that  are  in  Christ;  they  are  aU  members  of  His 
most  gracious  body.  4.  The  last  reason  is  taken  from  the  near  relation  that  is  to  be 
between  Christ  and  every  member  of  Christ.  If  all  that  are  in  Christ  are  the  children 
of  Christ  they  must  needs  walk  as  Christ  walked.  Like  begets  like.  Dost  thou  say 
thou  hast  put  on  Christ?  Why,  then,  show  me  the  signs  of  Christ  in  thee.  How 
canst  thou  then  demonstrate  that  thou  art  a  Christian  ?  It  may  be  now  and  then 
thou  wilt  give  a  prayer  unto  Christ.  Is  this  to  be  in  Christ  ?  LE  thou  be  in  Christ, 
then  thou  must  hve  the  life  of  Christ  in  all  thy  ways.  "He  that  saith  he  abideth 
in  Him,"  &c.  In  this  word  "he"  there  are  three  notes.  First,  indication.  The 
apostle  doth,  as  it  were,  point  at  a  certain  man  in  his  congregation,  as  if  there  had 
been  some  man  that  he  knew  was  not  in  Christ.  So  preachers  must  not  only  preach 
the  Word  of  God  in  general,  but  they  must  preach  in  particular.  Secondly,  discrimi- 
nation. As  if  he  should  say,  there  are  some  that  are  in  Him  and  some  that  are  not 
in  Him.  Hence  observe  this  point,  that  every  minister  is  bound  to  preach  so  as  to 
make  a  difference  between  the  precious  and  the  vile.     Here  are  two  things — 1.  They 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii, 

shall  teach  them  the  difference  between  the  holy  and  profane.  2.  They  shall  not 
only  show  it  before  them,  but  if  they  will  not  see  it  they  shall  cause  them  to  see  it ; 
that  is,  they  must  beat  it  into  them  and  rub  it  into  their  consciences.  ^You  that  have 
heard  the  Word  of  God  apply  it  to  your  souls,  it  is  a  blessed  plaister ;  let  it  He  on  your 
souls.  Thirdly,  scrutiny.  It  is  not  only  an  outward  word,  but  a  word  of  the  heart: 
"  If  any  man  say,"  that  is,  if  any  man  think,  that  he  is  in  Christ,  he  ou^ht  to  wait 
as  Christ  did.  Hence  we  observe,  that  a  minister  is  bound  to  preach  to  men's 
thoughts.  (IVm.  Fenner.)  The  Christian  walk : — It  was  one  of  the  last  sayings  of 
a  famous  divine  that  there  were  three  things  which  were  essential  to  healthy 
Christian  teaching — doctrine,  experience,  and  practice.  He  said  that  if  doctrine 
alone  were  brought  forward  to  a  people  there  was  a  danger  lest  they  should  turn 
out  Antinomians ;  that  if  experience  alone  were  brought  forward  to  a  people 
there  was  a  danger  lest  they  should  turn  out  enthusiasts  and  sentimentalists;  and 
that  if  practice  alone  were  brought  forward,  there  was  a  danger  that  they  would  turn 
out  legalists.  I  know  not  whether  we  have  sufficient  attention  given  in  the  present 
day  to  the  third  of  the  three  great  essentials  spoken  of,  I  mean  the  essential  of 
Christian  practice.  I.  The  tbue  believek's  profession — "  He  saith  that  he  abideth 
in  Christ."  He  rests  all  his  hope  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he  feels  that  he  is  a 
sinner,  but  he  sees  in  Christ  an  all-sufficient  Saviour.  Time  there  was  when  he 
abode  himself  in  carelessness ;  he  was  a  thoughtless,  an  unconcerned  person,  travel- 
ling down  the  stream  of  time  and  thinking  nothing  of  the  gulf  of  eternity.  Now, 
old  things  are  passed  away  and  all  things  are  become  new.  II.  The  standard  of 
THE  TRUE  believer's  PRACTICE.  The  apostlc  speaks  of  the  believer's  "  walk."  By 
that  he  means  his  daily  course  of  life,  his  behaviour,  that  may  be  seen  of  men,  as  a 
person's  walking  may  be  seen  by  the  eye.  The  man  of  the  world  cannot  move  without 
being  seen  ;  so  the  walk  of  the  Christian  is  that  behaviour  which  others  around  him 
can  observe.  It  is  not  merely  a  spasmodic  rushing  forward,  but  an  equable  daily 
■walk.  He  speaks  of  what  that  walk  "  ought "  to  be ;  he  speaks  of  it  as  a  debt,  as  an 
obligation.  The  believer  is  bound  by  the  strongest  of  all  ties  and  obligations  to 
•'  walk  even  as  Christ  walked."  Who  that  has  ever  seen  a  young  painter  in  his  first 
efforts  to  paint,  when  he  has  set  the  canvas  before  him  and  endeavoured  to  copy 
some  mighty  masterpiece  of  Rubens,  or  Rembrandt,  or  Titian,  has  not  been  struck 
with  the  difference  between  his  first  essay  and  the  wonderful  copy  before  him  ?  Yet 
that  painter  does  the  same  kind  of  thing  that  Rubens,  or  Titian,  or  Rembrandt  did; 
he  is  working  upon  canvas,  he  has  the  colours,  he  holds  the  bi-ush ;  though  he  may 
not  like  them  lay  on  the  colours  and  trace  the  outline  in  the  same  way,  yet,  after  all, 
he  is  following  their  steps,  he  is  imitating  them,  and  is  far  more  likely  to  bring  forth 
an  excellent  work  than  if  he  copied  that  which  was  not  equal  in  perfection.  But  in 
what  is  it  that  we  are  endeavouring  to  "walk  even  as  Christ  walked"?  In  His 
demeanour  towards  those  with  whom  He  had  to  do — in  all  His  relations,  as  a  son 
unto  His  mother,  as  a  friend  among  His  friends — in  all  His  dealings  with  His  enemies 
and  with  His  disciples.  {Bp.  Ryle.)  Imitation  of  Christ : — I.  Particulars  in  which 
Christians  ought  to  live  as  Christ  lived.  1.  Those  who  profess  to  be  Christ's 
disciples  ought  to  take  Him  as  their  example  in  bearing  their  appointed  sufferings. 
(1)  In  the  first  place,  contentedly  to  bear  whatever  sufferings  God  by  His  providence 
imposes  on  us ;  not  to  be  discontented,  irritable,  and  despondent.  (2)  There  was  another 
characteristic  in  Christ's  endurance  of  sufferings,  perhaps  yet  more  important  to 
us,  because  it  relates  to  a  temper  still  more  constantly  to  be  in  exercise.  Jesus 
foresaw  all  those  sufferings  which  He  afterwards  so  patiently  bore.  He  "steadfastly 
set  His  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem  ";  He  pursued  the  great  end  of  His  mission  into 
this  world  without  deviation  by  one  single  step  or  for  one  single  moment.  He,  then, 
v;ho  "walks  as  Christ  walked,"  will,  without  fear,  without  despondency,  without 
impetuosity  and  passion,  without  enthusiasm,  with  calm  deliberation  and  steady 
purpose,  determine  to  pursue  the  course  of  duty  God  has  called  him  to  pursue, 
whatever  the  consequences  may  be.  2.  In  this  course,  however,  it  is  impossible  but 
that  Christians  should  meet,  as  Christ  met,  with  those  who  would  oppose  this  course. 
II.  Reasons  why  we  should  walk  thus.  1.  Those  who  are  redeemed  ought  to  live 
as  their  Redeemer  lived,  because  they  recognise  Him  to  be  the  pattern  of  all  excel- 
lence. 2.  Those  who  are  redeemed  ought  to  endeavour  to  please  their  Redeemer. 
3.  Those  who  have  been  redeemed  ought  to  count  it  one  of  the  highest  objects  of  their 
existence  to  glorify  and  serve  Him  who  has  been  their  Redeemer.  (B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.) 
Inward  prare  vi'iiii/est  in  the  life :— There  is  an  inward  germinant  power  whicn 
must  make  itself  felt  in  a  life  like  his.  If  a  man  abide  in  Christ  and  Christ  dwells 
within   him,   then  must   the   heavenly   forms   of  grace   and    truth   which   Christ 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  93 

unfolded  in  His  life  be  manifested,  to  some  extent  at  least,  in  His  followers.  The 
life  of  the  rose  unfolds  itself  in  the  fragrance  and  beauty  of  the  queen  of  flowers  ; 
the  life  of  the  lily  in  immaculate  purity ;  the  life  of  Christ  in  "  love,  joy,  peace, 
long-suffering,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance,"  which  are  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit.  Christ  is  the  great  archetype  of  redeemed  humanity,  and  the  life  of  each 
beUever  is  an  aspect  of  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  conformity  of  the  life  to 
the  model  of  Christ  is  the  test  of  fellowship  with  the  Father.     (A.  R.  Cocke,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-11.  Brethren,  I  write  no  new  commandment  unto  you,  but  an  old 
commandment. — The  old  and  neio  commandments  : — He  had  been  telling  them  that 
they  were  to  keep  the  commandments  if  they  would  know  God.  Now  those  people 
who  boasted  that  they  had  discovered  quite  another  road  to  the  knowledge  of  God 
than  this  had  an  especial  dislike  to  the  Old  Testament.  So  they  would  be  sure  to 
turn  uponhim  and  say,  "  The  commandments !  What  commandments  do  you  mean  ? 
Not  those  old  commandments,  surely,  which  were  given  to  the  Jews  !  You  would  not 
bring  us  back  to  the  law,  would  you  ?  "  He  faces  them  boldly.  "I  do  mean  those 
old  commandments,"  he  says ;  "  I  write  no  new  commandment  unto  you,  but  an 
old  commandment  which  ye  had  from  the  beginning.  I  mean,  distinctly,  that  I 
look  upon  those  old  commandments,  if  they  were  faithfully  kept,  as  a  way  to  the 
knowledge  of  God."  But  how  ?  He  does  not  say  for  a  moment  that  a  person 
merely  regarding  the  commandments  as  written  on  stone  could  keep  them.  But  he 
says,  "  The  old  commandment  is  the  Word  which  ye  have  heard  from  the 
beginning."  Here  is  the  secret  of  the  whole  matter.  The  commandments  were  a 
"  word  "  proceeding  from  a  living  God  ;  a  "word  "  addressed  to  the  hearts  of  human 
beings.  As  long  as  the  commandments  were  looked  at  only  as  written  and  graven 
in  stone  they  belonged  to  Israelites.  When  they  were  regarded  as  the  words 
proceeding  from  the  Word  which  was  from  the  beginning  it  was  intelligible  how 
God  had  been  speaking  to  other  nations ;  how,  though  they  had  not  the  law,  they 
did  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law ;  how  they  showed  the  work  of  the 
law  written  in  their  hearts ;  how  they,  as  well  as  the  Jews,  might  seek  by  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing  for  glory,  honour,  and  immoi-tality.  But  was  there 
nothing  gained  by  this  revelation  of  the  Word  in  the  flesh,  by  this  gospel  of 
His  life  ?  Was  it  not  a  good  thing  to  be  born  under  the  New  Testament 
instead  of  the  Old  ?  "  Again,"  says  St.  John,  "  a  new  commandment  I  write  unto 
you  ;  which  thing  is  true  in  Him  and  in  you,  because  the  darkness  is  past,  and  the 
true  light  now  shineth."  He  is  a  teacher  of  progress  much  more  truly  than  those 
who  treated  all  the  past  as  worthless  or  evil.  He  had  brought  forth  a  new  command- 
ment, not  inconsistent  with  the  old,  scarcely  an  addition  to  it,  rather  the  very 
essence  of  it,  which  yet  it  was  unable  to  express.  "  He  that  saith  he  is  in  the  light, 
and  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  darkness  even  untU  now."  What  was  there  new  in 
this  statement?  There  was  nothing  new  in  the  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  That  was  old ;  that  St.  Paul  declares,  that  St.  John 
declares,  that  our  Lord  declares,  is  impUed  in  all  the  commandments.  Men  knew 
that  they  ought  not  to  hate  their  neighbours  ;  that  is,  men  who  dwelt  near  them, 
who  belonged  to  their  own  tribe  or  nation ;  however  often  they  might  do  it  in  spite 
of  their  knowledge.  The  code  could  not  bid  them  to  do  more  than  this.  We  may 
say  it  boldly,  no  mere  code  can.  But  there  must  be  a  bond  between  man  and  man  ; 
there  must  be  a  power  to  make  that  bond  effectual,  or  the  law  concerning  neighbours 
will  be  most  imperfectly  heeded.  The  revelation  of  Christ  explains  the  secret. 
When  He  came  forth,  when  His  light  shone  upon  men,  then  it  was  seen  that  there  is  a 
common  Brother  of  Men ;  of  men,  I  say,  not  of  Israelites  merely.  He  is  the- 
Universal  Brother.  "Therefore,"  says  John,  "  this  thing  is  true  in  Him  and  in  you, 
because  the  darkness  is  past  and  the  true  light  now  shineth."  As  if  He  had  said, 
•'  Now  we  are  come  into  a  new  and  higher  state  ;  the  state  not  only  of  neighbour- 
hood but  of  brotherhood."  Are  we  no  more  under  an  obligation?  Nay,  verily,  we 
come  under  a  new  commandment,  under  a  wider  and  deeper  obligation.  It  is  a  sin  ; 
a  sin  which  punishes  itself.  For  to  hate  a  brother  is  to  walk  in  darkness.  It  is  to 
hide  ourselves  from  Him  who  is  our  great  common  brother.  It  is  to  live  as  if  the 
Lord  had  not  appeared.  For  us  to  hate  our  brother — to  hate  any  man — is  nothing 
less  than  to  deny  the  man,  the  Son  of  Man ;  the  common  light  of  men.  For  us  to 
love  our  brother  is  nothing  less  than  to  walk  in  the  light  of  Christ's  presence, 
nothing  less  than  to  be  free  from  all  occasion  and  danger  of  stumbling.  "  He  that 
loveth  his  brother  abideth  in  the  light,  and  there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in 
him."     {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)        Brotherly  love : — I.  Brotherly  love  is  an  old 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

COMMANDMENT  (ver.  7.)  This  verse  is  often  represented  as  though  it  referred  to  what 
the  apostle  had  before  said,  and  not  to  that  which  he  was  about  to  utter.  To  me  it 
Beems  clear  that  he  speaks  by  anticipation.  He  adopts  a  manner  of  writing  which 
suggests  the  introduction  of  a  new  topic — "  Brethren,  I  write  (or  am  about  to  write) 
no  new  commandment."  Besides,  brotherly  love  is  a  subject  of  which  such  a 
declaration  might  with  great  propriety  be  made.  In  making  it  the  apostle  imitates 
the  example  of  his  beloved  Master,  when,  in  His  memorable  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 
He  warned  His  hearers  against  supposing  He  was  introducing  any  new  doctrine 
(Matt.  V.  17).  Brotherly  love  was  no  novelty.  It  arose  of  necessity  out  of  the 
relation  in  which  men  stood  to  God  and  to  one  another.  He  was  their  Creator  and 
they  were  brethren.  Brotherly  love  was  the  doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament  as  weU 
as  of  the  New.  It  need  not  be  added  how  powerfully  these  views  are  enforced  when 
men  are  regarded  as  the  subjects  of  grace.  They  become  thus  doubly  the  children 
of  God  and  brethren  one  of  another.  H.  Yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  a 
NEW  COMMANDMENT  (vcr.  8).  The  apostle  delights  to  imitate  his  Master.  He  does 
so  not  only  in  his  own  conduct,  but  in  his  very  manner  of  teaching.  Of  this  there 
is  an  interesting  example  in  the  subject  now  before  us.  Of  it  Jesus  said  (John  xiii. 
34,  35).  It  is  after  this  model  John  says  of  brotherly  love,  "  A  new  commandment 
I  write  unto  you."  How  is  this  saying  to  be  understood  ?  In  one  sense  it  was  an 
old  commandment,  and  in  another  it  was  new.  It  was  old,  necessarily  arising  out 
of  the  relation  of  men  to  one  another,  and  required  by  the  oldest  revelation  of  the 
Divine  will.  But  it  was  also  new,  as  it  was  republished  under  the  Christian 
economy.  It  should  be  more  intense  than  it  ever  had  been.  It  was  hereafter  to  be 
formed  on  the  model  of  Christ's  love.  It  should  be  wider  in  extent  as  it  should  be 
deeper  in  feeling.  Hitherto  the  Jew  confined  his  regards  to  his  own  nation.  But 
in  future  all  such  national  and  sectarian  distinctions  were  to  be  done  away.  It 
should  be  as  high  in  its  motives  and  aspirations  as  it  was  deep  in  feeling  and  wide 
in  extent.  Both  would  bring  it  into  fellowship  with  heaven.  Thus  it  should 
become  the  badge  of  the  Christian  economy.  Judaism  had  been  distinguished  by 
its  formal  ceremonies,  but  Christianity  would  be  distinguished  by  its  generous  and 
enlarged  catholicity.  Taking  hold  of  a  few  hearts  it  would  bind  them  together  as 
one  man.  Thus  united,  they  would  operate  on  the  mass  of  society  around  them. 
III.  Such  love  is  a  reality,  and  is  exemplified  in  Christ  and  in  them  that  abb 
His  (ver.  8.)  As  for  Christ,  His  whole  life  was  one  burning  flame  of  holy  love. 
And  be  it  observed,  all  this  is  summed  up  by  the  apostle  as  an  argument  for  brotherly 
love  in  us  (PhQ.  ii.  4-11).  If  we  have  the  mind  of  Christ  it  is  clear  what  that  must 
be.  A  similar  account  may  be  given  of  His  early  disciples.  Like  their  Master,  they 
denied  themselves  that  they  might  benefit  others.  How  incredible  the  hardships 
they  endured !  This  was  the  spirit  that  pervaded  the  early  Church.  No  other  could 
have  sustained  it  in  those  days.  It  was  fuU  of  the  tenderest  sympathy,  the  most 
ardent  love,  and  the  severest  self-denial.  IV.  It  ought  to  be  so,  considering  the 
LIGHT  we  enjoy  (vcr.  8).  1.  "  The  darkness  is  past."  (1)  The  darkness  of 
Judaism.  It  served  its  purpose.  (2)  The  darkness  of  heathenism.  The  address 
of  the  prophet  has  been  made  to  us  (Isa.  Ix.  1,  2).  (3)  The  darkness  of  unaided 
and  perverted  human  reason  (1  Cor.  i.  21).  2.  "The  true  light  now  shineth." 
(1)  The  light  of  the  Word  shineth,  "a  lamp  unto  our  feet  and  a  light  unto  our 
path."  (2)  The  light  of  the  spirit  shineth  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  (3)  The  light  of 
ordinances  now  shineth,  so  that,  as  of  old,  of  many  places  it  may  be  said  (Matt.  iv. 
16).  (4)  The  light  of  Christ  shineth  (John  xii.  36).  These  are  our  privileges. 
What  then  must  be  our  responsibilities?       V.  The   apostle's  enforcement   of 

BROTHERLY  LOVE  BY  A  STRONG  DENUNCIATION  OF  ITS  VIOLATION  AND  A  HIGH  COMMENDA- 
TION OP  ITS  EXCELLENCE.  {Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  commandment  of  love — iU 
oldness  and  its  newness  : — These  words  stand  between  two  commandments — that  in 
the  sixth  verse  of  the  chapter  from  which  my  text  is  taken,  to  walk  as  Christ  walked, 
and  the  commandment  of  brotherly  love  contained  in  verse  the  ninth.  To  which  of 
these  does  the  apostle  refer  here  ?  To  both,  for  in  their  deepest  meaning  the  two 
are  one.  If  we  walk  in  the  light  as  Christ  walked,  then  shall  we  love  our  brethren, 
for  He  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us.  Having  ascertained  what  the  command- 
ment is,  let  us  consider  the  two  things  mentioned  concerning  it^ts  oldness  and 
its  NEWNESS.  The  law  of  love  is  as  old  as  human  nature  itself.  First,  the  faculty 
of  love  belongs  to  man  as  man — is  part  of  his  nature.  Second,  man  has  the  sense 
or  feeling  that  love  is  right,  that  it  is  a  duty  ;  and  that  to  hate  others,  or  even  to  be 
indifferent  to  them,  is  wrong.  This  is  the  Divine  testimony  in  man's  conscience, 
a  silent  commandment  which  makes  itself  heard  and  felt  without  the  use  of  words. 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  95 

But  the  precept  of  love  is  new  as  well  as  old.  It  was  Christ  Himself  that  first 
called  it  new.  "A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  another; 
as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also  love  one  another."  1.  The  prominence  and 
oneness  which  our  Lord  gave  to  it  made  it  new.  2.  The  perfect  realisation  of  the 
precept  of  love  in  the  life  of  Christ  was  new.  It  filled  His  Spirit,  possessed  His 
soul,  appeared  in  His  words  and  works,  and  was  made  manifest  for  ever  in  His 
passion  and  death.  He  did  justice  to  love,  honoured  it,  and  showed  how  beautiful, 
how  noble,  and  how  divine  a  quality  it  is ;  and  thus  the  old  commandment  was 
arrayed  in  new  glory.  3.  The  old  precept  of  love  has  also  a  new  inspiring  power, 
as  seen  in  the  life  and  character  of  our  Lord.  4.  Again,  Christ  made  love  the 
symbol  or  badge  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  is  not  by  any  system  of  theology, 
forms  of  worship,  learning,  or  social  position  that  the  true  Church  is  known ;  but 
by  all  that  is  implied  in  the  great  word  "  love  "  as  it  is  used  in  the  New  Testament. 
6.  There  is  an  undying  freshness  in  love  which  makes  it  ever  new.  Consider  the 
working  of  love  anywhere,  and  you  will  find  in  it  a  beauty  that  never  fades,  a 
newness  that  never  withers,  a  fragrance  that  never  departs.  (T.  Jones.)  No  new 
commandment : — It  is  scarcely  too  much  of  a  paradox  to  say  that  new  knowledge  is 
for  the  most  part  a  discovery  of  old  truth ;  we  talk  in  popular  language  of  the 
discovery  of  electricity,  but  the  electric  power  lurked  in  those  same  substances  since 
the  world  began ;  we  talk  with  delight  of  the  wonderful  discoveries  made  by  the 
spectroscope,  but  after  all  those  colours  were  in  the  sunlight,  those  elements  in  the 
starhght,  long  before ;  we  discover  the  marvellous  power  of  steam,  but  many  an 
earthquake  and  volcano  might  have  told  us  something  of  the  power  of  steam 
centuries  ago ;  "  no  new  law  I  write,"  the  steam-engine,  the  electric  current,  the 
light  seem  to  say  as  they  pass  on  their  rapid  flight,  but  "  an  old  law  "  which  ye  had 
from  the  beginning.  And  yet  as  we  watch  them  at  work  it  is  a  new  one ;  the  steam- 
engine  is  changing  the  course  of  commerce  and  the  face  of  society ;  the  electric 
current  puts  a  girdle  round  the  world  ;  we  know  something  of  the  stars  and  the  sun 
now  we  never  knew  before ;  our  ignorance,  "  our  darkness  is  passing  away,  and  the 
true  light  is  beginning  to  shine."  Can  we  wonder,  then,  when  we  turn  from  the 
physical  to  the  moral  world,  the  same  truth  holds  good  ?  But  our  paradox  carries 
us  further  than  this  ;  it  is  not  only  true  that  new  knowledge  is  often  only  a  discovery 
of  old  truth,  but  surely  it  is  also  true  that  not  infrequently  progress  in  the  world's 
best  life  is  only  made  by  the  re-discovery  of  old  knowledge.  What  are  we  doing  in 
sculpture,  except  trying  to  discover  how  to  reach  the  perfect  outline  of  the  Greeks  ? 
In  painting  we  still  study  the  old  masters ;  and  old  inscriptions  are  showing  us  how 
much  the  ancients  knew  which  we  thought  once  we  were  discovering  for  the  first 
time.  So  also  in  the  moral  and  religious  sphere,  what  have  all  the  great  Christian 
movements  been  except  re-proclamations  of  forgotten  truths?  The  Wesleyan 
movement  was  but  the  re-proclamation  of  the  necessity  of  conversion ;  the  so-called 
Oxford  movement  was  but  the  calling  emphatic  attention  to  the  neglected 
Sacraments;  and  this  at  least  can  be  said  of  the  Salvation  Army,  that  it  does 
remind  us  in  the  midst  of  our  culture  and  education  of  the  fact  of  perishing  souls. 
What,  then,  is  the  upshot  of  all  this  ?  First,  that  we  should  expect  to  find  God's  final 
word  for  the  world  no  new  one;  we  should  expect  to  find  His  great  revelation 
something  which  focussed  into  a  new  force  the  scattered  rays  of  old  truth ;  and 
secondly,  we  should  expect  to  find  that  in  course  of  time,  from  human  frailty, 
fragments  even  of  this  great  revelation  should  be  forgotten,  and  that  consequently, 
welling  forward,  as  it  were,  from  its  central  depths,  would  have  from  time  to  time 
to  shine  the  forgotten  truth.  I.  Now  the  great  commandment,  ever  old  and  ever 
NEW,  IS  the  law  of  LOVE.  1.  "  Is  it  true  to  history  ";  is  it  true  that  Christianity 
gathers  together  and  focuses  scattered  rays  of  old  truth  ?  In  dealing  with  sceptics 
it  is  often  found  that  if  a  saying  of  our  Lord's  can  be  shown  to  distantly  resemble 
the  saying  of  some  philosopher  centuries  ago,  if  the  teaching  of  Plato,  or  of  Seneca, 
or  of  Epictetus  can  be  quoted  as  anticipations  or  echoes  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  or  the  letters  of  St.  Paul,  if  sentences  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  can  be  shown  to 
be  embedded  in  Jewish  liturgies,  therefore  it  is  supposed  that  a  damaging  blow  has 
been  dealt  to  His  uniqueness  and  originality.  Why  !  on  the  contrary  we  glory  in 
it ;  we  trace  in  it  the  action  of  the  Incarnate  Word  before  He  is  Incarnate  ;  we  see 
Him  immanent  in  the  world  from  the  beginning,  teaching,  controlling,  guiding : 
it  is  the  very  thing  we  are  looking  for  to  confirm  our  faith  ;  and  if  one  thing  more 
than  another  could  be  discovered  to  send  home  this  teaching  of  brotherhood  into 
our  hearts,  it  is  to  find  that  it  is  no  new  commandment  He  gave  us  when  He  came 
in  the  flesh,  but  an  old  one  He  had  given  us  from  the  beginning.     2.  "  It  is  true  to 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

human  nature."  "A  planet  in  our  system,"  says  Bishop  Barry,  "has  three 
influences  playing  upon  it — it  has  first  its  own  centrifugal  force  which  bears  it  on 
its  way,  and  which  if  left  unbalanced  would  carry  it  forward  in  a  straight  Une  ;  it 
has  on  it  next  the  great  central  influence  of  the  sun,  and  thirdly  it  has  on  it  the 
influence  of  the  other  planets,"  and  he  goes  on  to  remind  us  of  the  remarkable  fact 
that  the  planet  Neptune  was  discovered  not  at  first  by  immediate  observation,  but 
by  the  effect  which  it  had,  though  unseen,  on  the  orbit  of  another  planet.  Now 
with  that  picture  before  us  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  Christianity  recognises  self. 
"  Not  afraid  of  the  shallow  taunt  of  selfishness  it  tells  man  plainly  that  his  own 
personality  is  a  treasure  committed  to  his  charge,  and  that  he  simply  fulfils  a  law 
of  his  being  in  educating  it  to  perfection,  and  therefore  to  happiness  in  this  world 
and  the  world  beyond  the  grave."  In  other  words,  we  are  called  by  Christianity  to 
self-sacrifice,  but  we  must  have  a  self  to  sacrifice.  A  question  was  asked  the  other 
day  after  an  address  to  some  Oxford  undergraduates  which  goes  to  the  root  of  the 
matter.  Was  it  wrong  to  educate  a  taste  for  art  ?  was  it  wrong  to  go  to  Venice  in 
the  vacation  ?  or  to  buy  a  beautiful  picture  for  one's  room  ?  The  sincerity  of  the 
question  was  beyond  dispute.  Putting  aside  all  obvious  cautions  about  extravagance 
or  over-indulgence  of  taste  or  cases  where,  on  account  of  the  present  distress,  it 
becomes  right  to  waive  our  rights,  as  a  broad  principle,  is  self-development  right  or 
wrong  ?  And  we  may  surely  venture  most  emphatically  to  answer  that  it  is  a  duty ;  that 
balanced  duly  by  the  other  infiuences,  the  instinct  of  self-development — the 
centrifugal  force  of  the  planet— must  have  its  place  ;  that  it  is  a  short-sighted  poUcy 
even  looked  at  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  human  race  to  crush  individuahty ; 
that  mind  and  powers  developed  will  have  more  to  give,  not  less,  in  the  days  to 
come  ;  and  that  we  shall  be  untrue  to  history  and  human  nature  if  we  ignore  the 
last  revelation  we  have  received — worked  out  too  by  human  sacrifice  and  human 
effort — of  personal  and  individual  freedom,  for  which  martyrs  have  fought  and  died. 
But  does  this  contradict  or  interfere  with  the  law  of  love  ?  Not  for  a  moment,  if  we 
remember  whose  we  are  and  whom  we  serve.  3.  But  is  it  practicable  ?  Does  the 
law  work  ?  And  it  is  a  relief  to  turn  away  from  general  principles  to  reporting  of 
the  thing  in  action ;  after  all,  "  the  only  true  gospel  is  the  gospel  of  life."  Now  in 
obedience  to  the  law  of  love  a  certain  number  of  the  sons  of  the  Universities  of 
Cambridge  and  Oxford  come  each  year  to  live  in  the  centre  of  East  London ;  they 
do  it  simply  and  naturally ;  they  make  no  parade  of  virtue  in  doing  it ;  their  labour 
is  a  labour  of  love.  What  is  the  effect  ?  Does  it  destroy  self  ?  By  God's  blessing 
it  helps  to  destroy  selfishness,  but  not  self ;  it  develops  self ;  it  transfigures  self. 
It  makes  men  of  them ;  the  calls  upon  their  judgment,  the  claims  upon  their 
sympathy,  the  education  of  their  powers  of  government,  insensibly  and  slowly  make 
character  ;  they  lose  their  Mves  only  to  find  them.  Has  it  any  effect  on  their  beUef 
in  God  ?  We  know  the  dreamy  haze  in  which  many  of  us  leave  the  University :  "  is 
the  old  gospel  true  after  all,"  we  ask  ourselves,  "  or  have  we  lost  it  among  the  maze 
of  modern  speculations  ?  "  What  effect  upon  this  haze  has  obedience  to  the  law  of 
love  ?  It  gives  a  man  back  his  faith  in  God ;  the  darkness  passes  away  and  the 
true  light  begins  to  shine  ;  and  he  finds  by  practical  experience  the  truth  of  the  old 
saying,  "  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God 
whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  "  And  if  it  ennobles  self  and  clears  the  vision  of  God,  what 
has  it  to  say  to  man  ?  It  wins  man ;  man  is  unable  to  resist  it ;  it  makes  him 
believe  in  a  brotherhood  of  which  he  has  heard  but  never  seen  before ;  this  is  a 
music  he  can  understand.  II.  This  brings  us  to  the  second  thing  we  might  expect 
to  find  ;  we  saw  that  we  might  expect  to  find  from  time  to  time  forgotten  depths  of 

EVEN  A  FINAL  REVELATION  SWELLING    FORWARD   INTO    THE    LIGHT    OF    DAY.       So    WCak   iS 

human  nature,  so  small  its  capacity  to  hold  infinite  truth,  that  it  has  from  time  to 
time  to  relearn  piecemeal  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  ;  just  as  clouds  keep 
gathering  round  the  sun,  and  then  being  dispersed,  so  the  darkness  of  prejudice  and 
selfishness  keeps  gathering  round  the  sun  of  revelation ;  again  and  again  that 
darkness  has  to  be  dispersed,  and  the  true  light  again  and  again  to  shine.  Now  as 
we  look  out  upon  the  world,  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  something  has  begun  to 
shine  which  was  not  there  before.  Ask  people  who  have  been  abroad  for  fifteen  or 
twenty  years,  and  then  come  back  to  England,  and  they  will  tell  you  that  they  are 
perfectly  astonished  at  what  they  see.  But  these  things,  they  will  tell  you,  are  but 
symptoms  of  an  inner  change  ;  they  find  the  whole  tone  different;  they  find  the  old 
class  feeling  vanishing ;  they  find  the  heart  of  one  half  of  the  world  has  begun  to  go 
out  towards  the  other.  What  is  the  meaning  of  it  ?  It  fronts  us,  it  judges  us,  it  is 
a  fact ;  and  the  question  is  this,  Is  it  to  be  sneered  down  as  a  passing  whim  or  is  ii 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  JOHN.  97 

part  of  the  life  of  God  ?  And  in  upholding  that  it  is  part  of  the  life  of  God  which 
has  again  found  its  way  through  the  mists  of  human  selfishness,  we  may  take  our 
Btand  on  three  grounds.  1.  It  was  time  for  it  to  come ;  we  had  learnt  the  last 
lesson,  we  understand  the  freedom  of  the  individual.  2.  It  is  too  strong  to  be  a 
whim  ;  the  true  diamond  and  the  diamond  of  paste  are  like  enough  to  look  at,  but 
you  can  cut  with  the  one  and  not  the  other ;  this  diamond  cuts.  3.  The  colour  of 
the  light  bears  witness  to  its  source  ;  we  aU  may  mistake  many  things  at  times  and 
many  colours,  but  when  we  see  it  in  action  there  is  no  mistaking  the  white  Ught  of 
love.  And  so,  in  conclusion,  we  have  to  ask  ourselves.  What  is  to  be  our  attitude 
towards  this  brightening  light  ?  (1)  And  first,  surely  at  any  rate,  not  an  attitude 
of  opposition  ;  the  most  cautious  of  us  can  hardly  refuse  to  accede  to  the  counsel  of 
the  cautious  Gamahel.  (2)  But  secondly,  the  very  words  of  Gamahel  show  us  that 
•we  cannot  stop  there ;  if  it  is  of  God,  and  we  as  Christians  are  fellow- workers  with 
God,  then  God  expects  us,  He  must  expect  us  to  help  it  on.  (A.  F.  W.  Ingram,  M.A.) 
Which  thing  is  true  in  Him  and  in  you. — The  law  of  Love  true  to  the  requirements  of 
life  : — What  does  he  here  mean  by  "  true  "  ?  In  Scripture,  as  in  our  daily  speech, 
the  word  stands  not  merely  for  the  giving  over  unchanged  by  our  mind  to  the  mind 
of  another,  by  words  or  otherwise,  of  something  we  know,  so  that  he  shall  get  it 
just  as  we  have  it.  It  means  often  the  real  instead  of  the  seeming — that  which  is, 
not  that  which  we  think  to  be.  Not  so  often  it  must  be  taken,  as  in  this  place,  for 
that  which  fits,  as  a  key  the  lock  which  it  opens,  or  a  medicine  the  disease  which  it 
heals,  or  a  plan  the  difficulty  it  solves.  That,  in  short,  which  puts  things  right 
which  are  wrong,  which,  disentangling  confusion  brings  about  order,  supplying 
wants,  stopping  gaps,  knitting  together  broken  links,  making  useful  that  which 
without  it  is  useless,  or  beautiful  that  which  by  itself  is  uncomely.  That  which 
does  this  in  each  case  is  the  "  true."  What  the  apostle,  therefore,  here  means  ia 
that  the  great  law  of  love  fits  into  the  facts,  the  realities,  of  human  nature  in  the 
best  way,  giving  it  a  finished  beauty,  and  putting  into  it  what  it  lacked  for  its  smooth 
working.  Nothing  else,  the  apostle  would  teU  us,  could  bring  about  so  much  good ; 
and  he  is  sure  that  we  can  see  this  clearly  to  be  the  case  in  Christ  and  in  ourselves. 
This  law  of  love,  he  says,  "  is  true  in  Him  and  in  you."  Without  this  love  aU  the 
glory  of  the  life  of  Christ  would  be  gone.  We  see  how  it  was  needed  to  make 
perfect  all  that  He  was  and  did.  We  see  the  boundless  usefulness  of  that  life  to  us 
and  to  the  world.  But  what  good  could  that  life  or  that  death  have  done  but  for 
the  love  which  ruled  Christ  in  both  ?  Think  next  of  yourselves,  saith  St.  John  ;  think 
how  your  thoughts,  your  feelings,  your  lives,  your  treatment  of  others,  are  aU 
changed.  You  are  happier,  you  are  in  aU  ways  better  than  you  were ;  your  old 
difficulties  in  dealing  with  others  you  now  no  longer  feel.  Doubts  as  to  the  things 
it  were  best  for  you  to  do  are  gone.  Whence  the  change  ?  Has  it  not  clearlj 
followed  on  your  obedience  to  the  law  of  love  ?  (C.  Watson,  D.D.)  The  darkness 
is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth. — The  darkness  passing — the  light  shining  ;— 
I.  In  Chkist  PEEsoNAiiLT  THIS  IS  TRUE,  "  that  the  darkness  is  passing  and  the  trne 
light  is  shining."  In  so  far  as  this  is  a  continuous  process,  or  progressive  experience, 
it  is  true  of  Christ  only  as  He  walked  on  earth.  Darkness  is  upon  Him,  around 
Him,  in  Him ;  the  darkness  of  the  sin  with  which  He  comes  in  contact,  the  sin 
which,  in  its  criminality  and  curse.  He  makes  His  own.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  true  light  is  ever  shining  upon  Him,  around  Him,  in  Him ;  the  Ught  of  the 
Father's  loving  eye  bent  upon  His  suffering  Son ;  the  light  of  His  own  single  eye 
ever  bent  upon  the  Father's  glory.  In  Him  this  darkness  and  this  light  are  in- 
cessantly meeting  ;  present  always,  both  of  them,  vividly  present  to  His  conscious- 
ness ;  felt  to  be  real,  intensely  real — the  darkness,  however,  always  as  passing ; 
the  true  light  always  as  now  shining.  H.  What  is  true  in  Him  should  be  true  in 
TJS,  and  should  be  reahsed  by  us  as  true  in  us  as  in  Hun.  That  is  the  apostle's  new 
commandment.  For  we  enter  into  the  position  of  Him  in  whom,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, that  is  true.  The  commandment  to  us  is  to  enter  into  His  position.  And  it 
is  a  new  position.  It  is  new  to  every  one  with  whom  the  commandment  finds 
acceptance  and  in  whom  it  takes  effect.  1.  "  The  darkness  is  passing."  Is  it  so 
with  me,  to  me,  in  me  ?  Then  all  that  pertains  to  the  darkness,  aU  that  is  allied  to 
it,  is  passing  too.  It  is  all  hke  a  term  in  course  of  being  worked  out  in  an  algebraic 
question ;  a  vanishing  quantity  ;  a  fading  colour.  Plainly  there  is  here  a  thoroughly 
practical  test.  This  darkness  is  the  absence  of  God.  Now  I  come  into  contact  with 
this  darkness  on  every  hand,  at  every  point.  Places,  scenes,  companies,  from  which 
God  is  shut  out ;  works  and  ways  from  which  God  is  shut  out ;  people  from  whose 
minds  and  hearts  God  is  shut  out — I  am  in  the  midst  of  them  aU.     Worse  than 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

that,  they  are  in  me,  as  having  only  too  good  auxiliaries  in  my  own  sinful  bosom. 
How  do  I  regard  them?  Do  I  cleave  to  them,  to  any  of  them?  Would  I  have 
them  to  abide,  at  least  a  little  longer?  Would  it  pain  me  to  part  with  them  and  let 
them  pass?  "  The  darkness  is  passing."  Is  that  true  in  me,  as  in  Christ,  with 
reference  not  merely  to  the  darkness  of  this  world  that  has  such  a  hold  on  me,  but 
also  and  chiefly  to  the  darkness  of  my  own  shutting  out  of  God ;  the  darkness  of  my 
shutting  out  of  God  from  my  own  conscious  guilt  and  cherished  sin  ?  That  ia 
darkness  indeed.  Is  it  passing  ?  Am  I  glad  of  its  passing  ?  Or  am  I  in  some 
measure  so  loving  it  that  I  would  not  have  it  all  at  once  pass?  2.  "  The  true  light 
is  now  shining."  This  is  not  represented  as  a  benefit  to  be  got,  or  as  a  reward  to  be 
reached,  after  the  darkness  shall  have  passed.  It  is  a  present  privilege  or  possession. 
It  is  true,  as  a  great  fact,  in  you  as  in  Christ,  that  the  true  light  now  shineth.  And 
the  fact  of  its  now  shining  while  the  darkness  is  passing  is  the  thing  which  is  to  be 
recognised  as  true  in  you  as  in  Christ.  That  is  the  "new  commandment"  ;  a  com- 
mandment always  new  ;  conveying  in  its  bosom  an  ever-fresh  experience,  pregnant 
with  ever-fresh  experimental  discoveries  of  Him  who  is  light  and  who  dwells  in 
light.  Only  act  up  to  this  commandment ;  be  ever  acting  up  to  it  more  and  more. 
Enter  into  the  spirit  of  it,  and  follow  it  out  to  its  fair  and  fuU  issues.  {R.  S. 
Candlish,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-11.  He  that  .  .  .  hateth  his  brother  is  in  darkness. — Brotherly  love  a 
test  and  means  of  being  and  abiding  with  guileless  spirit  in  the  light  instead  of  walking 
in  darkness : — I.  Brotherly  love  consists  in  this — that  they  in  whom,  as  in 
Christ,  this  thing  is  true,  that  the  darkness  is  passing  and  the  true  light  is  shining, 
recognise  one  another  as,  in  that  character  and  on  that  account,  brethren.  For, 
first,  in  Christ,  our  position  with  reference  to  that  darkness  is  changed  from  what  it 
naturally  is.  It  is  reversed.  The  terrible  flood  is  not  now  carrying  us  away ;  we 
stem  it  holding  Him — He  holding  us.  We  see  it  passing.  Now  all  is  changed. 
By  grace  in  Christ  I  am  in  a  new  way.  As  I  feebly  open  my  heavy  eyes  in  the 
upper  atmosphere  I  am  now  beginning  to  breathe,  what  bright  warm  beam  is  that 
which  lightens  up  the  face  of  Him  in  whose  arms  I  am,  and  lightens  up  my  heart  as 
I  look  and  gaze  on  Him  and  cling  and  grow  to  Him  ?  It  is  the  Father  loving  me  as 
He  loveth  Him.  It  is  "  the  darkness  passing  and  the  true  light  now  shining." 
Then,  as  the  first  confused  and  rapturous  joy  of  my  own  narrow  escape  becomes 
collected  and  calm,  I  look  around.  And  I  see  Him^for  He  multiphes  Himself  and 
is  everywhere — I  see  Him  doing  the  same  kind  office  to  one,  and  another,  and 
another  still,  that  He  is  doing  to  me.  I  see  Him  embracing  them  because  He  loved 
them  and  gave  Himself  for  them.  Shall  I  not  hail  them  as  my  brethren  ?  Can  I 
hate,  or  refuse  to  love,  one  who  is  my  brother  on  such  a  footing  as  that?  U.  Hence 
it  is  that  the  existence  of  this  brotherly  love  is  a  fitting  test  of  our  beino  "  in  the 
LIGHT."  At  aU  events,  the  absence  of  it  is  conclusive  proof  that  we  are  not.  Light 
is  in  itself — in  its  very  nature  and  bare  shining — a  great  extinguisher  of  hatred, 
especially  of  hatred  among  those  who  should  be  brethren.  It  is  in  the  darkness  that 
mistakes  occur  and  misunderstandings  arise.  It  is  in  the  darkness  that  injuries  are 
brooded  over  and  angry  passions  nursed.  If  you,  brother,  and  I,  are  at  variance,  it 
is  almost  certain  to  be  because  there  is  some  darkness  about  us  that  hinders  us  from 
seeing  one  another  clearly.  Hence  we  imagine  evil  of  one  another  and  impute  evil 
to  one  another.  Let  in  the  light.  Let  us  see  one  another  clearly.  Differences 
between  us  may  still  remain ;  our  views  of  many  things  may  be  wide  as  the  poles 
asunder.  But  we  see  that  we  are  men  of  like  passions  and  hke  affections  with  one 
another.  The  light  shows  us  that  we  are  true  brethren  in  spite  of  all.  HI.  The 
exercise  of  brotherly  love  is  fitted  to  be  the  means  of  our  continuing  in  the  light, 
60  as  to  avoid  the  risk  of  falling  (ver.  10).  Two  benefits  are  here.  First,  positively, 
by  means  of  brotherly  love  we  abide  in  the  light.  The  law  of  action  and  reaction  is 
here  very  noticeable.  Being  in  the  light  begets  brotherly  love,  and  brotherly  love 
secures  abiding  in  the  light.  For  this  brotherly  love  is  simply  love  to  the  true  light, 
as  I  see  it  shining  in  my  brother  as  it  shines  in  Christ.  And  such  love  to  the  true 
light,  wherever  and  in  whomsoever  it  is  seen  shining  as  it  shines  in  Christ,  must 
needs  cause  me  to  grow  up  more  and  more  into  the  true  light  myself ;  to  grow  up 
into  Christ  and  God  in  Christ.  Secondly,  "  there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in 
Him."  This  is  a  negative  advantage  ;  but  it  is  great.  Saved  yourselves  by  grace, 
gratuitous  and  rich  and  full ;  loved  with  an  everlasting  love ;  grasped  in  the  arms, 
in  the  bosom,  of  Him  in  whom  and  in  you,  as  now  one,  "  the  darkness  is  passing 
and  the  true  light  is  now  shining  " — your  spirit  is  free,  your  heart  enlarged.    Being 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  99 

loved,  you  love.  The  scales  of  selfishness  fall  from  off  your  eyes.  Christ  sends  you 
to  His  brethren :  "  Go  tell  My  brethren."  And  as  you  go  to  them  with  Christ's 
message  and  on  Christ's  errand,  and  make  them  more  and  more  your  brethren  aa 
they  are  His,  you  clearly  see  your  way.  He  makes  it  clear.  And  you  walk  at  liberty 
when  you  have  respect  to  all  His  commandments,  "  loving  your  brother,  and  so 
abiding  in  the  light."  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  He  that  loveth  his  brother  ahideth 
in  the  light. — Moral  darkness : — Note  the  solemn  and  picturesque  eloquence  of  the 
accessional  parallelism  in  this  verse.  The  inner  condition  of  him  who  hates  his 
brother — "  is  in  darkness  "  ;  the  outward  life — "  walketh  in  darkness  "  (Psa.  Ixxxii.  5 ; 
Eccles.  ii.  14).  He  has  lost  his  point  of  orientation — "  he  knoweth  not  whither  he 
goeth,"  to  what  unsurmised  guilt  and  punishment.  Something  follows,  worse  than 
darkness  above  —  the  darkness  has  not  only  blinded  him,  but  "blinded  his  very 
eyes  "  once  for  all.  He  has  lost  the  very  faculty  of  sight  I  Could  the  apostle  have 
thought  of  creatures  who,  in  dark  caverns,  not  only  lose  the  faculty  of  sight,  but 
have  the  visive  organs  atrophied  ?  Tennyson  has  presented  the  same  image,  applying 
it,  however,  not  to  sin,  but  to  sorrow — 

•'  But  the  night  has  crept  into  my  heart, 
And  begun  to  darken  my  eyes." 

(Ahp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Hatred  causes  stumbling  : — He  who  hates  his  brother 
stumbles  against  himself  and  everything  within  and  withoat ;  he  who  loves  has  an 
unimpeded  path.     {A.  J.  Bengel.) 

Vers.  12-14.  I  write  unto  you,  little  children, — I.  Cheistians  of  all  ages  and 
BANKS  ARE  AND  SHOULD  BE  AS  LITTLE  CHILDREN.  1.  As  little  children  are  newly 
entered  into  the  world,  and  beginning  their  lives,  all  things  are  new  to  them,  so 
whosoever  wUl  be  saved  entereth  into  a  new  state  by  being  renewed  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  participating  of  the  Divine  nature.  2.  Having  a  new  life,  they  look 
after  that  which  will  maintain  and  keep  it  up  in  good  vigour  ;  for  aU  creatures  that 
have  Ufe  have  something  put  into  them  which  attracteth  the  nourishment  proper  to 
that  life.  3.  In  regard  of  humility,  and  designs,  and  contrivances  after  greatness  in 
the  world.  They  that  become  as  little  children  seek  not  after  dominions  and  digni- 
ties and  honours.  4.  Innocent  and  harmless  as  a  chUd,  who,  though  infected  with 
sin,  and  must  be  saved  by  Christ  as  others  of  grown  age,  yet  cannot  act  sin.  H, 
Such  who  abe  as  little  childben  have  obtained  remission  of  sins  for  Christ's 
name's  sake.  1.  What  is  forgiveness  of  sins  ?  (1)  It  is  a  judicial  actipn  of  God. 
One  man  forgiveth  another  ;  for  our  heavenly  Father  requireth  that  (Matt,  xviii.  35). 
But  our  forgiveness  is  an  act  of  charity  or  duty  imposed  upon  us.  God's  forgiveness 
is  an  act  of  authority,  as  He  is  the  Governor  and  Judge  of  the  world.  (2)  By  which 
He  doth  freely  and  fully  release  from  the  guUt  of  all  our  transgressions,  (a)  Freely. 
God  doeth  it,  and  that  without  any  cost  to  us  (Isa.  lii.  3).  {h)  It  is  full;  as  God 
pardoneth  freely,  so  also  fuUy,  and  not  by  halves ;  universally,  and  not  a  few  sins 
only,  (c)  It  is  a  release  from  the  guUt  of  our  transgressions.  Properly  it  is  the 
obligation  to  punishment  which  God  releaseth  us  from.  A  reprieve  only  deferreth 
execution,  but  a  pardon  wholly  preventeth  it.  (d)  The  object  of  this  pardon  is  the 
penitent  believer;  and  that  faith  is  required  (Acts  x.  43).  (e)  This  sin  is  forgiven 
without  requiring  satisfaction  or  punishment  of  the  sinner.  2.  How  it  is  obtained. 
(1)  Sin,  a  transgi-ession  of  the  law,  a  debt,  as  being  a  wrong  done  against  God, 
obliging  the  sinner  either  to  repair  God  in  point  of  honour,  or  to  lie  under  the  wrath 
of  God  for  evermore  ;  for  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death"  (Rom.  vi.  23).  (2)  There  is 
no  deliverance  from  this  debt  of  sin,  or  obligation  to  wrath  because  of  sin,  but  by 
pardon  and  forgiveness.  (3)  There  is  some  hope  of  forgiveness,  because  God  for- 
beareth  the  worst,  and  doth  not  stir  up  all  His  wrath  against  them.  They  have 
food,  and  raiment,  and  ease,  and  liberty,  and  friends  and  wealth,  and  honour. 
Everything  about  us  proclaimeth  the  goodness  of  this  God  with  whom  we  have  to 
do  (Acts  xiv.  17).  (4)  Though  forgiveness  may  be  probably  hoped  for  from  God's 
goodness  and  mercy  as  represented  in  common  providence,  yet  tiU  there  be  a  satis- 
faction for  the  offence,  and  we  may  have  our  pardon  granted  with  the  good  leave  of 
provoked  justice,  the  soul  can  have  no  satisfaction.  The  grand  scruple  that  haunts 
the  guilty  creature  is  how  shall  God  be  appeased?  (Micah  vi.  7.)  (5)  It  was  agree- 
able to  the  honour  and  wisdom  of  God  that  those  who  would  have  benefit  by  this 
remedy  should  be  sensible  of  the  weight  which  is  upon  them,  and  humbly  confess 
their  sins,  and  with  brokenness  of  heart  sue  out  their  pardon.     (6)  It  is  fit  also  that 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

those  who  would  sue  out  their  pardon  in  this  humble  and  submissive  way  should 
acknowledge  their  Redeemer,  and  thankfully  accept  of  the  benefit  procured  by  Hun, 
and  offered  to  them  in  His  name ;  and  heartily  consent  to  His  covenant  to  be 
brought  home  to  God  again,  that  they  may  be  fully  recovered  out  of  their  lapsed 
condition.     HI.  Such  as  have  oBTArNED  remission  of  sins  are  bound  to  express 

THEIR    gratitude    AND    THANKFULNESS  TO  GOD  BY  NEW  OBEDIENCE.       1.    That  they  may 

not  undo  what  is  done,  and  so  build  again  the  things  they  have  destroyed 
(Gal.  ii.  17,  18).  2.  That  we  may  make  good  our  qualification.  Certain  it  is  that 
none  are  pardoned  but  those  that  are  renewed  and  born  again ;  for  the  application 
of  the  merit  of  Christ  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  are  inseparable  (1  Cor.  vi.  11). 

3.  To  express  their  gratitude  and  thankfulness  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  4.  Because  they 
have  great  encouragements  (Psa.  cxxx.  4).  Use — 1.  Let  me  now  exhort  you  to 
seek  after  the  pardon  of  sins.  To  this  end — (1)  Consider  your  necessity.  (2)  Con- 
sider the  grounds  and  hopes  of  pardon ;  God's  merciful  nature  and  self -inclination 
to  pity  us.  (3)  Consider  what  a  blessed  comfort  it  is  to  have  sin  forgiven  (Psa. 
xxxii.  1,  2).  Use — 2.  To  stir  us  up  not  to  offend  God  any  more,  or  provoke  Him  to 
rtnger  by  our  sins.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  A  sermon  to  the  Lord's  Utile  children: — 
I.  I  want  the  babes  in  grace,  the  weak  in  faith,  to  notice  their  privilege.  "  I 
write  unto  you,  httle  children,  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  His  name's 
Bake."  1.  This  is  a  privilege  extremely  desired  by  the  little  children.  They  have 
but  lately  felt  the  burden  of  guilt ;  the  Spirit  of  God  has  but  newly  convinced  them 
of  sin ;  and,  therefore,  above  everything,  their  prayer  is,  "  Father,  forgive  me."  To 
the  freshly  saved  it  is  a  joy  worth  worlds  to  have  their  sins  forgiven ;  and  this  joy 
belongs  of  right  to  all  the  saints,  yea,  even  to  the  little  children  in  the  family  of 
God.  The  pardon  of  sin  is  as  the  pearl  of  great  price  to  you  in  your  present  stage 
of  spiritual  life  ;  you  would  have  sold  aU  that  you  had  in  order  to  procure  it ;  and 
now  that  you  have  it  your  heart  is  aglow  with  gratitude.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  stay 
your  holy  joy,  and  yet  the  Lord  will  show  you  greater  things  than  these.  2.  At 
your  stage  of  experience  pardon  is  the  most  prominent  blessing  of  the  covenant. 
The  newly-pardoned  does  not  yet  see  the  innumerable  other  blessings  which  come 
in  the  train  of  forgiveness  ;  he  is  for  the  present  absorbed  in  the  hearing  of  that  one 
sentence,  "  Go  in  peace  ;  thy  sins  which  are  many  are  aU  forgiven  thee."  Pardon 
is  but  an  entrance  blessing,  a  welcome  at  the  doorstep  :  there  are  rarer  joys  within 
the  house.  You  have  become  an  heir  to  a  boundless  inheritance ;  all  things  are 
yours ;  heaven,  and  Christ,  and  God  are  yours.  3.  Here  let  me  observe  that  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  is  assuredly  the  possession  of  the  new  beginner  in  the  Divine  life. 

4.  Note,  also,  that  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  on  the  same  terms  as  those  of  the 
apostle,  and  the  greatest  of  the  saints  :  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  the  sake  of 
Jesus,  for  the  sake  of  His  glorious  person,  for  the  sake  of  His  honourable  offices,  for 
the  sake  of  His  atoning  death,  for  the  sake  of  His  glorious  resurrection,  for  the  sake 
of  His  perpetual  intercession  before  the  throne  of  God.  6.  Now  notice  that  this  is 
the  reason  why  John  wrote  to  you,  httle  children.  The  moment,  then,  that  a  man 
has  his  sins  forgiven,  he  is  old  enough  to  begin  to  understand  that  which  is  written, 
and  he  should  become  a  Bible  reader.  U.  I  have  to  speak  of  the  knowledge  of 
these  Mttle  children.  "  I  have  written  unto  you,  httle  children,  because  ye  have 
known,  or  know,  the  Father."  The  tiniest  babe  in  the  family  of  God  knows  the 
Father.  1.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  his  sins  are  forgiven  him.  By  whom  is  that 
pardon  given  ?  Why,  by  the  Father  ;  and,  therefore,  he  that  has  had  his  sins  for- 
given him  necessarily  knows  the  Father.  2.  Moreover,  this  is  a  piece  of  know- 
ledge which  the  child  of  God  obtains  very  early  in  his  spiritual  life  ;  for  whatever  a 
child  does  not  know,  he  knows  his  father.  Little  children,  you  know  God  now  in 
your  spiritual  childhood.  You  could  not  write  a  treatise  upon  His  attributes ;  but 
you  know  Him  by  the  instinct  of  a  child.  Little  children,  the  result  of  your  know- 
ing God  as  your  Father  is  that  when  He  is  away  from  you  you  are  in  the  habit  of 
crying  after  Him.  On  the  other  hand,  when  you  do  get  to  your  Father  you  show 
that  you  love  Him  by  the  perfect  restfulness  of  your  spirit.  In  God  you  are  at 
home.  The  presence  of  God  is  the  paradise  of  the  believer.  This  also  is  true, 
that  you  seek  to  imitate  Him.  Would  you  not  be  perfect  if  you  could  ?  If  you 
could,  would  you  not  be  rid  of  every  sin  ?  And  do  you  not  glory  in  Him  ? 
Little  children  when  they  begin  to  talk,  and  go  to  school,  how  proud  they 
are  of  their  father !  We  cannot  make  enough  of  our  God.  We  extol  Him  with 
all  our  might.  With  the  blessed  virgin  we  sing,  "My  soul  doth  magnify  the 
Lord."  in.  The  precepts  which  John  has  written  for  your  guidance.  First, 
look  at  1  John  ii. :  "  My  httle  children,  these  things  I  write  unto  you,  that  ye  sin 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  101 

not,"  1.  That  is  the  first  precept — Uttle  children,  sin  not.  Children  are  very  apt 
to  get  into  the  mire.  There  is  so  much  of  carnality  about  us,  so  much  of  the  old 
Adam,  that  the  question  is  not  into  which  sin  we  fall,  but  into  which  sin  we  do  not 
fall.  Like  the  pendulum,  we  swing  to  the  right  hand  and  then  to  the  left :  we  err 
first  in  one  way  and  then  in  another ;  we  are  ever  inclined  to  evU.  Avoid  every 
sin.  Ask  for  the  grace  of  God  to  sanctify  you  wholly,  spirit,  soul,  and  body. 
2.  Further  on  in  this  second  chapter  the  apostle  writes  to  them  again,  and  tells  them 
(ver.  18)  that  it  is  the  last  time,  and  that  there  are  many  antichrists  abroad.  You 
will  have  to  run  your  eye  right  down  the  chapter  till  you  come  to  verse  24,  for  that 
is  what  he  says  to  little  children,  because  there  are  many  antichrists  in  the  world 
that  would  seduce  them  ;  "  Let  that  therefore  abide  in  you,  which  ye  have  heard 
from  the  beginning."  Little  children  are  very  fickle.  The  toys  which  they  cry 
for  one  day  they  break  the  next ;  young  minds  change  with  the  wind.  So, 
little  children,  there  are  many  evU  ones  who  wiU  endeavour  to  seduce  you  from  the 
truth  of  God,  it  is  well  to  be  on  your  guard  against  those  who  would  mislead  you. 
Till  we  are  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  truth,  new  things  have  great  charms  for  us, 
especially  if  they  have  about  them  a  great  show  of  holiness  and  zeal  for  God. 
"  Little  children,  let  that  therefore  abide  in  you,  which  ye  have  heard  from  the 
beginning,"  leave  to  others  the  soon-exhausted  novelties.  3.  Little  children,  here  is  a 
third  precept  for  you  (ver.  28).  "  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  Him."  Let  the 
truth  abide  in  you,  and  do  you  abide  in  Christ,  who  is  the  truth.  What  next  ?  4. 
Read  on  to  chapter  iii.  7 — "  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you."  Children  are 
very  credulous ;  they  will  believe  any  idle  tale  if  it  be  told  them  by  a  clever  and 
attractive  person.  Little  children,  believe  your  Saviour,  but  be  not  ready  to  believe 
anybody  else.  5.  Further  oil  (iii.  18)  we  read,  "  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in 
word,  neither  in  tongue  ;  but  in  deed  and  in  truth."  6.  You  have  the  next  word  in 
chapter  iv.  4 — "  Ye  are  of  God,  little  children,  and  have  overcome  them ;  because 
greater  is  He  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  Satan  dwells  in  the 
world,  and  he  is  mighty  ;  but  God  dwells  in  you,  and  He  is  almighty;  therefore  be 
not  afraid.  7.  The  last  precept  to  little  children  is  at  the  end  of  the  Epistle.  Care- 
fully read  the  last  verse — "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols."  I  do  not 
think  you  are  likely  to  fall  in  love  with  the  idols  of  the  heathen  and  bow  down  to 
them ;  but  there  are  plenty  of  other  gods  which  are  the  idols  of  one  period  and  the 
derision  of  the  next.  Keep  you  to  Christ.  Ask  not  for  pomp  and  show  ;  ask  not  for 
noise  and  bluster ;  ask  for  nothing  but  that  your  sins  may  be  forgiven  you,  that 
you  may  know  the  Father,  and  then  that  you  may  abide  in  Christ,  and  be  fuU  of 
love  to  all  the  family  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  gospel  to  the  young  : — What 
is  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  the  young  ?  1.  It  appeals  to  their  conscience, 
for  youth  has  a  conscience,  a  very  sensitive  conscience.  How  the  boy  blushes  when  he 
tells  his  first  Ue.  The  soul  of  the  boy  shrinks  from  sin  at  first.  How  penitent  he  is  for 
the  angry  blow  or  the  cruel  word.  May  I  not  tell  that  child  how  sin  may  be  put 
away  ?  Ah,  we  tell  the  child,  and  we  tell  him  to-day,  that  the  lie  will  grow,  and  that 
the  habit  will  increase.  2.  It  is  also  a  gospel  to  the  heart.  I  believe  in  making 
religion  a  personal  thing,  in  bringing  before  the  child,  or  the  growing  boy,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  a  living,  loving  person,  One  who  feels  for  him,  and  One  who  knows 
him.  3.  It  is  a  gospel  which  appeals  to  the  admirations.  It  tells  the  child  of 
the  wondrous  promises  of  God,  and  the  little  child's  admiration  is  kindled.  4.  It 
is  the  gospel  to  the  energies.  It  represents  life  as  a  vineyard  to  be  planted,  as  a 
battle  to  be  fought,  as  a  work  to  be  done.  The  gospel  to  the  young  tells  them  that 
if  they  grow  up  there  is  work  for  them  to  do.  5.  It .  is  a  gospel  of  aspirations. 
Youth  is  the  time  of  hope.  Youth  is  the  time  of  ambitions.  And  the  gospel  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  recognises  that,  and  will  never  laugh  at  the  young  Joseph 
because  he  has  dreamed  that  other  sheaves  are  coming  and  bowing  down  to  his 
sheaf.  But  remember,  boy,  the  sheaves  wiU  never  bow  down  to  your  sheaf  unless 
you  take  off  your  coat,  and  sharpen  your  sickle,  and  get  to  work.  Life  is  not  simply 
to  be  dreamed  away.  {E.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.)  The  Father  and  His  children  : — 
Having  shown  what  God  is,  and  what  follows  from  that,  what  Christ  is,  and  also 
what  follows  from  that,  St.  John  now  tells  his  readers  what  by  the  grace  of  God 
they  themselves  are,  and  what  follows  from  that.  St.  John's  description  of  Chris- 
tians. I.  In  their  unity,  or  as  to  the  things  they  have  in  common.  1.  A  common 
life  (ver.  12).  "  Children  "  is  one  of  the  standing  terms  in  this  Epistle  for  all  Chris- 
tians of  all  ages  and  ranks  ;  and  the  great  truth  to  which  this  term  witnesses  is  the 
kinship  of  all  Christian  people.  2.  We  are  all  feeble  in  power,  partial  in  knowledge, 
fractious  in  temper,  imperfect  in  all  things.     If  Newton  at  the  height  of  his  career 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

felt  himself  a  child  strolling  on  the  shore  of  a  fathomless  sea ;  if  St.  Paul  at  the 
height  of  his  inspiration  felt  that  his  views  of  truth  were  imperfect,  "  for  now  I 
know  in  part,  and  prophesy  in  part  "  ;  if  Michael  Angelo  at  eighty  said,  "I  carry 
my  satchel  still " — still  like  a  little  child  going  every  day  to  school  to  learn  a  new 
lesson  ;  if  J.  B.  Green,  with  all  his  mine  of  knowledge,  said,  "  I  shall  die  learning  " ; 
eurely,  then,  we  must  feel  that  the  term  "  little  ones  "  is  no  piece  of  apostolic  play- 
fulness, no  mere  pet  name  prompted  by  St.  John's  great  love,  but  a  strictly  accurate 
description  of  us  all.     3.  Faith  in  His  name,  i.e.,  in  Himself,  as  revealed  by  Him- 
self to  us — is  the  first  religious  act  of  man.    Forgiveness  in  His  name  is  the  first 
religious  gift  of  God.     Faith  and  forgiveness  constitute  the  first  act  of  reciprocity, 
of  give  and  take  between  God  and  man.     Now  forgiveness  of  sin  is  the  third  fact 
common  to  all  Christians.     All  Christians  are  akin.     All  are  imperfect.   All  are  for- 
given.    4.  To  know  the  Father  means  to  hve  in  direct  personal  communion  with 
the  Father — personally  to  love  Him,  to  obey  Him,  to  draw  near  Him  in  prayer  and 
praise.     To  live  with  regard  to  God  not  like  an  orphan  whose  father  is  a  mere 
memory  or  a  hearsay,  but  like  a  child  whose  father  is  alive  and  at  home,  who  sees 
him  every  day,  knows  him  better  and  loves  more  as  each  day  passes — that  is  the 
crowning  feature  of  the  Christian  life.     H.  In  their  variety.     1.  Knowledge  is  the 
feature  of  age.     "  I  write  unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  know."     You  cannot  begin 
your  Christian  life  with  knowing ;  you  must  begin  with  believing.     Life — only  a 
life  of  action  for  God  can  change  belief  into  knowledge.     2.  Young  men,  there  is  a 
fight  before  you.    Mrs.  Oliphant,  in  one  of  her  weird  stories,  tells  of  a  secret  chamber 
in  a  haunted  castle,  where  dwelt  for  ages  a  bad  ancestor  of  a  lordly  race,  keeping 
himself  alive  by  unholy  arts.     Every  heir  of  that  house  on  his  twenty-first  birth- 
day was  compelled  to  enter  the  chamber  alone  and  meet  the  temptations  of  this 
evil  man.     One  by  one  they  fell  into  the  snare ;  tiU  one  came  who  discarded  the 
Bword  given  him,  and  met  the  tempter  in  God's  name,  and  conquered.     Well,  that 
weird  ghost-story  is  our  own  life-story.    All  men  and  all  women  meet  that  spectre. 
We  would  protect  you  young  folk  ;  we  would  save  you  the  temptation  in  the  wilder- 
ness ;  but  it  may  not  be.     Hell  will  assault  you  at  every  point  of  your  nature.     Now 
a  young  man's  strength  in  that  dread  hour  depends  on  how  much  of  God's  Word  he 
has  in  him.     (J.  M.  Gibbon.)         Christians  as  little  children: — St.  John  here  con- 
siders the  children  of  God,  whom,  as  previously,  he  calls  little,  not  contemptuously, 
but  in  reference  to  known  infirmities,  abbreviated  knowledge,  and  feeble  progress. 
The  greatest  saint,  after  all,  is  but  as  a  little  child,  as  it  respects  attainments  in 
virtue  and  knowledge.     As  a  giant,  beside  a  pyramid  of  Egypt,  is  but  as  a  pigmy ; 
and  the  whole  earth,  compared  with  the  universe  in  which  it  rolls,  but  a  small 
planet ;  and  its  loftiest  peaks  as  mites  on  its  surface  when  compared  with  its  bulk ; 
BO  God's  worshippers,  compared  with  Him,  the  Omniscient,  the  Omnipresent,  and 
the  Eternal,  are  as  nothing.     The  wisest  are  the  most  humble,  because  they  know 
how  Uttle  they  know,  and  how  much  of  truth  there  remains  to  be  known  ;  which, 
as  an   ocean,  lies    before  them  in  fathomless  depths.      Like   those  who   climb 
mountains  of  ashes,  who  slide  back  as  they  make  the  progressive  step,  so  we, 
through  defective  education,  and  from  our  own  negligence,  have  to  unlearn,  as  well 
as  to  learn ;  and,  after  all,  are  but  learners  still,  and  but  as  children,  who  are  apt 
to  stay,  hable  to  fall,  and  who  require  continually  to  look  up  to  the  All-wise  and 
All-good.     To  little  children,  even  the  babes  in  Christ,  St.  John  proclaims  the  most 
consoling  truth,  viz.,  that  their  sins  are  forgiven.     Our  blessed  Lord  authorises  us 
to  be  happy,  when  it  is  thus  with  us,  saying,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  are  for- 
given thee."      To  have  our  sins  forgiven  is  to  have  life  indeed ;    all    are  most 
miserable  tUl  then,  however  unjustly  gay  or  blindly  secure.      (John  Stock,  M.A.) 
Young   Christians  to  be  cared  for : — The  true  pastor  careth  for  every  member  of 
Christ's  body  committed  to  His  trust.     He  does  not  regard  the  cedars  and  the  oaks 
only ;  but  also  the  tender  plants  and  shrubs  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord.     (Ibid.) 
Because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  His  name's   sake. — God^s  glory  in  the 
forgiveness  of  sin  for  His  name's  sake  : — "  For  His  name's  sake !  "     These  petitions 
which  occur  frequently  in  the  Book  of  Psalms  have  been  granted  to  the  very  letter. 
*•  For  Thy  name's  sake,  0  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity.     Help  us,  0  God  of  our 
salvation,  for  the  glory  of  Thy  name.     Deliver  us,  purge  away  our  sins,  for  Thy 
name's  sake."     You  must  be  aware  that  the  expression  "the  name  of  the  Lord  "  is 
used  frequently  in  Scripture  to  denote,  generally,  His  nature  and  attributes.     Li- 
deed,  "  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  is  put  virtually  for  God  Himself ;  so  that  what  is 
said  to  be  done  for  the  sake  of  His  name  might  be  regai'ded  as  done  for  His  own 
sake  by  God.     And  you  will  find  that  when  employed  as  a  motive  or  reason,  there 


CHAP,  n,]  I.  JOHN.  103 

is  a  prevalence  in  God's  name  which  is  assigned  to  no  other  plea.  I.  You  cannot 
mark  more  distinctly  the  altebation  wbought  by  Christ  on  human  condition 
than  by  representing  Him  as  placing  us  in  such  a  position  that  we  can  ask  God  for 
His  own  sake  to  pardon  iniquity.  It  is  true  that  prayer,  from  its  very  nature,  must 
correspond  to  the  dictates  of  the  Divine  attributes,  or  the  demands  of  the  Divine 
glory;  in  other  words,  what  our  necessities  impel  us  to  ask,  must  be  just  what  God, 
in  compliance  with  His  own  properties,  can  be  ready  to  bestow ;  else  there  is  no 
hope  of  the  acceptance  of  our  petitions ;  but  that  this  should  be  possible  in  respect 
of  the  forgiveness  of  sin  is  a  marvel  which  overwhelms  us,  even  when  familiar 
with  the  scheme  of  redemption.  The  glorious,  the  stupendous  thing  in  this  scheme 
is,  that  it  consulted  equally  for  God  and  man  ;  that  it  made  the  Divine  honour  as 
much  interested  as  human  necessity  in  the  granting  of  pardon  to  all  who  would 
accept.  Justice  itself,  holiness  itself — these  not  only  permit  our  pardon,  they 
demand  our  glorification.  In  short,  we  can  not  only  ask  God  to  forgive  in  the 
hope  that  His  compassion  may  incline  Him  to  show  favour,  we  can  take  the  bold 
and  unassailable  ground  of  asking  Him  to  forgive  "  for  His  name's  sake."  When 
the  Psalmist  asked  for  forgiveness,  he  asked  it  for  the  sake  of  God's  name.  Indeed, 
the  Psalmist  was  not  privileged  to  "  see  the  things  which  we  see,  or  to  hear  the 
things  which  we  hear."  He  may  not  have  been  allowed  to  discern  the  exact 
process  ;  but,  in  common  with  other  patriarchs  and  saints  under  the  old  dispensa- 
tion, he  had  reached  a  firm  assurance  that  God  stood  pledged  to  provide  a  ransom  ; 
that,  therefore,  the  Divine  honour  was  indissolubly  bound  up  with  the  pardon  of 
sin.  And  this  sufficed.  But  if  David,  hving  only  in  the  twilight  of  revelation, 
taught  only  through  the  mysteriousness  of  prophecy  and  type — if  he  believed  that 
pardon  might  be  asked  for  the  sake  of  God's  name,  shall  not  we  acknowledge  the 
fact — ^we,  "  before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  hath  been  evidently  set  forth  crucified 
amongst  us  " — we,  who  know  that  "  God  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us  who 
knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him  " — we,  who 
are  taught  that  "  all  the  promises  of  God  are  yea  in  Christ,  and  in  Htm  amen  "? 
II.  Consider  more  particularly  the  cojifort  derivable  from  this  great  truth, 
that  it  is  "  for  His  name's  sake  "  that  God  forgives  sin.  And  we  may  here  say, 
that  since  God  forgives  sin  for  His  own  sake,  there  is  no  room  whatever  for  fear 
that  our  sins  are  too  great  to  be  pardoned.  We  may  even  go  so  far  as  to  declare, 
that  if  it  be  always  for  the  sake  of  His  own  name  that  God  acts  when  pardoning 
iniquity,  then  the  greater  the  iniquity  the  greater  the  reason  why  He  should  for- 
give. David  would  seem  to  have  felt  this  when  he  prayed — "  For  Thy  name's  sake, 
0  Lord,  pardon  my  iniquity,  for  it  is  great."  Human  sinfulness  has  been  turned 
into  the  widest  field  for  the  display  of  Divinity,  so  that  on  the  arena  of  this  ruined 
creation  there  may  be  such  a  manifestation  of  aU  that  is  majestic  in  Godhead  as 
should  serve  to  make  it  a  theatre  of  instruction  to  the  highest  order  of  being.  And 
we  cannot  hesitate  to  maintain  that  it  is  the  greatness  of  moral  evil  which  has  made 
His  interference  so  honourable  to  the  Almighty.  It  was  a  case,  if  we  dare  use 
the  expression,  worthy  the  succours  of  the  Godhead.  When  a  Manasseh,  who  had 
Binned  beyond  aU  that  went  before,  is  forgiven,  and  Paul,  who  had  thirsted  for  the 
"  blood  of  the  saints,"  is  reconciled  unto  God,  we  feel  that  every  attribute  which 
pardon  glorifies  must  be  glorified  in  the  highest  possible  degree.  If  He  was  glorified 
in  stUling  the  tempest.  He  must  be  most  glorious  when  that  tempest  is  fiercest. 
And  though  when  the  transgressor  remembers  that  his  sins  have  been  numerous 
and  heinous,  or  that  his  iniquity  has  been  specially  flagrant,  if  he  had  to  ask  for- 
giveness for  his  own  sake,  he  might  well  be  discouraged,  yet  when  he  calls  to  mind 
that  if  God  forgives  at  all,  He  must  forgive  "  for  His  name's  sake,"  it  should  not  be 
the  greatness  of  his  sin  which  can  withhold  him  from  prayer.  The  bitter  impiety 
of  the  reckless  is  not  more  offensive  to  our  Maker  than  the  suspicion  that  He  is 
unwUling  to  receive  back  the  prodigal.  Such  suspicion  throws  doubt  upon  the  truth 
of  His  Word;  and  what  can  be  imagined  more  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  God? 
You  are  expressly  told  that  God  "  wiUeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,"  but  rather 
that  all  would  repent  and  Uve.  Is  this  true  ?  God  saith  it.  Will  you  deny  it  ? 
WiU  you  falsify  it?  Yet  you  do  if  you  fear  to  come  to  Him,  because  you  know, 
because  you  feel  that  your  transgressions  are  great,  that  your  offences  are  multi- 
pUed.  Whom  did  Christ  die  for?  The  guilty.  Whom  does  He  intercede  for? 
The  guilty.  "  The  name  of  the  Lord,"  saith  Solomon,  "  is  a  strong  tower."  If 
BO,  why  should  we  not  "  flee  to  it  and  be  safe,"  forasmuch  as  to  "  httle  children  " 
an  apostle  could  say,  "Your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  His  name's  sake"? 
{H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        For  His  name's  sake  : — Living  in  the  joy  and  light  of  the 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Divine  Fatherhood,  the  Apostle  John  had  come  to  regard  all  disciples  of  Jesus  as 
children ;  and  as  the  beauty  of  a  child  is  in  its  childhood,  its  littleness,  its 
unassertiveness,  its  dependableness,  the  apostle  seems  to  have  a  delight  in  speaking 
of  the  disciples  of  Jesus  as  Uttle  children,  remembering  doubtless  the  httle  child 
that  Jesus  took  and  set  in  the  midst  of  those  disciples  who  were  wrangling  about 
greatness  and  place  and  position.  I  think  there  is  much  of  instruction,  and  no 
little  of  comfort  for  us  if  only  we  will  try  and  see  things  as  the  Apostle  John  sees 
them.  He  acknowledges  the  dark  fact  of  sin,  the  bright  fact  of  forgiveness,  and  the 
brightest  of  all  facts — that  forgiveness  is  based  on  the  relation  which  Jesus  Christ 
has  established  between  Himself  and  us.  One  is  weary  of  hearing  of  secular 
education  as  a  cure  for  the  sinfulness  of  man's  nature.  I  am  sure  that  an  eloquent 
writer  of  our  day  is  right  on  this — that  if  the  influence  of  the  outpoured  life  of 
Christ  were  withdrawn  from  our  world,  sins  would  not  only  increase  incalculably  in 
number,  but  the  tyranny  of  sin  would  be  fearfully  augmented,  and  it  would  spread 
among  a  greater  number  of  people.  It  is  a  new  disposition,  a  new  heart  which 
man  needs,  and  the  outpoured  life  of  God  in  Christ  is  necessary  to  produce  that ; 
as  necessary  to  produce  it  as  the  outpoured  radiance  of  the  sun  is  necessary  to 
produce  the  fruits  of  the  earth  by  which  our  physical  nature  is  sustained.  There- 
fore it  is  that  the  Apostle  John  goes  far  deeper  than  to  connect  the  forgiveness  of 
sin  with  repentance  for  sin ;  he  connects  it  with  the  relationship  we  sustain  to 
Christ  and  the  relationship  He  sustains  to  us.  Some  one  asks — why  is  it  necessary 
that  Jesus  the  Christ  of  God  should  put  Himself  into  the  relations  towards  us  which 
have  been  established,  in  order  that  the  Everlasting  Father  may  forgive  sins? 
Why  cannot  He  say  to  the  sorrowing  man,  "  I  forgive  you,"  and  have  done  with 
it?  1.  There  are  reasons  in  His  own  nature.  When  God  undertakes  to  forgive 
Bin  He  pledges  Himself  to  rescue  the  forgiven  man  from  his  sin.  In  a  word.  He 
undertakes  to  regenerate  his  nature,  to  renew  it  so  that  he  shall  eventually  live  the 
unsirming  life.  And  in  order  to  that,  Jesus  Christ  and  His  work  are  necessary. 
2.  There  are  reasons  in  the  nature  of  man.  To  forgive  a  sinner  and  leave  htm  to 
the  helplessness  which  has  come  from  his  sin  is  only  half  forgiveness.  Man  needs 
to  be  brought  into  such  an  understanding  of  God  and  into  such  a  love  of  God  that 
he  will  hate  to  sin  against  Him.  In  order  to  that,  Christ  Jesus  and  His  sacrifice  of 
Himself  are  necessary.  3.  There  are  reasons,  too,  in  the  Divine  government.  _  It 
must  be  made  universally  evident  that  there  is  no  righteous  reason  for  rebellion 
against  God  on  the  part  of  any.     (R.  Thomas.) 

Ver.  13.  Fathers,  .  .  .  young  men,  .  .  .  little  children. — The  successive  stages  of 
life  : — Here  the  aged  apostle  has  a  message  of  affection  for  every  class  and  age  of 
Christian  disciples.  And  is  it  not  wise  for  Christian  teachers  occasionally  to 
proclaim  to  Christians  some  message  designedly  appropriate  to  each  particular 
stage?  For  the  cycle  of  man's  fleeting  hfe,  like  the  cycle  of  the  revolving  year, 
has  its  succession  of  seasons — its  springtime  of  childhood,  its  summer  of  youth,  its 
autumn  of  maturity,  and  its  winter  of  old  age.  Each  of  these  succeeding  seasons 
of  life  has  its  own  joys  and  sorrows,  weakness  and  strength,  temptations,  besetting 
sins,  and  preventing  graces.  And  the  gospel  has  a  message  appropriate  for  each 
period  in  life.  I.  It  has,  first  of  all,  a  message  for  little  children.  Very 
beautiful  and  wonderful  it  is  to  think  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  as  the  Babe  of 
Bethlehem,  passing  through  every  stage  of  infancy,  with  all  a  child's  trials, 
thoughts,  hopes,  fears,  imaginings.  Never  before,  in  the  history  of  the  world,  had 
any  religion  taken  little  children  so  closely  and  so  warmly  to  its  heart.  And  do  not 
little  children  stand  in  need  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  ?  A  child's  life  is  often  a  very 
mingled  life.  Heaven  often  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy,  but  often  also  heaven 
seems  to  flee  quite  far  away.  In  every  fortress  of  innocence  there  lurks  some  evil 
traitor,  waiting  to  hand  over  the  keys  of  the  citadel  to  the  temptations  crouching 
at  the  gates.  Little  children,  therefore,  need  all  the  help  which  parental  discipline 
and  affection,  combined  with  religious  education  and  good  companionship,  can 
render  in  their  conflict  against  evil.  But,  my  children,  you  cannot  lead  good  and 
beautiful  lives  by  simply  trusting  to  your  training.  In  religion,  as  in  all  things 
else,  self-help  and  firm  resolve  are  of  the  greatest  importance.  H.  Now  pass  from 
childhood  to  the  second  stage  of  life— youth.  The  season  of  youth  is  a  very  glad 
and  glorious  time.  It  has  all  the  freshness  of  spring  and  all  the  fertility  of  summer. 
Yet  it  is  a  season  of  great  and  frequent  perils.  And  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  under- 
stood both  its  glory  and  its  danger  (Mark  x.  17-22).  The  self-sacrificing  love  of 
Christ  is  the  most  powerful  of  all  magnets  for  attracting  the  devotion  of  the  young. 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  105 

What  young  man  who  steadfastly  gazes  upon  the  spectacle  of  the  Cross  can  with- 
stand its  blessed  influence  and  its  strong,  appeaUng  power  ?  To  show  thee  the 
pitiless  violence  of  sin,  as  well  as  to  enable  thee  to  conquer  it,  Christ  gave  Himself 
up  for  thee  with  broken  heart,  yet  unbending  determination,  upon  the  cruel  Cross. 
Wilt  thou  not,  then,  make  Him  thy  hero,  thy  model,  thy  aU-inspiring  friend  ?  HI. 
Our  text  has  also  a  message  for  the  aged.  Old  age,  like  every  other  season  of  life, 
has  its  own  besetting  sins  and  its  own  appropriate  graces.  The  forms  of  sin  change 
with  the  changing  course  of  years.  As  the  hot  fires  of  vigour  die  down  into  cold 
cinders  of  decrepitude,  the  gay,  thoughtless,  and  softly  indulgent  youth  hardens 
into  the  cynical,  envious,  covetous,  ambitious  old  man.  On  the  other  hand,  old 
age  has  also  its  special  graces.  Especially  do  these  graces  shine  in  those  who, 
"  from  the  beginning,"  have  been  true  and  faithful  unto  Christ.  He  will  not 
disdain  the  gleanings  of  your  latest  years,  if  with  all  your  heart  you  truly  seek 
Him.  But  for  you,  conscript  fathers  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  there  is  a  richer  and 
a  brighter  message.  You  have  known  Christ  from  the  beginning  of  your  pilgrim- 
age. You  were  faithful  in  the  bursting  freshness  of  spring,  in  the  wearying  heata 
of  summer.  You  know  by  this  time  what  God  is ;  you  have  proved  Him  to  the 
uttermost  in  childhood,  youth,  and  maturer  years.  Experience  has  taught  you 
that  He  never  fails.  And  so  for  you  there  remains  the  special  grace  of  the  aged — 
the  grace  which  transfigures  the  wrinkled  face  with  the  radiance  of  inward  joy, 
and  sets  the  golden  crown  of  perfect  peace  upon  the  snowy  head.  For  you,  the 
seed-graces  of  spring  and  the  flower-graces  of  summer,  have  developed  into  the 
rich  fruit-graces  of  autumn.  Self-control  has  ripened  into  self-conquest ;  kindness 
has  been  hallowed  into  love  ;  the  heavy  morning  of  self-denial  has  brightened  into 
the  cloudless  day  of  self -repose  ;  the  toil  of  the  ascent  has  been  repaid  by  the  land- 
scape from  the  summit.  Nor  is  this  aU.  The  sunset,  too,  is  glorious.  And  after 
sunset,  as  the  twilight  of  evening  deepens  into  the  darkness  of  night,  the  stars 
begin  to  peep  in  the  roof  of  heaven,  stars  which  were  invisible  by  day.  And  when 
death  itself  shall  appear  to  you,  ye  old  and  faithful  servants  of  the  Lord,  it  wiU  be 
not  death,  but  victory.  (Canon  Biggie.)  The  guileless  spirit  abiding  in  the  light 
in  its  threefold  aspect  of  childhood,  fatherhood,  and  youth : — These  verses  form, 
I  think,  a  break  or  interruption  in  the  apostle's  line  of  argument.  John  calls  upon 
those  to  whom  he  writes  to  consider,  not  only  what  he  is  writing  to  them,  but  what 
they  themselves  are  to  whom  he  is  writing ;  what  he  is  entitled  to  assume  in  and 
about  them  as  likely  to  ensure  a  favourable  reception  of  his  message.  I.  Consideked 
IN  ITSELF,  the  appeal  recognises,  on  the  one  hand,  a  common  character  in  all 
behevers,  fliat  of  "  little  children,"  and  on  the  other  hand  a  distinction  between 
"fathers"  and  "young  men."  1.  In  addressing  us  all  as  little  children,  John 
makes  a  distinction  between  his  first  and  his  second  appeal.  It  is  the  same  thought 
in  reality,  only  put  in  somewhat  different  lights.  For  the  Father  is  truly  known, 
only  in  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  for  His  Son's  name's  sake.  2.  The  appeal  is  next 
made  to  the  two  classes  or  companies  into  which  we  may  be  divided  :  those  who 
are  fathers  in  Israel,  and  those  who  are  young  men.  JI.  It  stands  between  two 
OPPOSITE  precepts  ;  the  one  positive,  the  other  negative.  "  Love  the  brotherhood  " 
(vers.  9-11) ;  "  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world  "  (ver. 
15).  To  love  the  Father,  and  the  brethren  as  the  Father's  family  ;  not  to  love  the 
world  lying  in  the  wicked  one  ;  these  are  the  contrasted  commands  between  which 
the  apostle's  earnest  and  affectionate  appeals  occur.  The  entrance  of  the  light  into 
the  world,  its  entrance  into  the  hearts  of  as  many  as  are  in  Christ,  necessarily 
causes  a  division.  It  unites  by  a  new  bond  of  brotherhood  the  children  of  the  Ught 
among  themselves.  And  it  separates  between  them  and  the  world.  The  separation, 
or  distinction,  is  not  of  their  own  making,  but  of  God's.  He  is  in  the  light.  He  is 
Himself  the  Light.  It  is  He  who  is  the  Divider,  and  not  they.  Nor  is  the  dis- 
tinction of  such  a  sort  as  to  feed  or  nurse  vaingloriousness  on  our  part,  or  to  be 
invidious  as  regards  the  world.  Far  otherwise.  It  is  fitted  to  humble  us  in  the 
very  dust,  as  often  as  we  think  of  what  we  are  in  ourselves,  and  but  for  sovereign 
mercy  must  ever  have  been ;  of  what  many,  very  many,  around  us  are  ;  less  guilty, 
by  many  degrees,  than  we ;  and  more  likely  than  we  to  win,  not  only  earth's 
approval,  but,  one  would  almost  say,  even  Heaven's  favourable  regard  too.  What 
am  I  ?  And  what  are  they  ?  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Three  stages  of  natural  and 
Christian  life  :  the  distinction  of  three  sort  of  Christians,  "fathers,"  "  young  men," 
and  "  little  children  "  ; — 1.  Though  spiritual  growth  be  most  considerable  here,  yet 
natural  age  is  not  altogether  to  be  excluded.  God  hath  people  of  all  sorts  and 
sizes,  some  old,  some  in  the  freshness  of  youth,  others  that  are  but  newly  got  out 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  infancy  and  childhood.    For  fathers  or  old  men,  we  read  of  Paul  the  aged 
(Philem.  9)  and  of  Mnason  an  old  disciple  (Acts  xxi.  16).   Among  young  men  we  read 
of  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3),  of  good  Obadiah  (1  Kings  xviii.  12),  of  Samuel 
(1  Sam.  ii.  18),  of  Timothy  (2  Tim.  iii.  15).     Hosanna  was  not  displeasing  to  Christ 
in  little  children  (Matt.  xxi.  15,  16).     Well,  then,  people  of  all  ages  should  apply 
themselves  to  religion.     Old  men  excuse  themselves,  they  are  too  old  to  interest 
themselves  in  Christ ;  and  the  children  are  not  ripe,  and  young  men  are  otherwise 
occupied ;  but  fathers  for  age  should  be  also  fathers  for  knowledge  and  godliness 
(Prov.  xvi.  31).     On  the  contrary,  how  sad  is  it  when  men  have  spent  many  years 
nnfruitfully,  and  are  acquainted  with  all  other  things  but  God  and  their  own  souls, 
and  have  not  as  yet  begun  to  live  spiritually ;  when  they  have  one  foot  in  the 
grave,  and  are  as  good  as  dead  already  I     You  never  begin  to  live  tiU  you  live  in 
Christ.     You  have  but  told  over  so  many  summers  and  winters  ;  all  that  time  is 
lost  that  is  spent  in  your  unregeneracy.    A  man  may  be  long  at  sea,  and  yet  make 
but  a  short  voyage.     Oh,  bethink  yourselves  before  your  hoary  head  go  down  to 
the  grave  in  sorrow  I     Submit  to  this  work  before  it  be  too  late.     Chimneys  long 
foul,  if  they  be  not  swept,  are  fired  at  length.     2.  For  young  men,  it  concerneth 
them  to  apply  their  hearts  to  godliness.     There  is  an  ignorant  conceit  that  it  is  not 
60  necessary  for  young  men  to  study  the  Scriptures,  or  to  trouble  themselves  much 
with  thinking  of  heaven,  because  they  are  lusty,  and  likely  to  live  many  years,  and 
therefore  think  it  more  fit  for  them  to  mind  the  things  of  this  life,  and  let  old  men 
alone  to  think  of  heaven  and  holiness.   Our  apostle  was  not  of  this  mind.   Scripture 
biddeth  us  "  remember  our  Creator  in  the  days  of  our  youth  "  (Eccles.  xii.  1).     Our 
best  and  flowery  years  should  be  consecrated  to  God.    And  David  would  have  the 
"young  man  cleanse  his  way  "  (Psa.  cxix.  9).     It  is  but  reason  that  God,  that  gave 
all,  should  have  our  first  and  best ;  they  glorify  God  most  who  begin  with  Him 
soonest.     The  lusts  of  youth  being  boiling  hot,  need  the  correction  of  a  more  severe 
discipline.     The  devil  layeth  most  snares  for  them,  as  those  who  are  most  prone  to 
sin,  who  are  like  to  serve  him  longest ;  and  therefore,  that  they  may  not  be  caught 
in  Satan's  snares  they  should  begin  with  God  betimes.    A  good  man  may  remember 
old  sins  with  new  fears  that  they  are  not  pardoned.     Now  afflictions  may  awaken 
the  sense  of  old  sins,  as  old  bruises  trouble  us  a  long  time  after  upon  every  change 
of  weather.     3.  For  babes  or  little  children  ;  they  being  born  in  sin  must  also  be 
bom  again.     Surely  they  that  have  the  education  of  children  belonging  to  them 
should  season  them  betimes  with  good  principles ;  they  find  the  benefit  of  it  ever 
afterward.     Scripture  often  inviteth  us  to  a  careful  education  of  them  ;  and  there 
be  many  promises  of  good  success  (Prov.  xxii.  6).    Dye  the  cloth  in  the  wool,  and 
not  in  the  web,  and  the  colour  is  the  more  durable.     God  worketh  strangely  in 
children,  and  many  times  rare  things  are  found  in  them  beyond  expectation.     (T. 
Manton,  D.D.)      Spiritual  groiuth : — 1.  There  is  a  great  difference  among  Christians; 
aU  are  not  of  one  stature,  strength,  and  growth  in  godliness ;  as  here,  there  are 
fathers,  young  men,  and  babes.    He  supposeth  the  more  elderly  will  be  fathers  in 
Christ,  and  that  every  one  hath  profited  according  to  his  time  and  standing.     God 
created  Adam  and  Eve  in  their  full  perfection,  but  doth  not  regenerate  us  into  our 
fuU  stature  in  Christ.     2.  It  may  fall  out  that  the  elder  Christians  may  be  babes  in 
Christ,  and  the  younger  Christians  rather  fathers  for  their  longer  experience  in  the 
things  of  God,  and  for  the  better  government  of  their  passions.    David  when  young 
was  wiser  than  his  enemies,  than  his  teachers,  than  the  ancients  (Psa.  cxix.  100). 
Gracious  abilities  come  not  from  age,  but  from  the  Spirit.    Ancient  men  try  several 
conclusions  to  their  own  loss ;   but  God  is  more  ancient  than  they,  and  at  one 
prospect  seeth  all  things ;   if  He  will  direct  me  I  am  safe.      Joseph  young,  at 
seventeen  years  old,  was  wiser  than  his  brethren.     Daniel  and  his  fellows  ten  times 
more  than  all  the  astrologers  and  magicians,  though  children  (Dan.  i.  17-20).    And 
many  times  youth  goeth   before  the  aged  in  ripeness  of   wisdom,  and  in  solid 
manners,  though  they  are  so  much  behind  them  in  number  of  years.    3.  As  to 
6piritual  growth,  some  may  be  weak  and  strong,  young  and  old  at  the  same  time, 
in  different  respects,  as  we  see  by  experience.     Some  are  weak  in  knowledge  and 
unsettled  in  the  faith,  who  yet  have  a  good  zeal  towards  God,  and  are  temperate, 
just,  and  holy,  and  have  a  great  command  over  their  affections  and  passions.     On 
the  other  side,  some  are  of  a  good  understanding,  and  they  come  behind  in  no  gift, 
yet  are  subject  to  carnal  passions  and  affections,  and  so  are  babes  in  that  respect 
(1  Cor.  iii.   1-3).    A  spiritual   people  is  not  a  people  of  parts,  knowledge,  and 
abilities,   but  of   grace   and  sanctification.      4.  There  is  a   wonderful  difference 
between  Christians  and  themselves  at  sundry  times ;  so  that  these  three  degrees 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  107 

may  be  coincident.     The  gravest  father  may  be  as  weak  as  the  youngest  child,  as 
violently  tempted   as   the  young  man.     Satan's  design  is   against  the  spiritual 
Christian,  and  those  who  are  more  eminent  than  others,  to  throw  them  into  the 
mire,  that  religion  may  have  the  greater  wound  and  dishonour.    In  violent  gusts  of 
wind,  even  cedars  may  fall  to  the  ground.     Therefore,  as  we  grow  in  grace,  we 
should  increase  in  humility  and  godly  fear.     5.  All  this  doth  not  hinder  but  that 
some  from  their  settled  constant  frame  may  be  called  "fathers,"  "young  men," 
and  "  babes."      (1)    Fathers  are  such  who,  through  long  experience  and  much 
acquaintance  with  a  godly  life,  do  walk  more  constantly,  cheerfully,  and  fruitfully 
in  the  ways  of  God  than  others  do.     (2)  Young  men  in  Christ  are  such  as  have 
most  courage,  resolution,  and  earnestness,  yet  not  that  experience  which  Christ's 
old  servants  have  gotten  ;  a  middle  sort  of  Christians,  not  so  settled  as  the  aged, 
nor  yet  altogether  so  weak  as  babes.     They  are  more  exercised  with  temptations, 
and  a  life  of  conflicts,  as  having  many  rebellious  passions  to  subdue,  which  being 
irritated  by  the  suggestions  of  Satan  and  the  baits  of  sense,  do  put  them  to  no 
small  trouble.     (3)  There  are  babes  or  Uttle  children.     Use  1.  If  there  be  "fathers," 
"  young  men,"  and  "  children,"  then — (1)  Let  us  "  not  despise  the  day  of  small 
things  "  (Zech.  iv.  10),  not  in  ourselves  nor  others.     (2)  Let  us  not  despise  the 
meanest  degree  of  grace  in  others.     Time  was  when  every  one  was  a  babe  in  Christ, 
and  time  may  be  when  those  who  are  but  babes  may  grow  old  men  (Matt.  xx. 
16).     Use  2.   Let  us  consider  in  what  rank  we  are,  that  we  may  wisely  apply 
ourselves  to  the  duties  proper  to  our  condition.     Usually  that  which   old  men 
want  is  fervour;   that  which   young    men    want,   if    they  know   their    hearts, 
is  sincerity;   the  one  must  beg  quickening  grace,  as  David   doth  often  in  Psa. 
cxix.     Use  3.  To   awaken  us  to  labour  after  the  highest  rank  of  grace.     God 
is  the  more  honoured  the  more  fruitful  we  are  (Phil.  i.  9).     (Ibid.)        Fathers: 
— Fathers  in  Christ  : — 1.   St.   John   says,   "  I  write,"   and  by-and-by,   "  I  have 
written,"  this  shows,  I  think,  the  importance  of  his  subject.     If  he  has  already 
written  upon  it,  he  must  think  it  to  be  a  very  necessary  truth  if  he  writes  upon  it 
yet  again.      Foundation  stones  should  be  laid  with  scrupulous  care ;   and  truth, 
which  is  fundamental,  should  be  repeated  by  the  teacher  till  the  disciple  has  learned 
it  beyond  all  fear  of  ever  forgetting  it.     2.  This  form  of  speech  also  reveals  the 
unchanging  conviction  of  the  writer,  who,  having  written  once,  is  glad  to  write  the 
same  things  again.    This  shows  a  mind  made  up  and  decided,  from  which  proceeds 
consistent  testimony.     If  we  live  a  thousand  years,  at  the  close  of  life  we  shall 
have  nothing  more  nor  less  to  say  than  the  immutable  truth  of  God.     We  hope  to 
understand  the  truth  better,  but  we  shall  never  discover  better  truth.     3.  "  I  write," 
and  "  I  have  written,"  also  indicate  the  abiding  need  of  men :   they  require  the 
same  teaching  from  time  to  time.     Men's  natures  are  still  the  same,  men's  spiritual 
conflicts  and  dangers  are  still  the  same,  and  hence  the  same  truth  is  suitable,  not 
only  from  day  to  day,  but  from  century  to  century.     Though  we  can  now  digest  the 
soUd  meat  of  the  kingdom,  yet  the  children's  bread  has  lost  none  of  its  relish  in  our 
esteem.     I.  Who  aee  the  fathers  ?     1.  We  usually  associate  that  idea  somewhat 
with  age ;   but  we  must  take  care  that  we  do  not  make  a  mistake  here,  because 
age  in    grace,   albeit  that    it  may  run  parallel    with   age  in  nature   in   many 
cases,   does    not    always    do    so.      In  the   Church  of    God   there   are  children 
who  are   seventy  years   old.      One  would  not  like  to  say  of   a  man  of  eighty 
that  he   had   scarcely  cut  his  wisdom  teeth,  and   yet  there  are  such.     On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  fathers  in  the  Church  of  God,  wise,  stable,  instructed,  who 
are  comparatively  young  men.     The  Lord  can  cause  His  people  to  grow  rapidly, 
and  far  outstrip  their  years.     From  their  early  youth  they  have  a  discernment  of 
God's  Word,  and  a  quickness  of  apprehension  wonderful  to  notice.    More  than  that, 
I  have  even  observed  a  depth  of  experience  within  a  very  short  time  granted  to 
certain  young  believers,  so  that  though  they  were  but  youths  in  age  they  were 
fathers  in  piety.     Nevertheless,  as  a  usual  thing,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  advance- 
ment in  grace  should  be  accompanied  with  advancement  in  years.     These  are  the 
fathers,  then,  men  who  have  aged  in  grace,  have  come  to  the  fuU  development  of 
their  spiritual  manhood,  and  have  been  confii-med  in  that  development  by  the  test 
of  time  and  trials.     2.  "  Fathers,"  again,  are  persons  of  maturity,  men  who  are  not 
raw  and  green,  not  fresh  recruits.     These  men  know  what  they  know,  for  they  have 
thought  over  the  gospel,  studied  it,  and  have  embraced  it  with  full  intensity  of 
conviction.     3.   "  Fathers,"   again,   are  men   of   stability  and   strength.    As  the 
Spartans  pointed  to  their  citizens  as  the  real  walls  of  Sparta,  so  do  we  point  to 
these  substantial  men  as,  under  God,  the  brazen  walls  and  bulwarks  of  the  Church, 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


Men  who  are  well  taught,  confirmed,  experienced,  and  trained  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
are  pillars  in  the  house  of  our  God.  4.  The  fathers  of  the  Church  are  men  of  heart, 
who  naturally  care  for  the  souls  of  others.  5.  Having  this  care  upon  him  the 
father  comes  to  be  tender ;  he  partakes  somewhat  of  the  tenderness  of  a  mother, 
and  thus  is  called  a  nursing-father.  Sympathetic  care  and  hearty  tenderness  are 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  will  bring  you  a  happiness  which  will  richly  com- 
pensate you  for  your  pains.  6.  Not  yet  have  I  quite  reached  the  full  meaning  of  a 
father ;  for  the  father  is  the  author,  under  God,  of  the  being  of  his  children  ;  and 
happy  is  a  Church  that  has  many  in  it  who  are  spiritual  parents  in  Zion,  through 
having  brought  sinners  to  Christ.  II.  What  is  the  prominent  characteristic  of 
A  FATHER  IN  Christ ?  "I  Write  unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  have  known  Him  that 
is  from  the  beginning."  1.  Observe  here  the  concentration  of  their  knowledge. 
Twice  he  says,  "  Ye  have  known  Him  that  is  from  the  beginning."  Now,  a  babe 
in  grace  knows  twenty  things :  a  young  man  in  Christ  knows  ten  things  :  but  a 
father  in  Christ  knows  one  thing,  and  that  one  thing  he  knows  thoroughly.  Oh,  to 
have  one  heart,  one  eye,  for  our  one  Lord,  and  for  Him  alone !  2.  Note  the 
peculiarity  of  their  knowledge  as  to  its  object :  they  know  "  Him  that  was  from  the 
beginning."  Do  not  the  babes  in  Christ  know  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Yes,  they  do ;  but 
they  do  not  know  Him  in  His  full  character.  They  know  Him  as  having  forgiven 
their  sins,  and  that  is  much,  but  it  is  not  all.  Yes,  and  as  I  grow  and  become  a 
young  man,  I  approach  nearer  to  Jesus,  and  get  another  view  of  Him ;  for  I  over- 
come the  wicked  one  even  as  He  did,  and  thus  I  stand  side  by  side  with  Him  in  the 
conflict.  But  if  I  come  to  be  a  father  I  enter  into  fellowship  with  the  great  Father 
Himself  ;  for  it  is  union  with  God  the  Father  that  makes  a  man  a  father  in  God. 
When  you  become  a  father  in  Christ  you  see  Christ  from  the  Father's  point  of  view ; 
not  as  newly  come  to  save,  but  as  "  from  the  beginning  "  the  Saviour  of  men.  The 
father  in  grace  rejoices  to  behold  the  Lord  Jesus  as  God  :  he  beholds  the  glory  of 
His  adorable  person  as  for  ever  with  the  Father  or  ever  the  earth  was.  He  sees 
that  covenant  even  from  of  old  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure  in  the  hand  of  Him 
that  was  from  the  beginning.  There  is  one  point  that  the  father  in  Christ  delights 
to  think  upon,  namely,  that  the  coming  of  Christ  was  not  an  expedient  adopted 
after  an  unforeseen  disaster  in  order  to  retrieve  the  honour  of  God  ;  but  he  under- 
stands that  the  whole  scheme  of  events  was  planned  in  the  purpose  of  Divine 
wisdom  for  the  glorifying  of  Christ,  so  that  from  the  beginning  it  was  part  of 
Jehovah's  plan  that  Jesus  should  take  upon  Himself  human  nature,  and  should 
manifest  in  that  nature  all  the  attributes  of  the  Father.  3.  I  want  to  notice  again, 
that  this  knowledge  is  in  itself  special :  the  knowledge  itself  is  remarkable  as  well 
as  the  object  of  the  knowledge.  "  Ye  have  known  Him."  Yes,  we  do  know  the 
Lord  as  a  living,  bright  reality,  a  daily  friend,  councillor,  and  companion.  True 
fathers  in  grace  not  only  know  the  Lord  by  much  meditation,  but  they  know  Him 
by  actual  intercourse ;  they  walk  with  Him,  they  talk  with  Him.  They  look  upon 
matters  not  from  man's  standpoint,  but  from  Christ's  point  of  view,  and  hence  they 
understand  much  of  the  Lord's  ways  which  aforetime  were  dark  to  them.  He  who 
very  deeply  sympathises  with  a  man  knows  Him  well.  Learning  by  faith  to  sit  still 
and  believingly  wait  the  event,  these  fathers  calmly  expect  that  all  things  will  work 
together  for  good  to  them :  and  hence  they  understand  the  unbroken  serenity  of  the 
heart  of  Jesus,  and  know  Him  in  His  joys  as  well  as  in  His  sorrows.  HI.  What  is 
the  MESSAGE  TO  THE  FATHERS  ?  I  would  indicate  that  message  by  referring  to  the 
context.  1.  John  has  been  saying  that  we  should  love  one  another.  If  you  are 
truly  fathers  you  cannot  help  loving  all  the  family :  the  fatherly  instinct  is  love, 
and  fathers  in  Christ  should  be  brimful  of  it.  2.  The  next  message  immediately 
succeeds  the  text,  "  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world." 
You  have  all  the  marks  of  what  they  call  declining  years — I  call  them  ascending 
years ;  you  will  soon  be  gone  from  the  world  and  its  changing  vanities,  therefore  do 
not  set  your  love  on  earthly  treasures.  3.  While  they  are  not  to  love  the  world 
they  must  take  care  that  they  do  not  fall  victims  to  any  of  the  lusts  of  this  present 
evil  world,  such  as  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  You  are  grown  ripe  in  grace,  and  will 
soon  enter  heaven,  live  accordingly.  4.  The  next  exhortation  to  the  fathers  is  that 
they  should  watch,  for,  says  the  apostle,  "  Ye  have  heard  that  antichrist  shall  come, 
even  now  there  are  many  antichrists."  Oh,  valiant  fathers,  keep  ye  watch  and 
ward.  5.  Lastly,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  fathers  to  prepare  for  the  coming  of  the 
Lord.  "  Abide  in  Him,  that,  when  He  shall  appear,  ye  may  have  confidence,  and 
not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming."  (C.  H.  Spnrfieon.)  Christian 
fathers  and  the  knoulcdje  of  the  Duine  Being  .-—In  the  distinction  if  Christians, 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  109 

they  are  fathers  who  best  know  Hun  that  was  from  the  beginning.  I.  The  object. 
By  "  Him  that  was  from  the  beginning  "  is  meant  Christ,  who  is  also  thus  else- 
where described  (John  i.  1,  2).  1.  As  to  His  office  and  saving  efficacy  (Eev.  xiil.  8). 
2.  As  to  His  personal  subsistence  (Micah  v.  2 ;  John  Xvii.  5).  The  benefit  of  this 
meditation,  (a)  To  further  the  joy  of  our  faith,  in  that  we  see  the  infinite  worth 
that  is  in  His  sufferings  to  satisfy  justice  and  to  expiate  sin.  (6)  To  increase  the 
strength  of  our  confidence  against  all  the  assaults  of  the  enemies  of  our  salvation 
(1  John  V.  5).  (c)  That  we  may  be  more  apprehensive  of  the  greatness  of  His  love, 
which  we  shall  never  be  till  we  consider  the  dignity  of  His  person,  (d)  To  show  the 
readiness  of  our  obedience,  that  we  may  receive  His  doctrine,  and  obey  His  laws  ; 
that  we  may  not  be  ashamed  of  His  truth,  and  the  profession  of  His  name,  (e)  To 
increase  our  reverence,  and  that  the  ignominy  of  His  Cross  may  not  obscure  His 
glory,  nor  lessen  His  respect  in  our  hearts,  but  that  we  may  have  high  and  honour- 
able thoughts  of  our  humbled  Lord  in  His  lowest  estate.  (/)  To  draw  our  hearts 
from  all  created  things,  and  to  lessen  our  respect  to  worldly  vanities,  that  so  our 
minds  and  hearts  may  more  look  after  those  things  which  are  eternal  and  glorious. 
He  that  was  before  the  world  was  will  be  when  the  world  shall  be  no  more.  n. 
What  kind  of  knowledge  it  is  that  is  here  spoken  of.  There  is  a  twofold  know- 
ledge. 1.  Speculative  and  historical :  with  this  most  content  themselves.  The 
Jews  had  "  a  form  of  knowledge  "  (Eom.  ii.  20),  and  so  hath  the  formal  Christian 
(2  Tim.  ill.  5)  a  map  or  model  of  gospel-truths.  There  are  different  degrees  of  this 
— a  memorative  knowledge.  Another  degree  above  this  is  an  opinionative  know- 
ledge, when  they  do  not  only  charge  their  memories,  but  have  a  kind  of  conscience 
and  judgment  about  these  things.  But  yet  wisdom  entereth  not  upon  the  heart 
(Prov.  ii.  10).  They  make  men  disputers  of  this  world,  but  not  serious  practisers 
of  godliness.  They  have  a  religion  to  talk  of,  but  not  to  hve  by.  2.  Practical  and 
saving.  The  truth  and  soundness  of  our  knowledge  is  mainly  known  by  the 
effects.  We  are  to  "  know  Him  that  was  from  the  beginning,"  so  as — (1)  To 
believe  in  Him,  and  to  venture  our  eternal  interests  in  His  hands  (Psa.  ix.  10).  (2) 
To  know  Him  so  as  to  esteem  and  prize  Him  (Phil.  iii.  8,  9).  (3)  To  know  Him  so 
as  to  embrace  Him  with  love  and  desire  (John  iv.  10).  (4)  To  know  Him  so  as  to 
obey  Him  (Jer.  xxii.  16).  IH.  What  is  herein  proper  to  fathers,  or  how  can 
this  be  a  ground  of  distinction  between  them  and  others,  since  all  Christians  are 
indispensably  bound  to  know  Christ  ?  (John  xvii.  3.)  1.  Whatever  is  said  of  either 
age,  fathers,  young  men,  or  babes,  doth  certainly  belong  to  all ;  as  to  overcome  the 
wicked  one,  so  to  know  Him  that  was  from  the  beginning.  To  know  the  Father  is 
common  to  all  the  ranks,  only  most  eminently  in  one  more  than  in  the  other.  2. 
There  is  some  peculiar  fitness  in  these  characters,  and  in  the  several  ages 
mentioned ;  as — (1)  Plenitude  of  knowledge  belongeth  to  the  ancient  (Job  xii.  12). 
(2)  Old  men  are  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  ancient  things,  and  love  to  discourse  of 
things  done  long  ago.  So  the  apostle  commendeth  his  fathers,  or  old  men,  for  that 
they  have  known  the  Ancient  of  Days,  or  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  which  maketh 
them  more  happy  than  all  that  knowledge  which  they  have  gotten  by  many  years 
or  long  experience  in  the  world.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  aged  in  years  and 
grace : — I.  Who  are  fathers,  or  in  the  highest  rank  of  Christianitt.  1.  They 
are  such  as  are  more  delightfully  employed  in  the  exercises  of  godliness.  I  ascribe 
this  to  fathers,  partly  because  they  are  acquainted  with  the  pleasures  of  obedience 
(1  John  V.'  3) ;  and  partly  because  by  long  custom  they  have  inured  themselves 
thereto,  so  that  it  is  become  another  nature  to  them.  They  are  aUve  unto  God  ; 
and  what  a  man  doth  with  naturalness,  he  doth  it  frequently,  constantly,  and 
easily.  2.  They  do  more  wisely  manage  the  affairs  of  the  spiritual  life.  They 
know  the  craft  of  Satan  (2  Cor.  ii.  11) ;  they  have  felt  the  bitterness  of  sin  (Psa. 
Ii.  6)  ;  they  know  what  hindrances  they  shall  have  from  the  devil,  world,  and  flesh, 
and  how  they  may  resist  and  grow  wise  to  salvation.  Experience  hath  made  them 
wise  to  decline  the  rocks  upon  which  they  dashed  heretofore.  3.  They  are  more 
fixed  in  the  truth  against  the  seduction  of  error.  The  long  experience  of  the  fruit 
of  duties  confirms  them  against  those  delusions  which  would  draw  us  from  them. 
4.  Their  hearts  are  brought  into  a  more  settled,  heavenly  temper.  A  tree  that  hath 
long  stood  out  against  many  stormy  winds  is  the  more  firmly  rooted ;  so  a  seasoned 
Christian  that  hath  gone  through  all  weathers.  But  men  that  have  not  solid 
rooting  wave  hither  and  thither.  There  is  initial  grace,  and  a  radicated  state  of 
grace.  5.  They  oftener  meditate  of  God,  His  Word  and  works  and  providence. 
They  have  had  a  long  time  to  make  provision  and  hoard  up  spiritual  treasure ; 
and  now  they  bring  it  forth  (Matt.  xii.  31).    Meditation  is  a  difficult  work  for  young 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

beginners;  they  are  not  as  yet  cleansed  from  vain  thoughts,  nor  have  inured 
themselves  to  self-government.  But  now  long  experience  hath  taught  the  aged 
Christian  what  a  hindrance  it  is  to  have  their  hearts  pestered  with  vanities,  how  it 
deadeneth  their  prayers  ;  and  therefore  they  throng  themselves  with  holy  thoughts 
of  God  in  Christ,  who  is  the  beloved  of  their  souls.  6.  They  can  more  feelingly 
than  others  speak  of  the  shortness,  misery,  and  sinfulness  of  the  present  life  (Gen. 
xlvii.  8,  9).  They  know  the  disappointments  of  a  naughty  world.  7.  They  are 
more  weaned  from  the  delights  of  sense,  and  have  long  used  to  moderate  themselves 
within  the  bounds  of  sobriety  (Titus  ii.  2).  8.  They  think  and  speak  of  the  world 
to  come,  and  the  blessed  state  of  the  faithful  in  the  most  lively  manner,  as 
apprehending  it  sure  and  near  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  9.  They  attain  unto  greater  sound- 
ness and  integrity  in  the  essentials  of  religion  (Titus  ii.  2).  II.  How  much  it 
coNCEKNETH  FATHERS  IN  TEAKS  TO  BE  FATHERS  IN  GRACE,  and  to  be  morc  eminently 
religious  than  others,  that  they  may  be  a  pattern  to  them.  1.  It  conduceth  to 
God's  honour.  If  young  men  and  children  only  should  profess  religion,  you  would 
take  it  for  indiscretion  and  hotness  of  spirit ;  young  punies,  they  know  not  what 
they  do.  Fathers,  when  they  served  God  in  their  ripest  age  and  yet  are  not  weary 
of  His  service,  this  is  an  honour  to  Him.  2.  For  your  own  comfort,  what  a  support 
is  godliness  to  old  age,  when  decays  of  nature  are  recompensed  with  the  increase  of 
grace,  the  weakness  of  body  with  soundness  of  mind  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  The  mind  is 
vigorous  when  the  body  is  weak.  When  the  eye  is  dim,  as  in  old  Israel,  it  can  see 
God  the  invisible  one.  III.  The  aged  in  years  and  grace  must  be  written  unto. 
1.  That  they  may  persevere  in  godliness.  They  are  not  yet  out  of  the  reach  of 
temptations.  Partly  by  their  own  security.  A  man  of  long  standing,  being  secure 
of  salvation,  may  grow  remiss  and  negligent.  And  if  he  go  round  in  his  accustomed 
tract  of  duties,  may  carry  it  as  if  he  were  now  past  all  danger,  and  so  insensibly 
decayeth.  Well,  then,  there  needeth  watchfulness  to  the  very  last.  Man  is  a  very 
changeable  creature;  therefore  we  should  always  stand  upon  our  guard.  Partly 
because  the  course  of  temptations  may  be  altered ;  the  devil  doth  not  always  play 
the  same  game.  We  had  need  be  provided  for  all  weathers  (PhU.  iv.  12).  2.  That 
their  growth  may  be  promoted ;  that  they  may  be  stirred  up  to  more  seriousness, 
diligence,  and  more  fruitfulness.  (1)  After  so  long  a  standing,  and  so  much  means, 
more  growth  and  tendency  towards  perfection  may  be  justly  expected  from  them 
(Psa.  xcii,  13,  14).  (2)  Their  manifold  experience  should  make  them  better.  It  is  a 
miserable  thing  to  pass  under  so  many  providences,  and  not  to  be  improved  by 
them  (Deut.  xxix.  2-6).      (Ibid.)  Religion   beautiful  in  all  seasons  of  life: — 

The  fruitful  tree  is  beautiful  in  all  seasons ;  beautiful  in  the  buddings  and  blossoms 
of  early  spring ;  beautiful  in  the  opening  summer  with  the  unripened  fruit  clustering 
on  its  branches ;  but  never  so  beautiful  as  when  autumn  has  given  the  bloom  of 
ripeness  to  the  rich  produce  of  its  strength.  How  glorious  is  a  human  character 
ripe  for  heaven!  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  I  have  written  unto  you,  young  men, 
because  ye  are  strong,  and  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  have  overcome 
the  wicked  one. — Strength,  victory,  and  knowledge  in  youth: — Counsel  is  the 
prerogative  of  age.  Christianity  is  pre-eminently  an  experience.  Even  from  the 
religious  standpoint  we  look  upon  youth  as  militant,  rather  than  as  victorious. 
The  fight  with  the  evil  one  is  upon  them  ;  but  the  victory  is  in  the  future.  Are  we 
right  in  this  view  of  the  religious  possibilities  of  youth?  Certainly  not.  Our 
apostle  addresses  the  young  men  as  having  overcome  the  evil  one,  as  having  the 
Word  of  God  abiding  in  them.  Now,  in  fact,  we  reason  just  as  John  does  when  we 
look  at  youth  in  its  relations  to  society.  On  that  side  we  frankly  recognise  their 
strength,  victory,  and  susceptibility  to  truth.  They  are  accepted  as  important 
factors  in  the  aggressive  relations  of  life.  In  like  manner  we  assume  their  ability 
to  receive  and  apply  the  teachings  of  human  wisdom.  The  history  of  great  literary 
successes  is  largely  a  history  of  youthful  triumphs ;  it  makes  a  place  for  itself  in 
spite  of  obstacles.  In  the  secular  sense  it  does  overcome  the  world.  "  I  write  unto 
you,  young  men,  because  ye  are  strong."  There  may  be  strength  without  maturity. 
People  act  upon  that  principle  everywhere.  A  man  who  wants  a  good  horse  looks 
out  for  a  young  horse.  A  lady  who  wants  an  active  servant  does  not  seek  for  an 
old  man  or  woman.  Not  only  so,  but  we  expect  real  and  telling  service  from  youth. 
Ought  the  case  to  be  any  different  in  the  Church  of  Christ  ?  The  work  of  pushing 
the  gospel  into  new  fields,  of  bringing  other  youth  under  its  influence,  of  carrying 
on  benevolent  and  missionary  enterprises,  is  work  which  young  men  and  women 
can  do.  Yes,  you  are  strong  ;  and  the  Church  of  Christ  lays  claim  to  your  strength. 
Service  is  not  to  be  an  incident  of  your  Christian  life  :   it  is  to  be  its  law,  as  it  was 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  Ill 

the  law  of  Christ's  life.  But  the  question  is  not  only  of  Christian  work  :  it  is  also 
of  Christian  character  lying  behind  the  work,  and  inspiring  it.  There  can  be  no  good 
work  without  good  character.  Here  we  see  that  the  strength  of  which  John  speaks 
is  the  strength  which  comes  of  the  abiding  of  the  "Word  of  God  in  the  heart,  and  of 
victory  over  evil.  Youth  is  susceptible  to  bad  influences — takes  them  in,  is  shaped  by 
them.  Is  it  not  likewise  susceptible  to  good  ones  ?  With  all  the  sneers  at  early 
piety,  early  piety  is  a  blessed  fact.  And  why  not  ?  It  is  very  evident  what  youth 
can  do  in  the  way  of  victory  over  self  and  temptation  when  a  great  worldly  end  is 
to  be  gained  ;  and  are  we  to  say  that  the  young  Christian,  with  Christ's  inspiration 
in  his  heart,  and  Christian  influences  around  him,  shall  not  take  up  the  great 
cross  of  Christian  service,  and  practise  its  grand  self-denials,  and  resist  and  over- 
come the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  ?  No  ;  John  is  right.  He  does  not  assert 
too  much  when  he  says,  "  Ye  have  overcome  the  evil  one."  If  youth  can  be 
Christian  it  can  overcome.  If  it  is  truly  Christian  it  will  overcome,  for  Christ  is 
victory.  And  once  more,  what  of  the  Word  abiding  in  the  youth  ?  "  The  Word  of 
God  abideth  in  you."  In  the  order  of  the  text  this  comes  before  the  conquest  over 
the  evil  one,  and  rightly ;  because  the  Word  in  the  heart  stands  to  conquest  as 
means  to  end.  John's  thought  here  centres  in  the  word  "  abideth."  His  emphasis 
is  on  the  permanent  power  of  the  Word  over  youth.  Paul  assumes  the  same  thing 
with  reference  to  Timothy.  He  calls  to  mind  the  unfeigned  faith  which  dwelt  in 
his  mother  and  in  his  grandmother,  and  adds,  "  And  I  am  persuaded  that  in  thee 
also."  Young  people  have,  many  of  them,  come  to  think  that  such  mastery  by  the 
Word  is  impracticable.  They  think  they  must  master  the  Word  before  they  are 
mastered  by  it.  In  science  and  art  and  philosophy  the  diificulty  of  a  subject  does 
not  repel  youth.  They  study,  and  that  intelligently,  the  works  of  master  minds. 
They  work  out  hard  problems  in  engineering  and  astronomy.  And  what  I  complain 
of  in  a  certain  class  of  young  people  is,  that  they  will  not  apply  to  the.  Bible  the 
same  amount  of  attention  and  labour  which  they  bestow  on  other  things.  What- 
ever mystery  may  attach  to  the  Bible,  the  materials  for  character-building  lie  on  its 
very  surface.  If  there  are  parts  of  this  great  Divine  map  which  we  must  still  mark 
•'  unknown  land,"  the  track  to  goodness  and  to  heaven  is  sharply  drawn.  You  are, 
then,  as  young  men  and  women,  bound  by  your  Christian  profession  to  have  the 
Word  of  God  abiding  in  you,  as  a  permanent  impulse  and  formative  force  in  your 
character  and  Ufe.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  as  ready  to  make  its  precepts  a  living 
power  in  you  as  He  is  in  me.  You  know,  in  other  spheres,  what  it  is  to  work 
on  a  principle  and  for  a  purpose  ;  and  it  is  no  harder  to  know  this  when 
the  principle  is  laid  down  by  Christ,  and  when  the  purpose  is  holiness 
and  heaven;  The  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you.  0  young  Christians!  can  you 
say  that  this  is  true  of  you  ?  Has  the  power  of  the  Word  over  you  become  stronger, 
more  steady,  more  direct,  since  you  began  to  follow  Christ  ?  (M.  Vincent,  D.D.) 
TJnto  you,  young  men  : — John  abounded  in  charity,  but  with  the  utmost  stretch  of 
it  he  could  not  have  written  to  all  young  men  in  this  style,  for,  alas !  all  young 
men  are  not  strong,  nor  doth  the  Word  of  God  abide  in  them  aU,  nor  have  they  all 
overcome  the  wicked  one.  Shame  that  it  should  be,  that  when  the  devil  seeks 
recruits  for  his  army,  he  should  straightway  send  his  recruiting  sergeant  for  these 
fine  young  fellows,  who  ought  to  serve  a  better  master.  I.  The  photograph  of 
THE  model  young  MAN.  1.  What  is  spoken  in  the  text  has  to  do  only  with 
spiritual  qualifications,  and  it  deals  with  three  points.  First,  this  young  man  is 
strong.  The  strength  here  meant  is  not  mere  natural  vigour,  but  a  spiritual 
strength,  a  strength  which  is  the  result  of  an  indwelling  of  the  Spirit ;  a  strength 
which  brings  out  and  consecrates  the  natural  energy,  and  makes  the  young  man 
with  his  vigour  to  be  vigorous  in  the  right  direction.  (1)  Now,  the  spiritually 
strong  man  may  be  described  in  this  way— he  is  one  who  is  very  decided  for  Christ. 
He  is  not  half-hearted,  halting  between  two  opinions.  Whoever  may  be  for  the 
false,  he  is  for  the  true.  Whoever  may  side  with  the  unjust,  he  is  for  the  honest. 
He  is  decided,  not  only  in  his  service  of  Christ,  but  in  his  opinions.  He 
holds  firmly  what  he  does  hold.  He  is  a  strong  man  in  the  truth.  God 
has  made  him  strong  in  integrity  of  heart.  (2)  While  thus  strong  in  decision, 
he  is  also  strong  in  the  matter  of  establishment.  He  once  beUeved  truths 
because  he  was  so  taught,  but  now  he  has  proved,  if  not  all  things,  yet 
enough  to  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.  (3)  He  has  become  strong,  through 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  a  vigour  diffused  throughout  his  whole 
spu'itual  constitution.  He  knows  that  he  lives.  Others  in  our  Churches  do 
something  for  Christ,  and  know  that  they  are  alive,  but  their  whole  spiritual  system 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

is  relaxed.  If  they  take  up  the  hammer  and  work  for  God,  they  strike  such  feeble 
blows  that  the  nails  do  not  know  it.  Meanwhile,  he  is  not  only  strong  in  actual 
service,  but  he  is  strong  in  what  he  cannot  do.  The  strong  young  man  will  have 
many  schemes  crossing  his  brain,  and  while  he  is  in  his  youth  he  will  not  be  able 
to  realise  them,  but  they  will  flit  before  him  so  often,  that  at  last  he  will  pluck  up 
courage,  and  as  he  grows  in  years  and  possibilities,  he  wiU  at  last  make  real  that 
which  was  once  but  a  dream.  2.  The  text  gives  a  further  description  of  the  model 
Christian  young  man  in  the  words,  "  And  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you."  Her 
Majesty  was  on  the  south  side  of  the  water  to-day,  but  she  does  not  abide  there. 
All  the  pomp  and  sunshine  of  her  presence  have  vanished,  and  Westminster  Bridge 
and  Stangate  are  as  they  were  before.  The  Word  of  God  sometimes  comes  with 
right  royal  pomp  into  the  minds  of  young  men  ;  they  are  affected  by  it  for  a  time, 
and  they  rejoice  therein,  but,  alas  1  that  blessed  Word  soon  departs,  and  they  are 
none  the  better  for  that  which  they  have  heard.  The  model  young  man  in  the 
text  is  not  of  this  kind.  The  Word  of  God  abideth  in  him,  by  which  I  understand 
that  he  is  one  who  understands  the  Word,  for  it  must  get  into  him  before  it  can 
abide  in  him,  and  it  can  only  enter  by  the  door  of  the  understanding  :  he  under- 
stands the  Word,  and  then  by  having  an  affection  for  the  Word  he  shuts  to  that 
door  and  entertains  the  truth.  The  Word  of  God  abides  in  him,  that  is,  he  is 
constantly  feeling  its  effects.  It  abides  in  him — a  sacred  fire  consuming  his  sins, 
and  comforting  his  spirit.  It  abides  in  him,  a  heavenly  messenger  revealing  to  him 
the  freshness  of  celestial  truth,  uplifting  him  from  earthly  desires,  and  preparing 
him  for  the  mansions  in  the  skies.  3.  Thirdly,  the  text  adds,  "  And  ye  have 
overcome  the  wicked  one."  Some  young  men  have  overcome  that  blue  devil  which 
keeps  men  despairing,  doubting,  trembling,  and  fearing.  Then  there  is  that  dust- 
eating  devil,  of  whom  we  can  never  speak  too  badly — the  yellow  devil  of  the 
mammon  of  unrighteousness,  the  love  of  gold  and  silver ;  the  dread  god  of  London, 
roUing  over  this  city  as  if  it  were  all  his  own.  Another  form  of  the  wicked  one  we 
must  speak  of  but  softly,  but  oh  !  how  hard  to  be  overcome  by  the  young  man.  I 
mean  Madam  Wanton,  that  fair  but  foul,  that  smiling  but  murderous  fiend  of  hell, 
by  whom  so  many  are  deluded.  Young  man,  it  you  are  strong,  and  have  overcome 
the  wicked  one,  you  have  overcome,  I  trust,  that  Lucifer  of  pride,  and  it  is  your 
endeavour  to  walk  humbly  with  your  God !  You  have  given  up  all  idea  of  merit. 
You  cannot  boast  nor  exalt  yourself,  but  you  bow  humbly  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross, 
adoring  Him  who  has  saved  you  from  the  wrath  to  come.  You  have  given  up  also, 
I  trust,  young  man,  all  subjection  to  the  great  red  dragon  of  fashion,  who  draws 
with  his  tail  even  the  very  stars  of  heaven.    11.  Let  us  further  observe  that  these 

THINGS  WHICH  CONSTITUTE  HIM  WHAT  HE  IS  AEE  HIS  QUALIFICATIONS  FOB  USEFUL- 
NESS. "  I  write  unto  you,  young  men,  for  ye  are  strong."  We  beg  you  to  use  that 
strength  in  winning  souls  for  Christ.  Remember  that  this  very  strength  which 
brings  a  blessing  to  yourself  wUl  benefit  another.  That  very  faith  which  brought 
you  to  Christ  is  all  you  want  to  bring  others  to  Christ.  As  the  angel  said  to 
Gideon,  so  say  I  to  you,  young  man,  "The  Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man 
of  valour"  ;  and  yet,  again,  "  Go  in  this  thy  strength."  If  the  young  man  inquires 
for  tools  and  weapons  with  which  to  serve  his  Master,  we  refer  him  to  the  next 
point  in  the  text,  "  The  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you."  Now,  if  you  desire  to 
teach  others,  you  have  not  to  ask  what  the  lesson  shall  be,  for  it  abides  in  you. 
Do  you  want  a  text  that  will  impress  the  careless?  What  impressed  you? 
You  cannot  have  a  better.  You  desire  to  speak  a  word  in  season  from  the  Word  of 
God  which  shall  be  likely  to  comfort  the  disconsolate.  What  has  comforted  your 
own  soul  ?  You  cannot  have  a  better  guide.  Once  again,  "  you  have  overcome 
the  wicked  one."  The  man  who  has  once  given  Satan  a  slap  in  the  face  need  not 
be  afraid  of  men.  If  you  have  often  stood  foot  to  foot  with  a  violent  temptation, 
and,  after  wrestling,  have  overcome  it,  you  can  laugh  to  scorn  all  the  puny 
adversaries  who  assail  you.  HI.  The  wording  of  the  text  suggested  to  me,  to 
roECE  THE  CONSCRIPTION.  "  I  havc  Written  unto  you,  young  men."  In  the  French 
wars,  certain  young  men,  unhappily,  found  their  names  written  do%vn  in  the 
conscription,  and  were  marched  to  the  wars.  Now,  in  a  war  from  which  none  of 
us  desire  to  escape,  I  hope  there  are  young  men  here  whose  names  are  written 
down — heavenly  conscripts — who  are  summoned  more  fully  than  ever  before  in 
their  lives,  to  go  forth  to  the  battle  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  I  invite  every  young 
man  here  who  is  already  converted  to  God,  to  dedicate  himself  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  to-night.  It  will  be  well  if  you  take  a  step  further  as  conscripts.  You  "  holy 
work-folk  " — as  they  used  to  call  those  who  dwelt  around  the  cathedral  at  Durham, 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  113 

and  were  exempt  from  all  service  to  the  baron  because  they  served  the  church — 1 
want  you  now  to  think  of  some  particular  walk  and  department  in  which  as  young 
men  and  young  women  you  can  devote  yourselves  wholly  to  Christ.  Generalities 
in  rehgion  are  always  to  be  avoided,  more  especially  generalities  in  service.  What 
can  you  do  ?  What  is  your  calling  ?  Eagged  schools  ?  Sunday  schools  ?  Street 
preaching?  Tract  distribution?  Here  is  a  choice  for  you,  which  do  you 
select?  I  would  inquire  next,  whether  there  may  not  be  young  men  here 
who  can  give  themselves  up  to  the  Christian  ministry,  which  is  a  step  farther. 
Take  care  you  keep  not  back  whom  God  would  have.  Then,  further,  I  have 
to  say,  may  there  not  be  here  some  young  man  who  will  become  a  conscript 
for  missionary  service  abroad?  I  might  to-night  read  a  sort  of  proclamation 
such  as  I  see  sometimes  issued  by  Her  Majesty — '♦  Wanted,  young  men."  We  give 
no  description  about  the  inches  either  in  girth  or  the  height,  but  we  do  give 
this  description — "  Wanted,  young  men  who  are  strong ;  in  whom  the  Word  of  God 
abideth,  and  who  have  overcome  the  wicked  one."  Once  again.  If  this  be 
impossible,  and  I  suppose  it  may  be  to  the  most  of  us,  then  may  we  not  get  up  a 
conscription  to-night  of  young  men  who  will  resolve  to  help  at  home  those  who  have 
the  courage  to  go  abroad  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Noble  young  men : — I.  They 
have  STKENGTH  IN  THEM.  11.  They  have  God's  Word  within  them.  HI.  They 
have  the  devil  undeb  them.  {Homilist.)  Youthful  strength  : — "  What  am  I 
going  to  be  ?  "  is  the  question  that  presses  upon  young  people.  But,  unfortunately, 
the  question  is  generally  supposed  to  be  answered  when  they  have  fixed  upon  a 
trade  or  profession.  It  means,  rightly  taken,  a  great  deal  more  than  that.  "  What 
ideal  have  I  before  me,  towards  which  I  constantly  press?  "  I.  The  steength 
which  you  toung  people  ought  to  aim  at.  It  is  not  merely  the  physical  strength, 
nor  the  mere  unworn  buoyancy  and  vigour  which  sorrow  and  care  and  responsi- 
bilities have  not  weakened.  These  are  great  and  precious  gifts,  to  be  preserved  as 
long  as  may  be,  by  purity  and  moderation,  and  to  be  used  for  high  purposes.  It  is 
not  your  body  that  is  to  be  strong,  but  yourselves.  Now  the  foundation  of  all  true 
strength  lies  here,  in  a  good,  strong  will.  Two  words  contain  the  secret  of  noble 
life  :  "  Kesist !  "  and  "  Persist !  "  And  the  true  strength  of  manhood  lies  in  this 
mainly,  that,  in  spite  of  all  antagonisms,  hindrances,  you,  having  greatly  resolved, 
you  do  greatly  do  what  you  have  resolved.  But  then  the  strength  that  I  would 
have  you  cultivate  must  be  a  strength  of  will,  founded  upon  strong  reason. 
Unintelligent  obstinacy  is  folly.  But  that  is  not  all.  A  strong  will,  illuminated  by 
a  strong  beam  of  light  from  the  understanding,  must  be  guided  and  governed  by  a 
strong  conscience.  "I  should  hke  "  is  the  weakling's  motto.  "I  will"  maybe 
an  obstinate  fool's  motto.  "I  ought,  therefore,  God  helping  me,  and,  though  the 
devil  hinders  me,  I  will,"  is  a  man's.  Conscience  is  king.  To  obey  it  is  to  be  free ; 
to  neglect  it  is  to  be  a  slave.  II.  How  to  get  it.  "  Ye  are  strong,  and  the  Word 
of  God  abideth  in  you."  If  you  want  to  be  strong,  let  Scripture  truth  occupy 
your  mind.  There  are  powers  to  rule  and  to  direct  aU  conduct,  motive  powers  of 
the  strongest  character  in  these  great  truths  of  God's  revelation.  They  are  meant 
to  influence  a  man  in  all  his  doings,  and  it  is  for  us  to  bring  the  greatest  of 
them  to  bear  on  the  smallest  things  of  our  daily  life.  Whosoever  lives  with 
the  thoughts  that  God  has  given  us  in  His  Word,  familiar  to  His  mind,  and 
within  easy  reach  of  His  hand,  has  therein  an  armlet  against  all  possible  tempta- 
tion, a  test  that  will  unveU  the  hidden  corruption  in  the  sweetest  seductions,  and  a 
calming  power  that  will  keep  his  heart  still  and  collected  in  the  midst  of  agitations. 
I  remember  going  through  the  Ked  Sea,  at  the  mouth  of  it,  where  the  entrance 
is  narrow  and  the  currents  run  strong,  when  the  ship  approaches  the  dangerous 
place,  ,the  men  take  their  stations  at  appointed  places,  and  the  ponderous  anchors 
are  loosened  and  ready  to  be  dropped  in  an  instant,  if  the  swirl  of  the  current 
sweeps  the  ship  into  dangerous  proximity  to  the  reef.  It  is  no  time  to  cut  the 
lashings  of  the  anchors  when  the  keel  is  grating  on  the  coral  rocks.  And  it  is 
no  time  to  have  to  look  about  for  our  weapons  when  the  sudden  temptation  leaps 
upon  us  like  a  strong  man  armed.  You  must  have  them  familiar  to  you  by 
devout  meditation,  by  frequent  reflection,  prayer,  study  of  God's  Word,  if  they  are 
to  be  of  any  use  to  you  at  all.  And  then  if  we  take  the  other  view,  which  at 
bottom  is  not  another,  of  the  meaning  of  this  phrase,  and  apply  it  rather  to  the 
personal  Word,  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  that  will  yield  us  another  exhortation,  and 
that  is,  let  Jesus  Christ  into  your  hearts  and  keep  Him  there,  and  He  will  make 
you  strong.  Others  can  help  you  from  without,  as  you  put  an  iron  band  round 
some  over- weighted  crumbling  brick  pillar  in  order  to  prevent  it  from  collapsing, 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

but  He  will  pass  into  us,  as  you  may  drive  an  iron  rod  up  through  the  centre  of 
the  column,  and  make  it  strong  inside,  and  we  shall  be  strong  if  Jesus  Christ 
dwells  within  us.  III.  The  field  on  which  the  strength  is  to  be  exercised, 
AND  THE  VICTORY  WHICH  IT  SECURES.  "  Yc  havc  overcome  the  wicked  one." 
What  does  that  mean?  It  means  this,  that  if  you  will  take  service  in  Christ's 
army,  and  by  His  grace  resolve  to  be  His  faithful  soldier  till  your  life's  end,  that 
act  of  faith,  which  enrols  you  as  His,  is  itself  the  victory  which  guarantees,  if  it 
be  continued,  the  whole  conquest  in  time.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Victorious 
young  men : — I.  First,  the  "  strong  "  toung  men.  Let  the  strength  possessed  be 
in  Christ.  "  Be  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  That  is  omnipotent, 
immutable ;  that  is  infallible  ;  and,  so  often  as  you  feel  there  is  some  momentous 
thing  to  be  accomplished  in  the  cause  of  God,  rely  on  the  person  of  Christ,  and  out 
of  His  fulness  receive  grace  for  grace.  This  leads  us  to  consider  for  what  pui-pose 
these  renewals  of  strength  are  received.  Fu-st  of  all,  there  is  your  warfare — you 
want  more  strength  for  that.  You  will  recollect  the  cry  of  Jehoshaphat,  when  the 
host  of  his  enemies  was  advancing  against  his  little  army,  "  Oh,  our  God,  wilt 
Thou  not  judge  them?  for  we  have  no  might  against  this  great  company  that 
cometh  against  us ;  neither  know  we  what  to  do :  but  our  eyes  are  upon  Thee." 
And  he  got  strength  enough.  Moreover,  this  warfare  is  such  a  perpetual  one,  that 
you  want  perpetual  strength  for  it.  But  we  also  want  strength  for  our  walk.  It  \s 
a  rough  road.  A  great  deal  of  it  is  up-hill.  Our  walk  is  "  by  faith,  and  not  by 
sight,"  and  amidst  its  difficulties  you  want  that  faith  strengthened,  so  that  the 
Author  and  Finisher  of  it  may  be  glorified,  and  we  make  some  advancement  in 
Divine  life.  Oh,  the  vast  importance  of  being  kept  moving  onwards  !  Moreover, 
we  want  strength  for  the  work.  "  My  son,  go  work  in  My  vineyard  to-day"  is  the 
Father's  command.  I  am  sure  that,  instrumentaUy,  the  best  method  of  keeping 
young  men  in  Christ  in  health  of  soul  is  to  keep  them  weU  employed.  H.  By  "  the 
Word  of  God  "  we  understand  every  essential  truth,  whether  doctrinal, 
EXPERIMENTAL,  OR  PRACTICAL.  The  prominent  evil  of  the  day,  with  regard  to 
theology,  is  the  separating  of  this  threefold  description  of  essential  truth.  They 
cannot  press  them  too  much,  provided  they  press  them  upon  proper  principles  and 
upon  a  sure  foundation.  But  they  frequently  do  so  without  that.  Then  there  are 
others  who  have  got  a  peculiar  and  favourite  technicality  about  "my  experience" 
— the  preacher  does  not  preach  my  experience.  We  like  doctrinal  statements  fully 
urged  and  without  reserve.  We  want  deep  experience,  such  as  the  Word  of  God 
sets  forth.  We  want,  in  addition,  that  active  Christianity  which  shall  characterise 
the  recipients  of  grace  as  "a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  These  I 
account  "  essential  truths  "  ;  and  I  desire  that  they  should  abide  in  you.  We  also 
understand  by  the  phrase,  "  Word  of  God,"  the  eternal,  incarnate  Word  dwelling 
in  you — "  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory."  This  makes  our  Christianity  vital. 
ni.  A  word  about  your  spiritual  victories.  "  Ye  have  overcome  the  wicked 
one."  You  have  burst  asunder  from  his  bands.  By  mighty  grace  you  have 
escaped  his  pursuit,  and  got  as  clear  of  him  as  Israel  did  of  Pharaoh.  Well,  but 
he  is  sure  to  be  after  you.  But  "  ye  have  overcome  "  him  !  What  a  merciful, 
what  a  gracious,  what  a  glorious  thing  is  faith !  It  overcomes  Satan.  The 
flesh  and  carnal  free-will  may  content  themselves  with  Satan's  drudgery;  but 
faith  will  not ;  faith  cannot.  Then,  in  overcoming  sin,  which  is  the  same  thing, 
as  it  exists  in  the  world  and  our  depraved  nature.  What  is  sin  in  the  Christian  ? 
The  wicked  one  employing  his  own  emissaries  that  are  yet  left  behind.  Apart 
from  the  base  corrui^tions  and  lusts,  there  are  self-righteousness,  and  seK-conceit, 
and  self-congratulations,  and  selfish  motives  and  desires  to  gratify  and  pursue. 
There  is  the  spirit  of  the  world.  Let  me  pass  on  to  direct  your  attention  unto 
the  use  of  spiritual  weapons  only.  "  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not 
carnal."  There  are  a  great  number  of  carnal  weapons  that  are  used  very 
adroitly  and  very  manfully,  and  to  a  certain  degi'ee,  in  a  moral  sense,  very  success- 
fully too.  Take,  for  example,  the  arguments  that  are  entered  into  by  keen  and 
skilful  polemics  against  infidels.  Well,  they  are  all  very  proper  for  a  certain 
purpose ;  but  they  are  not  spiritual  weapons.  The  result  is  that,  in  many 
instances,  they  frequently  convince  the  judgment,  and  yet  do  nothing  for 
the  soul.  IV.  The  teaching  which  these  "young  men"  receive  from 
the  apostolic  writings.  I  think  it  may  be  summed  up  in  three  things.  One 
of  them  follows  immediately  upon  my  text.  Reject  the  world.  (/.  Irons.)  The 
strength  of  young  men  .-—"The  glory  of  young  men  is  their  strength."  Every 
lad  who  is  worth  his  salt  desires  the  strength  of  fuller  years,  the  sphere  of  influence, 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  115 

the  consciousness  of  life,  the  power  to  protect  the  weak,  to  serve  the  greater,  and  to 
take  his  place  in  the  front  of  the  battle  of  life.  Mothers  lean  on  the  arm  of  their 
firstborn  with  a  half-concealed  but  conscious  pride.  Sisters  admire  and  almost 
worship  the  bursting  flower  of  their  elder  brother's  strength.  1.  This  hope  of  the 
world  must  not  be  confounded  with  mere  muscle.  Strength  without  wisdom,  skill, 
or  self-repression,  strength  devoted  to  an  unworthy  or  insufficient  end,  scarcely 
deserves  its  name.  2.  Again,  strength  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  proverbial 
infaUibility  of  youth.  3.  Once  more,  strength  is  sometimes  confounded  with 
insensibility,  which  is  due  to  imperfect  appreciation  of  reality  and  a  feeble 
imagination.  Wherefore,  laying  aside  aU  mere  muscle,  ludicrous  self-consciousness, 
dulness  of  perception,  uncharitable  sense  of  superior  wisdom,  and  the  obstinacy  of 
simulated  virtue,  let  us  clearly  seize,  if  possible,  and  utihse  that  strength  of  the 
young  which  is  their  glory  and  the  master  power  of  the  world.  ^1)  The  strength 
which  the  world  and  the  Church  yearn  for  is  the  youthful  {virtus)  courage,  which, 
when  a  great  end  or  lofty  ideal  has  dawned  like  awful  sunrise  on  the  soul,  counts 
all  things  but  loss  in  comparison  of  its  triumph.  The  young  Athanasius  braved 
the  courtly  prelates  and  crowned  kings  of  the  world,  and  through  a  Ufe-long 
martyrdom  maintained  the  Word  which  had  been  flashed  in  blazing  light  upon  his 
inmost  conscience.  The  glory  of  young  men  is  their  strength  to  do  battle  for  a 
cause  larger  than  themselves,  and  dearer  to  themselves  than  Ufe.  (2)  Another 
noble  feature  of  the  young  man's  strength  is  in  his  power  to  endure  hardness,  from 
which  often  the  older  man  shrinks  baffled.  The  young  man  can  afford  to  wait  at 
his  post  of  duty,  Hke  the  sentinel  who  has  the  fate  of  an  army  in  his  hands,  like 
the  sea-pilot  in  a  storm,  or  the  lighthouse-man  with  the  fleets  of  the  channel  at  his 
mercy.  He  can  endure  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible.  The  direction  of  physical 
force,  of  stored  energy,  by  wisdom  and  skill  is  the  wonder  of  the  modern  world ; 
but  the  consecration  of  the  young  man's  strength  by  the  free  reception  and 
indwelling  of  the  mind  of  Christ  is  the  hope  of  the  Cathohc  Church  of  the  Living 
God.  (H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  The  youthhood  of  the  nation  : — 1.  And,  first,  the 
young  are  strong  in  numbers.  2.  It  is  true  the  young  are  strong  in  passions,  ia 
impetuous  desires,  in  appetites,  and  in  aspirations,  which  have  yet  to  be  freed  from 
too  exuberant  growth.  But  is  it  not  good  to  see  this  fresh  life  ?  3.  Yes,  the 
young  are  strong  in  hope,  in  trust  in  God's  future,  putting  the  Janus  face  of  the 
new  year  to  soften  the  sombre  effect  of  the  countenance  of  the  old  year,  bidding  ua 
listen  for  the  music  which  is  soon  to  wake  Ln  the  woodland,  on  the  hillside,  and  by 
the  streams.  And  this  we  need.  But  this  freshness  of  spirit  is  only  to  be 
cherished  as  David  cherished  it — at  the  fountains  of  God.  Hence  the  pertinency 
of  St.  John's  words,  "  And  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  have  overcome 
the  wicked  one."  This  is  the  crowning  strength  of  humanity,  and  no  demon  can 
possess  the  soul  while  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  it.  In  our  judgment  of  the 
young,  we  forget  what  an  age  of  stimulation  this  is — what  a  hot-house  it  is  to  the 
plants  that  otherwise  might  unfold  more  perfectly  and  enduringly,  and  we  charge 
upon  human  nature  what  only  belongs  to  the  exciting  influence  of  the  steam  engine 
and  the  telegraph.  The  fact  is,  aU  ages  are  linked  together,  and  the  truest  strength 
of  the  young  is  derived  from  a  vital  connection  with  the  past.  "  Thou  hast  beea 
our  dwelling  place  in  all  generations  1 "  (C.  A.  Bartol.)  Working  power : — I  like 
the  teaching  of  an  elder  philosopher,  defining  "power  "  to  be  that  in  a  cause  by 
which  it  produces  its  effect.  Power  in  possession,  but  not  in  exercise,  is  practically 
as  weak  as  its  opposite.  To  be  strong,  but  inactive,  strong  for  good,  but  to  do 
nothing  that  blesses,  is  to  be  both  weak  and  wicked.  What  is  the  advantage  of 
having  a  force  never  harnessed  to  the  weight  it  was  made  to  draw  ?  I.  What  is 
PERSONAL  POWER  IN  THIS  AGE?  1.  The  carllcst  type  of  personal  power  is  the 
physical.  The  first  heroes  were  Nimrods,  mighty  hunters.  To  them  the  lyre  was 
struck,  for  them  the  feast  smoked,  on  them  beauty  smiled.  The  elder  Herculea 
was  one  who  could  rend  oaks  and  strangle  serpents.  The  modern  has  other  labours, 
only  symbolised  by  those  of  his  prototypes.  2.  The  next  type  of  personal  power  ia 
that  derived  from  birth,  and  blood,  and  place — patrician  greatness.  This  sort  of 
hero  drives  across  the  stage  charioted,  coroneted,  titled.  He  bears  a  name  made 
illustrious  by  dead  men.  We  stiU  cherish  some  Uttle  portion  of  this  feudal 
deference,  and  make  way,  with  decent  homage,  for  the  well-born.  But  this 
greatness  is  in  our  day  only  a  shadowy  effigy  of  its  once  ducal  pre-eminence.  Not 
the  crown,  but  what  it  circles,  is  the  question  ;  not  the  emblazoned  star,  but  what 
beats  beneath  it ;  not  the  fountain,  but  the  redness  of  the  blood  that  flows  in  the 
veins.    3.  Next  arose  in  history  the  type  of  personal  power  derived  from  wealth. 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  fCHAP.  n. 

The  peers  of  this  new  order  of  nobility  are  ever  of  redoubtable  force.  And  yet,  let 
one  of  these  gilded  peers  be  a  narrow-souled  miser,  how  like  a  great  blot  lie  his 
mansion  and  surroundings  on  the  smiling  landscape.  Let  him  be  a  mean  man, 
how  everybody  in  his  heart  despises  him,  even  those  that  fawn  1  4.  A  loftier  type 
of  personal  power  than  any  we  have  named  is  the  intellectual.  As  the  soul  is  the 
true  man,  intellectual  stature  is  real  stature.  The  force  of  this  power  is  far-felt 
and  permanent.  But  this  power  in  its  distinctive  inheritance,  as  a  lordship  among 
men,  is  for  the  few.  It  cannot  be  universal.  Its  conditions  are  too  exacting.  It 
does  not  go  down  to  the  vitahties  of  character  and  breathe  through  all  the 
channels  of  the  heart  the  spirit  of  the  daily  Ufe.  5.  Moral  power.  Its  seat  is  the 
moral  nature,  the  conscience,  and  the  heart.  Its  life  is  the  central  law  prescribed 
by  the  supreme  Moral  Governor— the  law  of  his  own  being — the  force  that  sways 
Omnipotence — the  law,  the  force  of  love.  It  is  ever  obedient  to  the  right,  just, 
unselfish.  It  goes  forth  in  beneficence  whenever  and  wherever  it  can,  as  a  fuU 
fountain  flows  down,  give  it  open  channels.  This  is  the  power  that  more  and 
more  asserts  supremacy  in  our  day.  The  humblest  mind,  the  lowhest  place  may 
■wield  this  pre-eminent  force.  All  that  was  good  and  vital  in  other  and  outlawed 
types  of  personal  force  is  restored  and  immortalised  in  this.  The  intellect  may  be 
wedded  to  it.  Herein  is  the  clearest  mental  illumination.  Love  is  light.  Here, 
too,  the  golden  ingots,  the  silver  bars  molten  in  this  crucible  of  love,  pour  out  their 
shining  streams  in  farthest  currency,  and  dust  that  perishes  is  transmuted  into 
polished  gems  that  burn  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever.      II.  How,  as  individuals, 

MAY  WE  POSSESS  THIS  MORAL  POWEE,  FIND  OURSELVES  CLOTHED  WITH  IT  AS  A 
PERSONAL   FORCE,     AND     BY     IT     LAY     HOLD    OF   AND   BLESS    OUR   AGE  ?         1.     The    heart 

itself  must  be  the  home  and  court  of  this  power.  The  individual  heart  must  yield 
itself  to  the  control  of  this  truth,  come  loyally  under  the  monarchy  of  this  right, 
and  pulse  in  every  throb  with  love.  2.  There  must  be  personal  purity  and  integrity 
in  action.  The  law  of  unselfish  living,  enthroned  in  the  heart,  must  extend  its 
dominion  over  the  life.  The  man  must  be  seen  walking  with  his  conscience  at  his 
left  hand,  the  Bible  at  his  right,  and  God  before  him.  3.  The  ascendant  law  of 
unselfish  devotion  to  the  good  of  beings  must  assert  itself  also,  to  be  puissant,  in 
forms  of  self-denial — a  cutting  off  of  seM-indulgencies,  a  careful  personal  abstinence 
from  all  that  may  be  harmful  to  our  fellows.  4.  This  power  grows  and  becomes 
effective  by  being  employed.  It  must  declare  itself  in  action.  He  who  loves  will 
do  what  love  prompts  and  what  love  can.  5.  As  to  the  particular  ways  in  which 
this  personal  force  will  attach  itself  to  human  interests  and  Uve  in  their  histories, 
■we  may  say  the  circumstances  and  opportunities  of  every  man  alone  can  give  the 
definite  and  detailed  answer.  But  these  ways  are  aU  the  ways  possible  to  the  man. 
It  wiU  go  forth  into  the  -vineyard  to  see  what  needs  to  be  done,  and  ask  the  Master 
for  employment.  IH.  Can  any  man  inaugubate  fob  himself  such  a  life  and  history, 

AND  pour  himself  OUT  UPON  IT  AS  THE  NORMAL  HABITUDE  OF  HIS  SOUL  AND  NOT  BE  FELT? 

Can  such  a  life  fail  to  take  hold  of  the  age  ?  Can  this  power  work,  and  not  tellcon- 
troUingly  and  abidingly  upon  individual  interests  and  issues — the  making  and  shaping 
of  character  and  the  advancement  of  the  unseen  Kingdom  of  God  ?  (.4.  L.  Stone.) 
Young  men  in  cities  : — Dangers  attend  every  comer  into  this  life,  by  whatever  door 
he  enters.  All  places  wiU  have  their  trials  and  burdens ;  but  aU  places  are  not 
alike  dangerous.  The  chances  of  health  and  worthy  manhood  are  far  greater  to 
one  born  and  reared  in  the  country  than  to  one  born  and  reared  in  a  city.  If  we 
could  choose,  we  would  delay  the  coming  of  men  to  cities  from  the  country  till 
their  frames  were  consoUdated,  till  their  habits  were  formed ;  but  that  cannot  be. 
We  must  seek  to  make  the  best  of  what  is.  Consider  the  influx  of  young  men  to 
our  cities,  and  the  causes  of  it.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  an  imperative  demand 
for  vast  numbers  of  young  men  to  carry  forward  all  the  processes  of  society  that  is 
so  active  and  so  intense  in  cities.  Business  of  every  kind  needs  them.  Where, 
however,  there  is  a  real  need  there  wUl  always  be  an  exaggerated  conception  in  the 
country,  which  will  induce  a  rush  to  the  city  out  of  proportion  to  the  real  want, 
making  young  men  too  plentiful,  and  therefore  cheap.  And  it  is  a  bad  thing  when 
men  are  cheap.  Few  conceive  that,  by  a  law  of  God  as  fundamental  as  the  law  of 
gravitation  and  as  universal  as  human  society,  success  in  Ufe  is  the  equivalent  of 
industry,  knowledge,  prudence,  and  perseverance,  and  not  the  result  of  chance. 
The  exceptions  are  few  and  occasional  in  which  it  would  be  found  to  come  from 
anything  in  the  nature  of  real  luck.  Men  go  out  to  hunt  their  fortune ;  to  fire  it 
upon  the  ■wing ;  to  take  it  as  it  runs  through  the  forest.  They  mean  to  find  it 
already  made.    They  do  not  understand  that  they  must  make  it  themselves  if 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  117 

they  are  to  have  it.  This  vision  attracts  multitudes,  as  by  and  by  it  will  mock 
them.  Besides  these  causes  that  draw  hither  so  many  more  than  are  wanted  of 
young  men,  there  are  more  legitimate  ones.  The  city  has  opportunities  for  some 
kinds  of  education  that  are  not  elsewhere  to  be  found.  It  is  a  living  encyclopEedia. 
It  is  a  world  in  miniature.  It  touches  human  want  on  every  side.  I  count  as  the 
greatest  loss  that  the  young  can  sustain  in  coming  hither  the  loss  of  home,  as  I 
count  as  the  greatest  blessing  which  the  young  can  enjoy  to  be  that  training  which 
a  good  home  affords.  There  was  a  time,  in  primitive  periods,  when  the  apprentice 
belonged  to  the  employer's  family,  when  the  merchant  took  to  his  own  house  his 
few  clerks  ;  but  the  change  of  business,  and  the  multiplication  of  men  in  stores  and 
shops,  make  this  no  longer  possible,  and  young  men  find  their  places  as  best  they 
can.  Let  us  look  at  a  few  points  of  danger  that  develop  under  such  circumstances 
in  cities.  First,  of  course,  is  the  danger  that  society  will  lead  the  young  man 
through  kindness  into  dissipation  and  wasteful  indulgences  and  pleasures,  at  the 
risk  of  destroying  his  morals,  his  health,  and  his  industrious  habits,  and  of  soon 
setting  him  adrift  from  good  society  and  sweeping  him  into  that  great  flock  where 
distress  and  death  shoot  all  their  bolts.  The  very  qualities  that  most  fit  a  man  to 
be  loved  and  to  be  useful  are  the  very  qualities  that  make  him  an  easy  prey  to 
dissipation.  I  mean  sympathy  and  yearning  for  companionship  and  warm-hearted- 
ness. I  must  here  specialise  one  of  the  dangers  which  beset  the  young.  I  mean  the 
danger  of  drinking.  This  is  a  national  vice.  Passing  from  this,  I  mention  some  of 
the  illusions  that  the  young  must  go  through.  The  first  of  all  is  that  of  setting  up  a 
wrong  ideal  and  end  of  life :  not  manhood  and  its  power ;  not  conscience  and  purity ; 
not  truth  and  fidelity  ;  not  industry  and  contentment ;  but  simple  wealth,  as  if  that 
carried  aU  things.  Now,  aim  as  broadly  and  highly  as  you  please  at  fortune,  but 
remember  that  character  is  better  than  property.  It  is  better  because  it  brings  with 
it  that  which  property  does  not  necessarily  bring — influence  and  happiness.  Next 
is  the  illusion  in  respect  to  the  relation  which  exists  between  means  and  ends. 
Men  charge  the  fault  of  their  ill-success  in  life  to  society  and  to  the  envy  and 
jealousy  of  rivals ;  whereas  their  failure  is  attributable  to  the  fact  that  they  have 
stumbled  on  the  illusion  that  they  could  gain  a  prosperity,  not  by  rendering  an 
equivalent  work,  not  by  exercising  skill,  not  by  putting  forth  thought,  not  by 
adhering  to  moral  fidelities,  but  by  practising  dexterities.  There  is  but  one  other 
illusion  that  I  shall  mention,  and  that  is  the  illusion  that  the  young  are  too  apt  to 
fall  into,  of  the  incompatibility  of  a  moral  and  religious  course  in  life  with  worldly 
prosperity ;  as  if  the  God  that  made  and  arranged  the  laws  of  political  economy 
was  not  the  same  God  that  made  and  arranged  the  laws  of  morality  and  religion. 
Such  are  some  of  the  dangers  which  beset  the  young  that  are  filling  our  cities. 
What  are  some  of  the  remedies  that  may  be  applied?  There  is  not  one  royal 
remedy.  From  every  side  in  human  society  we  must  address  remedies  to  these 
conditions  of  temptation.  There  ought,  first,  to  be  inculcated  a  higher  sense  of  the 
responsibility  of  those  who  employ  the  young,  to  watch  for  them  and  care  for  them. 
Then  there  should  be  a  public  sentiment  formed — and  Churches  should  assist  in 
forming  it — by  which  the  young  should  more  and  more  be  released  from  the  exactions 
of  business,  and  should  have  time  secured  for  their  improvement.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
The  hopefulness  of  youthful  strength  : — We  have  here  three  reasons  why  John  deems 
it  a  fitting  thing  that  young  men  should  be  exhorted  on  the  necessity  of  leading  a 
life  of  love  and  light  and  unworldliness.  1.  But  why,  to  take  the  first  reason,  does 
John  deem  it  a  fitting  thing  to  exhort  young  men  to  lead  the  life  of  love  and  light 
and  unworldliness  because  they  are  strong?  Wherein  lies  the  fitness?  Our 
answer  is,  because  for  one  thing  youthful  strength  gives  boundless  hope.  Youth 
has  endless  faith  in  itself.  Its  ambitions  are  all,  as  yet,  realisable.  Its  aspirations 
have  not  yet  had  their  wings  sulhed  or  torn  by  rude  world-coUisions  in  their  ascent. 
Hope  rules  the  life.  Principle  strong  and  vigorous,  supported  right  and  left  by 
courage  and  hope  and  aspiration,  can  meet  in  something  like  equal  battle  the 
temptations  of  the  world  and  of  the  inner  Uf  e.  The  strength  which  is  thus  peculiar 
to  young  hfe  gives  good  hope  of  victory  in  the  spiritual  battle.  But  this  truth  has 
clearly  another  side,  and  a  very  important  one.  The  strength  of  youth  may  go 
forth  in  the  lines  of  evil  as  well  as  of  good.  For  in  youth  passion  is  wild  and 
strong.  Conscious  strength  is  very  ready  to  tempt  to  unprincipled  action.  And 
whether  that  youthful  strength  shall  have  an  upward  or  downward  tendency  will 
depend  very  much,  or  rather  altogether,  on  the  guiding,  controlling  power  at  the 
centre  of  life.  The  same  powder  which,  under  powerful  guidance,  will  spUt  the 
.  rock  and  make  its  granite  blocks  accessible  to  man  and  available  for  his  works  of 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.h. 

ornament  and  use,  will,  beyond  that  control,  shatter  in  a  moment,  into  wreck  and 
ruin,  even  the  most  enduring  results  of  his  toil.  And  even  so  the  strength  of  the 
young  man,  which  may  well  be  rejoiced  in,  and  from  which  so  much  may  reasonably 
be  expected,  must,  for  safety  and  for  fulfilment  of  promise,  be  under  the  control  of 
a  principle  which  works  for  righteousness.  2.  John's  second  reason  for  exhorting 
young  men  to  live  the  Christian  life  is  that  "the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  them." 
This  being  the  case,  then,  the  young  man's  powers,  if  he  is  to  be  really  strong, 
must  be  under  the  controlling  influence  of  the  will  of  God,  as  that  has  been  revealed 
in  His  law  and  specially  in  Christ's  life.  Further,  for  real  strength,  this  Word  of 
God  must  abide  in  him.  The  Divine  will  must  not  simply  alternate  as  a  guiding 
power,  with  other  and  natural  forces  that  are  within  him.  For  this  would  be  tanta- 
mount to  making  the  control  useless  or  impossible.  The  engine-driver  must  be  an 
abiding  presence  in  the  front  of  the  train  from  beginning  to  end  of  the  journey — ^let 
passengers  come  and  go  as  they  list  at  the  intermediate  stations — if  there  is  to  be 
safety  and  final  reaching  of  the  desired  goal.  Do  you  stiU  say,  "  But  how  do  I  know 
what  God's  will  is  ?  "  I  answer,  you  know  the  commandments.  Whatever  makes 
for  righteousness  is  in  harmony  with  God's  will.  Whatever  is  in  the  lines  of  love, 
and  hght,  and  truth,  is  also.  The  good,  the  beautiful,  and  the  true,  are  of  God. 
But,  further,  you  have  Christ's  life.  Make  it  your  study.  Imitate  it.  It  is  a 
human  life,  with  God's  Word  abiding  at  its  centre.  Live  His  life  and  you  will  do 
God's  will.  3.  The  third  reason  why  John  exhorts  young  men  to  lead  the  life  of 
love  and  light  is  that  they  "  have  overcome  the  wicked  one."  This  is  really  the 
reason  to  which  the  two  preceding  reasons  lead  up.  This  is  really  the  result  of  the 
young  strength  put  forth  under  Divine  guidance.  Human  struggle  can  have  no 
grander  issue.  And  in  order  to  victory  here  both  things  are  needed — both  the 
natural  strength  and  enthusiasm  of  youth  and  the  abiding  Divine  Word.  It  is  in 
youth,  in  the  fulness  of  manhood's  young  powers,  that  Satan  ever  makes  the  most 
determined  assaults.  And  he  also  knows  that  if  he  can  only  then,  as  life's  work  is 
being  entered  on,  break  down  the  power  of  the  better  nature,  he  has  the  defeated 
man  almost  to  a  certainty  at  his  feet  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  Of  course  with  every 
man  the  contest  with  evil  is,  in  a  most  important  sense,  life-long.  But  the  issues 
even  of  the  end  are  often  settled  at  the  beginning.  Hence  the  infinite  importance 
of  victory  over  the  enemy  in  the  dawn  of  life.  Depend  upon  it,  your  safety  is  in 
fighting  it  out  now.  (Andreio  Doak,  M.A.)  Young  manliooiVs  strength  and 
triumph : — The  most  noticeable  facts  on  historic  page  are  young  manhood's 
triumphs.  Alexander  passed  into  the  shades  when  but  thirty-three  years  old,  yet 
he  conquered  the  world.  At  twenty-seven  Napoleon  had  executed  his  grand  Italian 
campaign,  had  routed  proud  Austria's  forces,  had  made  himself  recognised  as  the 
equal  of  Europe's  proudest  monarch,  and  was  hailed  as  the  greatest  general  of  the 
age.  Caesar  was  a  young  man  when  he  won  the  heart  of  Kome.  As  a  young  man 
Mozart  held  all  Europe  entranced  by  his  symphonies.  I.  What  is  young  man- 
hood's STRENGTH?  1.  It  is  brawu,  unweakened  by  "wear  and  tear"  and  abuse. 
2.  Nerve  force,  unshattered  by  strains  of  real  Ufe.  3.  Mental  force,  untrammelled  by 
false  reasoning,  depraved  imaginings,  disappointments,  melancholy.  4.  The  opera- 
tion of  powers  kept  in  balance,  as  a  piece  of  well-adjusted  machinery,  properly 
lubricated  with  what  has  been  prepared  by  the  Mighty  Contriver — joy,  vigour,  hope. 
II.  How  TO  PEPETUATE  louNQ  manhood's  STRENGTH.  1.  By  moderation  or  tem- 
perance in  all  things.  2.  A  just  observance  of  the  laws  of  health  as  laid  down  by 
men  who  have  made  the  matter  a  subject  of  close  study.  3.  Proper  mental  food. 
"  As  one  thinks,  so  is  the  man."  4.  Carefulness  of  habits  and  company.  5.  Hearty 
espousal  of  Christianity  in  its  true  sense.  III.  The  obligations  it  entails  on  its 
POSSESSORS.  The  eyes  of  the  world  are  on  you,  young  men  1  You  are  the  future 
hope  of  business,  society,  politics,  country,  and  Church.  (C.  V.  Winigh.)  _  A 
description  of  young  men  in  Christ : — Understand  that  the  apostle  is  not  writing 
here  to  any  according  to  their  bodily  age ;  he  is  using  human  age  as  a  metaphor  for 
representing  growth  in  the  spiritual  life.  Grace  is  a  matter  of  growth,  and  hence 
•we  have  among  us  babes,  young  men,  and  fathers.  It  is  honour  enough  to  be  in 
Christ,  and  certainly  it  is  no  small  thing  to  be  in  spiritual  things  a  man  in  the 
prime  of  life.  I.  Their  possession  of  strength.  "  I  have  written  unto  you  young 
men,  because  ye  are  strong."  1.  These  young  men  in  grace  are  strong,  first  of  all, 
in  faith,  according  to  that  exhortation,  "  Be  strong  1  fear  not !  "  They  know  whom 
they  have  believed,  and  they  are  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which 
they  have  committed  to  him.  2.  This  strength  makes  a  man  strong  to  endure. 
He  is  a  sufferer,  but  mark  how  patient  he  is  1    He  is  a  loser  in  business,  and  he 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  119 

has  a  hard  task  to  earn  his  daily  bread,  but  he  never  complains,  he  has  learned  in 
every  state  to  be  content.  He  is  persecuted,  but  he  is  not  distressed,  he  is  not 
moved  from  the  even  tenor  of  his  way.  3.  This  strength  shows  itself,  next,  in 
labouring  for  Christ.  The  young  man  in  Christ  is  a  great  worker.  He  is  up  and 
at  it  according  to  his  calling  and  ability.  4.  So  also  are  these  young  men  strong 
to  resist  attack.  5.  Furthermore,  these  young  men  are  not  only  strong  for  resis- 
tance, but  they  are  strong  for  attack.  They  carry  the  war  into  the  enemy's  territory. 
II.  Their  need  of  strength.  "  Ye  are  strong,  and  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked 
one."  Between  the  lines  of  the  text  I  read  the  fact  that  young  men  who  are 
strong  must  expect  to  be  attacked.  Every  sinew  in  the  arm  of  faith  will  have 
to  be  tested.  There  is  a  heavy  burden  for  the  strong  shoulder,  and  a  fierce 
fight  for  the  trained  hand.  Why  does  Satan  attack  this  class  of  men  most? 
I  reckon,  first,  because  Satan  is  not  always  sure  that  the  babes  in  grace  are 
in  grace,  and  therefore  he  does  not  always  attack  beginners ;  but  when  they  are 
sufficiently  developed  to  make  him  see  who  and  what  they  are,  then  he  arouses 
his  wrath.  Satan  knows  that  young  men  lq  grace  can  do  his  kingdom  great 
harm,  and  therefore  he  would  fain  slay  them.  You  are  strong  to  overthrow  his 
kingdom,  and  therefore  you  need  not  marvel  that  he  desires  to  overthrow  you. 
I  think  it  is  right  that  young  men  should  endure  hardness,  for  else  they  might 
become  proud.  Full  of  strength,  full  of  courage,  full  of  patience,  full  of  zeal,  such 
men  are  ready  enough  to  believe  the  wicked  one  when  he  whispers  that  they  are 
perfect ;  and  therefore  trial  is  sent  to  keep  them  out  of  that  grievous  snare  of  the 
evil  one.  Besides,  not  only  might  this  young  man  be  a  prey  to  pride,  but  he 
certainly  would  not  bring  the  glory  to  God  untried  that  he  brings  to  Him  when  he 
overcomes  temptation.  Besides,  it  prepares  them  for  future  usefulness.  HI.  Their 
PROOF  OF  strength.  They  have  overcome  the  wicked  one.  They  must  be  strong  ; 
for  a  man  who  can  overcome  the  wicked  one  is  no  mean  man  of  war.  In  what 
sense  have  these  young  men  overcome  the  wicked  one  ?  1.  Well,  first,  in  the 
fact  that  they  have  broken  right  away  from  his  power.  They  were  once  his  slaves, 
they  are  not  so  now.  2.  Moreover,  these  young  men  have  overcome  the  wicked 
one,  not  only  in  breaking  away  from  his  power  and  in  driving  him  entirely  out  of 
possession  so  that  he  is  no  longer  master,  but  they  have  overcome  him  in  the  very 
fact  of  their  opposition  to  him.  When  a  man  resists  Satan  he  is  victorious  over 
Satan  in  that  very  resistance.  3.  But  besides  that,  some  of  us  who  are  young  men 
in  Christ  have  won  many  a  victory  over  Satan.  Have  we  not  been  fearfully 
tempted  ?  But  the  mighty  grace  of  God  has  come  to  the  rescue,  and  we  have  not 
yielded.  4.  Once  more,  in  Christ  Jesus  we  have  entirely  overcome  the  wicked  one 
already  ;  for  the  enemy  we  have  to  contend  with  is  a  vanquished  foe — our  Lord  and 
Master  met  him  and  destroyed  him.  Ah,  fiend,  we  who  believe  in  Jesus  shall  defeat 
thee,  for  our  Lord  defeated  thee  !  We  are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that 
hath  loved  us.  IV.  Their  source  of  strength.  "  The  Word  of  God  abideth  in 
you."  "  The  Word  of  God" — that  is  to  say,  we  are  to  believe  in  the  doctrines  of 
God's  Word,  and  these  will  make  us  strong.  What  vigour  they  infuse  into  a  man ! 
The  promises  of  God's  Word,  too,  what  power  they  give  a  man  !  To  get  a  hold  of  a 
"  shall  "  and  "  will  "  in  the  time  of  trouble  is  a  heavenly  safeguard.  "  My  God 
wUl  hear  me."  "  I  will  not  faU  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  Then  mind  the  precepts, 
for  a  precept  is  often  a  sharp  weapon  against  Satan.  Eemember  how  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  struck  Satan  a  killing  blow  by  quoting  a  precept — "  It  is  wi-itten,  Thou 
shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  Him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  If  the  precept 
had  not  been  handy,  wherewith  would  the  adversary  have  been  rebuked  ?  Every 
word  of  God  is  life  to  holiness  and  death  to  sin.  Use  the  Word  as  your  sword  and 
shield  :  there  is  none  like  it.  Now  notice  that  John  not  only  mentions  "  the  Word 
of  God,"  but  the  Word  of  God  "  in  you."  The  inspired  Word  must  be  received 
into  willing  mind.  How  ?  The  Book  must  be  pleaded  in  the  inmost  heart, 
by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  mind.  A  man  instructed  in  the  Scrip- 
tures is  like  an  armed  knight,  who,  when  he  goes  among  the  throng,  inflicts 
many  a  wound,  but  suffers  none,  for  he  is  locked  up  in  steel.  Yes,  but  that  is  not 
all ;  it  is  not  the  Word  of  God  in  you  alone,  it  is  "  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you." 
It  is  always  there,  it  cannot  be  removed  from  you.  If  a  man  gets  the  Bible  right 
into  him  he  is  all  right  then,  because  he  is  full,  and  there  is  no  room  for  evil. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Young  men: — I.  There  are  a  middle  sort  of  Christians, 
WHO  MAT  BE  CAiLED  YOUNG  MEN.  1.  From  the  fathers  they  differ — (1)  Because 
they  are  not  so  well  settled  in  a  heavenly  frame  of  spirit.  (2)  In  that  they  have 
not  so  much  superiority  and  command  over  their  affections  and  passions  as  the 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

fathers  have.  (3)  la  that  they  are  not  so  wise  and  experienced  in  the  spiritual 
warfare,  and  therefore  are  often  foiled,  though  they  do  also  often  overcome.  2.  From 
the  babes  they  differ — (1)  Because  they  have  been  longer  engaged  in  the  practice  of 
godliness,  and  so  they  have  a  more  serious  consideration  of  their  state  and  ways, 
that  they  may  avoid  sin  and  the  occasions  thereof.  (2)  They  are  more  diligent  in 
the  use  of  means.  Their  continual  work  is  to  subdue  their  passions  and  corrupt 
inclination,  to  weaken  their  rebeUious  desires  and  defeat  temptations.  (3)  They 
are  more  versed  in  the  Word  of  God,  though  not  skilful  in  the  word  of  righteous- 
ness,  as  the  fathers;   yet  not  as  unskilful  as  the  babes  (Heb.  v.  13).     11.  The 

MIDDLE    SORTS    OF    ChBISTIANS    OB    YOUNG    MEN    AEE     MOST    EXPOSED    TO    TEMPTATIONS 

AND  CONFLICTS.  1.  It  is  truc  of  Christians  young  in  grace ;  these  especially  are 
busied  in  fighting  against  the  temptations  of  Satan  and  in  resisting  and  sub- 
duing their  own  unruly  lusts.  2.  The  devil  tempteth  and  molesteth  the  saints, 
in  hope  to  recover  the  prey.  3.  In  regard  to  themselves  and  their  own  flesh, 
which  is  not  as  yet  perfectly  subdued  to  Christ's  discipline.  The  bullock  at 
first  yoking  is  most  unruly ;  the  fire  at  the  first  kindling  casts  forth  much  smoke 
(Eom.  vii.  9).  III.  That  which  is  most  eminent  in  this  rank  of  Christians  i8 
STRENGTH.  1.  The  Strength  of  the  body ;  that  is  incident  to  young  men  naturally 
considered  (Prov.  xx.  29).  But  this  is  no  great  thing  in  a  spiritual  eye  ;  for  a  bull  or 
an  ox  may  exceed  us  in  this  kind  of  strength  (Psa.  cxliv.  14) ;  and  a  robust  temper  of 
body  doth  more  often  incline  to  sin  than  to  virtue  and  grace.  2.  The  strength  of  the 
soul,  which  is  the  property  of  Christians,  often  spoken  of  in  Scripture  (Psa.  cxxxviii. 
3 ;  Eph.  iii.  6).  This  is  the  fruit  of  grace,  for  by  nature  we  have  it  not  (Eom.  v.  6). 
This  spiritual  strength  serveth  for  three  uses — (1)  To  bear  burdens  with  patience. 
A  heavy  burden  requireth  a  sound  back  (Col.  i.  11).  (2)  To  perform  duties  with 
cheerfulness.  That  is  a  part  of  a  Christian's  strength  to  be  able  to  work  hard  as 
weU  as  bear  much  (Phil.  iv.  13).  (3)  To  resist  temptations  with  success.  Our 
necessities  are  many,  so  must  our  strength  be  to  fight  as  well  as  to  work  and  bear. 
IV.  This  strength  they  have  because  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  them. 
1.  The  precepts  and  doctrines  of  the  Word  abide  in  them  (Psa.  xxxvii.  31).  A  lively 
sense  of  his  duty  is  kept  fresh  upon  his  heart ;  and  then,  when  they  are  tempted, 
they  answer  as  the  Eechabites,  We  dare  not ;  our  father  commanded  us  otherwise 
(Jer.  XXXV.  6).  2.  The  promises.  These  must  abide  in  us  for  comfort  against 
temptations,  desertions,  and  afflictions  (Job  xxii.  22).  In  a  time  of  wants  and  straits, 
how  sweet  is  it  to  remember  how  amply  we  are  provided  for  in  the  covenant  I 
(Psa.  cxix.  111).  And  in  doubts  and  discouragements  by  reason  ol  pressures  and 
troubles  (Psa.  cxix.  5).  3.  The  threatenings.  Many  lusts  are  strange  and  boisterous, 
and  are  deaf  to  all  milder  motives.  V.  Those  that  have  the  Word  of  God 
ABIDING  in  them  OVERCOME  THE  WICKED  ONE.  1.  The  adversary,  "  the  wicked 
one."  As  God  is  the  holy  One,  so  the  devil  is  called  "  the  wicked  one."  2.  What 
is  the  victory?  for  the  apostle  speaketh  of  it  as  a  thing  past,  "  Ye  have  overcome." 
(1)  The  devil  is  an  enemy,  with  whom  we  cannot  make  peace,  but  must  fight 
against  him  till  we  overcome.  So  that  here  it  cometh  to  a  point,  either  we  must 
perish  or  conquer.  (2)  There  is  hope  of  this  victory.  Whilst  we  keep  up  the  fight 
our  striving  is  a  degree  of  conquest  (James  iv.  8).  {3)  There  are  great  preparations 
for  a  victory.  The  devil  is  a  conquered  adversary  (Col.  ii.  15),  a  disarmed  enemy 
(Heb.  ii.  14).  (4)  Final  conquest  is  sure.  {T.3Ianton,I).D.)  Manly  Christianity  : — 
Canon  McCormick,  speaking  on  manly  Christianity,  said — 1.  That  it  was  of  grace 
and  not  of  nature.  It  was  the  grace  of  God  that  changed  a  man's  heart  and 
freed  his  conscience  from  the  burden  of  sin.  2.  It  appealed  to  the  judgment.  We 
do  not  accept  Christianity  blindly.  Ours  is  a  reasonable  religion.  There  is  no 
philosophy  in  the  world  equal  to  the  philosophy  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Paul. 
3.  It  touches  the  affections.  The  intellect  is  nothing  without  the  heart.  A  reUgion 
that  consists  only  of  thought  wiU  never  help  suffering  humanity.  Manly  Christianity 
exhibits  the  tenderest  pity,  sympathy,  and  love — it  deals  with  the  sorrows  and 
weaknesses  and  failures  of  mankind.  4.  It  does  not  neglect  the  body.  The  body 
is  sacred  because  Christ  became  man.  Have  high  ideas  about  your  bodies ;  if  you 
are  Christians  you  will,  for  you  will  know  that  the  body  is  part  of  the  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  5.  It  takes  care  to  cultivate  the  mind.  There  is  no  book  so 
fascinating  as  the  Bible.  It  helps  a  man  to  do  his  duty  in  life  as  no  other  book  can. 
6.  It  elevates  the  character.  In  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  there  is  the 
greatest  and  truest  liberty.  The  JFord  of  God  the  guide  of  youth  : — God's  own 
Word,  and  especially  His  record  concerning  Jesus,  dwelling  in  your  inmost  heart. 
This  is  the  helm  by  which  alone  your  course  through  life  wiU  be  safely  steered.    It 


cmsp.  n.]  I.  JOHN.  12X 

matters  little  to  a  steamship  how  powerful  her  engines  may  be  if  she  have  no  rudder. 
The  stronger  the  engines,  the  more  needed  the  helm.  The  greater  our  strength, 
the  greater  our  need  of  guidance.  The  boat-race  is  sometimes  won,  not  through 
superior  strength,  but  through  superior  steering ;  and  many  a  young  man  has 
failed  in  Ufe,  not  so  much  for  want  of  strength  as  for  want  of  good  steering.  Let 
the  Word  of  God  abide  in  you,  and  you  will  be  led  aright.  (J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Little  children,  because  ye  have  known  the  Father.  The  childhood  of  grace : — 1. 
They  differ  from  the  Fathers  in  two  things — (1)  The  object  known.  (2)  The  degree  of 
knowledge,  (a)  The  object  is  diversified,  "  Him  that  was  from  the  beginning,"  and 
"  the  Father."  Nothing  more  needful  for  children  than  to  have  a  father,  to  whom 
they  may  repair  in  all  their  wants  and  who  may  take  care  for  them ;  accordingly 
they  own  God  as  a  Father,  (b)  The  act,  "  You  have  known  the  Father."  This  know- 
ledge is  an  initial  knowledge ;  the  act  of  knowledge  is  attributed  to  the  fathers  and 
the  little  children,  but  yet  there  is  a  difference  in  the  degree,  (i.)  Little  children  have 
but  a  taste  of  God's  fatherly  love  (1  Peter  ii.  3) .  The  fathers  had  a  longer  experience, 
by  which  they  are  more  confirmed  in  the  sense  of  their  adoption  (chap.  iii.  1). 
(ii.)  These  little  children  know  God  as  a  father,  because  they  have  never  yet  been 
put  upon  occasions  to  question  His  love ;  but  when  they  are  tried  with  afflictions 
or  temptations  they  are  filled  with  doubts  and  fears.  2.  They  differ  from  the 
young  men  in  Christ.  These  differ  from  the  young  men  partly  because  they  are 
inexperienced,  and  so  are  guilty  of  many  oversights,  are  more  easily  deceived  by 
Satan  and  his  instruments  (Eph.  iv.  14),  and  partly  because  they  are  ignorant  of 
the  power  of  corruption  (1  Peter  i.  14).  Weaknesses  and  infirmities  are  most  rife 
then.  And  partly  because  they  do  not  understand  their  duty  in  their  first  entrance 
upon  their  Christian  course  so  weU  as  they  do  afterwards,  and  therefore  either 
cleave  to  things  out  of  blind  zeal  or  else  condemn  them  out  of  rashness  and  indiscre- 
tion (Eom.  xiv.  1).  They  are  easily  carried  away  with  a  vain  show,  and  either 
aUow  or  condemn  things  without  due  warrant.  And  partly  because  they  are  not  so 
strong  as  the  young  men,  nor  so  fuU  of  spiritual  confidence,  but  are  full  of  fears,  aa 
little  children  are  easily  ifrightened  with  anything.  Their  faith  being  little,  doubts 
arise  and  fears  prevail  (Matt.  vi.  30).  3.  We  must  distinguish  these  from  the  carnal  or 
the  temporary ;  for  though  they  be  not  so  heavenly,  so  prudent,  so  strong  as  the  more 
growTi  Christians,  yet  there  is  a  clear  distinction  between  them  and  the  unconverted. 
(1)  They  have  the  common  spirit  of  all  Christians.  God's  favour  is  aU  in  all  to 
them,  insomuch  as  they  cannot  be  satisfied  without  it  (Psa.  iv.  6,  7).  (2)  Though 
their  main  care  be  about  getting  off  the  guUt  of  sin  for  the  present,  yet  there  is  an 
unfeigned  purpose  that  they  may  not  in  the  smallest  matters  offend  God,  but  to  the 
uttermost  of  their  knowledge  they  are  careful  to  perform  their  duty.  (3)  These 
weak  Christians  do  or  should  remember  that  God  wiU  not  always  bear  with  their 
weaknesses.  They  must  grow  more  solid  and  prudent,  more  settled  into  an  heavenly 
frame  and  temper  (1  Thess.  iv.  1).  (4)  Their  knowledge  of  God  as  a  father  differeth 
from  that  knowledge  which  temporaries  have,  because  it  is  an  active  and  operative 
knowledge.  God's  being  a  father  implieth  both  duty  and  privilege,  and  none  know 
Him  aright  but  those  that  perform  the  duties  of  children  and  depend  upon  Him 
for  the  privileges  of  children,  (a)  This  knowledge  implieth  the  performance  of  the 
duties  of  children,  which  are  to  love,  please,  and  honour  their  father  (Mai.  i.  6). 
(ft)  There  are  the  privileges  of  children,  and  this  knowing  of  the  Father  impUeth 
trust  and  dependence  (Psa.  ix.  10).  Doctrine:  That  even  the  lowest  sort  of  Chris- 
tians do  know  God  as  a  father.  I.  God  standeth  in  the  relation  of  a  fatheb 
TO  His  PEOPLE.  1.  By  creation.  He  gave  being  to  all  things,  but  to  man  and 
angels  reason.  To  establish  the  relation  of  a  father  there  must  be  communication 
of  life  and  likeness.  2.  More  especially  there  is  a  particular  sort  of  men  to  whom 
God  is  a  father  in  Christ,  and  they  are  His  children.  This  title  is  not  by  nature, 
but  by  grace  (John  i.  12).  (1)  It  importeth  great  privilege  to  us.  Great  benefits 
accrue  to  us  thereby,  (a)  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (6)  We  have  a  blessed  and 
excellent  inheritance  to  look  for  here ;  aU  the  children  are  heirs  and  "  joint-heirs 
with  Christ  "  (Rom.  viii.  17).  (c)  In  all  His  dealings  for  the  present  God  retaineth 
a  fatherly  affection  to  us,  pitying  our  miseries  and  pardoning  our  faihngs  (Psa. 
ciii.  13).  (2)  It  caUeth  for  great  duty  at  our  hands,  conformity  and  likeness  to 
Him  in  all  Divine  perfections,  (a)  In  holiness  and  purity  (1  Peter  i.  15).  (b)  In 
ready  obedience  to  His  laws.  In  one  place  we  read,  "dear  children  "  (Eph.  v.  1), 
in  another,  "obedient  children"  (1  Peter  i.  14).  (c)  Subjection  and  humble  sub- 
mission to  His  correction  (Heb.  xii.  5-10).  II.  The  lowest  sort  of  Chkistians 
DO  know  God  in  the  relation  of  a  father.     1.  Christ  hath  taught  all  His  disciples 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  say,  "  Our  Father  "  (Matt.  vi.  9).  2.  Adoption  is  one  of  the  first  privileges.  As 
Boon  as  a  man  owneth  Christ  he  is  adopted  into  God's  family  (John  i.  12).  3.  It 
is  God's  covenant.  He  hath  promised  that  all  His  "  shall  know  Him,  from  the  least 
to  the  greatest  "  (Heb.  viii.  11).     {T.  Manton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15-17.  Love  not  the  world.  ...  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of 
the  Father  is  not  in  him. — The  world  and  the  Father : — We  talk  of  sons  going  out 
into  the  world.  Hitherto  they  have  been  dwelling  in  the  house  of  their  father. 
Day  by  day  they  have  had  experience  of  his  care  and  government.  This  going  out 
into  the  world  we  speak  of  as  if  it  were  a  loss  of  some  of  these  blessings.  It  may 
be  a  loss  of  them  altogether ;  the  father  and  the  father's  house  may  be  altogether 
forgotten.  The  world  may  seem  to  us  a  good  world,  because  it  sets  us  free  from 
the  restraints  of  the  family  in  which  we  have  been  brought  up.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  all  children  look  forward  to  this  time  of  going  out  into  the  world.  Their 
fathers  encourage  them  to  look  forward  to  it ;  they  tell  them  their  discipline  in  the 
nursery  has  been  intended  to  prepare  them  for  the  world.  Well,  St.  John  is 
regarding  these  Ephesians  as  members  of  one  family  in  different  stages  of  their 
growth.  Children,  young  men,  fathers,  are  all  treated  as  sons  of  God  and  as 
brothers  of  each  other.  St.  John  would  have  them  understand  that  what  is  true  in 
particular  families  is  true  also  of  this  great  family.  There  is  a  time  of  childhood, 
a  time  when  the  name  of  a  Father,  and  the  care  of  a  Father,  and  the  forgiveness  of 
a  Father,  are  all  in  all.  But  while  St.  John  looks  thus  encouragingly  and  hopefully 
upon  these  youths  he  also  wishes  them  to  be  alive  to  the  danger  of  their  new 
position.  They  may  forget  their  heavenly  Father's  house,  just  as  any  child  may 
forget  his  earthly  father's  house.  And  the  cause  will  be  the  same.  The  attractions 
of  the  outward  world  are  likely  to  put  a  great  chasm  between  one  period  of  their 
life  and  another ;  these  may  cause  that  the  love  of  the  Father  shall  not  be  in  them. 
But  are  the  cases  parallel?  The  family  of  my  parents  is  manifestly  separated 
from  the  general  world ;  to  pass  from  one  to  the  other  is  a  great  change  indeed. 
But  is  not  the  world  God's  world?  Is  not  the  order  which  we  see  His  order? 
How  then  can  these  young  men  be  told  that  they  are  not  to  love  that  which  He,  in 
•whose  image  they  are  created,  is  said  so  earnestly  to  love  ?  Assuredly  it  is  God's 
world,  God's  order.  And  how  has  disorder  come  into  this  order  ? — for  that  it  is 
there  we  all  confess.  It  has  come  from  men  falling  in  love  with  this  order,  or  with 
some  of  the  things  in  it,  and  setting  them  up  and  making  them  into  gods.  It  has 
come  from  each  man  beginning  to  dream  that  he  is  the  centre,  either  of  this  world 
or  of  some  little  world  that  he  has  made  for  himself  out  of  it.  This  selfish  love  is 
the  counterfeit  of  God's  self-sacrificing  love  ;  the  counterfeit,  and  therefore  its  great 
antagonist.  The  Father's  love  must  prevail  over  this,  or  it  will  drive  that  Father's 
love  out  of  us.  Here,  then,  are  good  reasons  why  the  young  men  shall  not  love  the 
world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world.  For  if  they  do,  first,  theu"  strength 
will  forsake  them ;  they  will  give  up  the  power  that  is  in  them  to  the  things  on 
which  the  power  is  to  be  exerted ;  they  will  be  ruled  by  that  which  they  are  meant 
to  rule.  Next,  they  will  not  have  any  real  insight  into  these  things  or  any  real 
sympathy  with  them.  Those  who  love  the  world,  those  who  surrender  themselves 
to  it,  never  understand  it,  never  in  the  best  sense  enjoy  it ;  they  are  too  much  on 
the  level  of  it — yes,  too  much  below  the  level  of  it^for  they  look  up  to  it,  they 
depend  upon  it — to  be  capable  of  contemplating  it  and  of  appreciating  what  is  most 
exquisite  in  it.  Some  will  say,  "  But  these  young  men  to  whom  St.  John  wrote 
were  godly  young  men,  to  whom  he  gave  credit  for  all  right  and  holy  purposes."  I 
believe  it ;  and  therefore  such  words  as  these  were  all  the  more  necessary  for  them. 
"  Love  not  the  world."  For  there  is  a  love  in  you  that  the  world  did  not  kindle, 
that  your  heavenly  Father  has  kindled  ;  love  it  not,  lest  you  should  be  turned  into 
worldlings,  whose  misery  is  their  incapacity  of  loving  anything.  (F.  D.  Maurice, 
M.A.)  Worldliness  : — Religion  differs  from  morality  in  the  value  which  it  places 
on  the  affections.  Morality  requires  that  an  act  be  done  on  principle.  Religion 
goes  deeper,  and  inquires  into  the  state  of  the  heart.  I.  The  nature  of  the 
FORBIDDEN  WORLD.  Now  to  define  what  worldliness  is.  Remark,  first,  that  it  is 
determined  by  the  spirit  of  a  life,  not  the  objects  with  which  the  life  is  conversant. 
It  is  not  the  "  flesh,"  nor  the  "  eye,"  nor  "  life,"  which  are  forbidden,  but  it  is  the 
"  lust  of  the  flesh,"  and  the  "  lust  of  the  eye,"  and  the  "  pride  of  life."  It  is  not 
this  earth  nor  the  men  who  inhabit  it — nor  the  sphere  of  our  legitimate  activity, 
that  we  may  not  love ;  but  the  way  in  which  the  love  is  given  which  constitutes 
worldliness.    Worldliness,  then,  consists  in  these  three  things  : — Attachment  to  the 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  123 

Outward — attachment  to  the  Transitory — attachment  to  the  "Unreal :  in  opposition 
to  love  for  the  Inward,  the  Eternal,  the  True ;  and  the  one  of  these  affections  is 
necessarily  expelled  by  the  other.  K  a  man  love  the  world  the  love  of  the  Father 
is  not  in  him.  But  let  a  man  once  feel  the  power  of  the  kingdom  that  is  within, 
and  then  the  love  fades  of  that  emotion  whose  life  consists  only  in  the  thrUl  of  a 
nerve,  or  the  vivid  sensation  of  a  feeling :  he  loses  his  happiness  and  wins  his 
blessedness.  II.  The  beasons  for  which  the  love  of  the  world  is  forbidden. 
The  first  reason  assigned  is,  that  the  love  of  the  world  is  incompatible  with  the  love 
of  God.  If  any  man  love  the  world  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him.  St.  John 
takes  it  for  granted  that  we  must  love  something.  Love  misplaced,  or  love  rightly 
placed — you  have  your  choice  between  these  two  ;  you  have  not  your  choice  between 
loving  God  or  nothing.  The  second  reason  which  the  apostle  gives  for  not 
squandering  affection  on  the  world  is  its  transitoriness.  Now  this  transitoriness 
exists  in  two  shapes.  It  is  transitory  in  itseK — the  world  passeth  away.  It  is 
transitory  in  its  power  of  exciting  desire— the  lust  thereof  passeth  away.  Lastly, 
a  reason  for  unlearning  the  love  of  the  world  is  the  solitary  permanence  of  Christian 
action.  In  contrast  with  the  fleetingness  of  this  world  the  apostle  tells  us  of  the 
stability  of  labour.  "  He  that  doeth  the  wiU  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  And  let  us 
mark  this.  Christian  life  is  action  :  not  a  speculating,  not  a  debating,  but  a 
doing.  Observe,  however,  to  distinguish  between  the  act  and  the  actor — it  is  not 
the  thing  done  but  the  doer  who  lasts.  The  thing  done  often  is  a  failure.  Bless, 
and  if  the  Son  of  Peace  be  there  your  act  succeeds  ;  but  if  not,  your  blessing  shall 
return  unto  you  again.  In  other  words,  the  act  may  fail ;  but  the  doer  of  it  abideth 
for  ever.  We  close  this  subject  with  two  practical  truths.  Let  us  learn  from 
earthly  changefulness  a  lesson  of  cheerful  activity.  Let  not  the  Christian  slack  his 
hand  from  work,  for  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  may  defy  hell  itself  to  quench 
his  immortality.  Finally,  the  love  of  this  world  is  only  unlearned  by  the  love  of 
the  Father.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  'peril  of  worldliness  : — How  many  a 
hopeful  beginning  of  Christian  life  is  marred  by  worldly  influences !  How  many 
a  flower  of  Paradise  seems  to  perish  in  the  bud  at  the  deadly  touch  of  the  world's 
cruel  frost.  We  mean  by  the  world  not  only  the  place  but  the  people,  or  at  least 
some  of  the  people,  who  live  in  it.  Of  them  St.  Paul  says  they  "  mind  earthly 
things  " ;  that  is,  their  affections  and  desires  are  centred  in  this  world.  Now  in 
primitive  times  the  distinction  between  the  world  and  the  Church  was  very  marked. 
Those  who  belonged  to  the  world  did  not  even  profess  to  accept  the  authority  of 
Jesus  Christ ;  on  the  contrary,  they  proclaimed  outward  war  against  Him  and  His, 
and  carried  it  on  with  cruel  persecutions.  But  soon  Satan  began  to  change  his 
tactics.  He  disposed  the  world  to  respect  the  Church,  for  he  began  to  see  that  her 
strength  lay  in  opposition.  He  therefore  set  his  wisdom  to  work  to  rob  her  of  this 
power,  and  he  has  attempted  to  compass  this  end  by  seeking  to  obliterate  as  far  as 
possible  that  clear,  sharp,  well-defined  line  of  demarcation  which  separated  the 
children  of  God  from  the  children  of  this  world.  There  is  such  a  line,  and  we 
ought  in  the  first  place  to  recognise  that  fact,  and  in  the  second  place  look  to  God 
for  wisdom  to  discern  it  as  clearly  as  we  can.  In  a  large  number  of  instances  it  is 
not  difficult  to  discern,  because  there  are  a  great  number  of  persons  whose  Uvea 
speak  for  themselves ;  evidently  their  object  in  life  is  not  to  glorify  God  or  yield 
to  His  claims.  In  another  large  number  of  instances,  where  the  lines  are  not  so 
hardly  drawn,  a  tolerably  good  idea  of  the  character  can  be  obtained  from  indica- 
tions proceeding  from  the  hves  of  those  by  whom  you  are  surrounded.  When  it  is 
apparent  that  the  regal  claims  of  Christ  upon  the  human  heart  are  not  recognised  ; 
when  there  is  no  confession  of  Christ  in  either  words  or  actions ;  when  lower 
objects  obviously  engross  the  attention,  and  nothing  in  their  character  or  conduct 
indicates  that  the  will  has  been  surrendered  to  Christ,  then  the  honesty  of  true  love 
constrains  us  to  regard  such  persons  as  belonging  to  the  kingdom  of  this  world,  and 
as  destitute  of  the  new  life  and  life-instincts  which  belong  to  citizens  of  the  New 
Jerusalem.  Nor  must  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  misled  by  the  fact  that  most  people 
are  nominally  Christians.  What,  then,  is  our  relation  to  the  world  ?  Christ 
answers,  "  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  By  constant 
contact  with  the  world  and  by  exposure  to  the  temptations  which  arise  in  our  daily 
life,  we  are  to  be  driven  more  and  more  to  realise  the  fact  that  we  are  citizens  of  a 
heavenly  country.  But  there  is  more  to  be  said  about  our  relations  with  the 
world  than  that  we  are  in  it  but  not  of  it.  We  notice  that  our  text  says  we  are  not 
to  love  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world ;  and  it  goes  so  far  as  to 
Bay,  "  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."    Now,  side 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 

by  side  with  this  direction  we  must  place  another  text,  with  which  we  are  equally 
or  more  famihar :  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son." 
What  shall  we  say  then  ?  If  God  loved  the  world,  are  we  precluded  from  doing 
that  which  we  thank  God  for  having  done  ?  Let  us  contemplate  a  man  in  whose 
heart  the  love  of  benevolence  is  strong  towards  the  world.  That  benevolence  will 
induce  him  to  recognise  the  world's  present  position ;  to  bear  in  mind  the  truth 
that  the  world  has  rebelled  against  God,  and  that  God's  edict  of  condemnation  has 
already  gone  forth  against  it.  Eealising  this — its  terrible  peril — he  will  shrink 
from  adopting  any  attitude  towards  the  world  that  would  be  likely  to  make  the 
world  feel  as  if  its  danger  were  a  mere  doctrinal  or  sentimental  unreality,  and  this 
will  keep  him  from  associating  with  the  world  on  terms  of  reciprocal  amity. 
Christ  might  have  wrought  miracles  of  salvation  from  heaven,  but  He  preferred  to 
come  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;  and  so  we  may  go  into  the  world  too,  provided 
it  is  to  save  sinners.  This  should  be  the  great  work  of  our  Uves.  But  when 
instead  of  this  we  associate  with  the  world  as  if  it  were  congenial  to  us,  it  is  far 
more  Ukely  to  drag  us  down  than  our  friendship  is  to  lift  it  up.  I  am  afraid  it 
must  be  sorrowfully  admitted  that  too  many  professing  Christians  are  leading  two 
distinct  kinds  of  lives,  worldly  with  the  worldly  and  Christian  with  the  Christian. 
You  would  hardly  think  them  the  same  persons  were  you  to  meet  them  under 
different  circumstances.  They  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  citizens  of  this 
world  to-day,  and  they  might  pass  for  excellent  saints  to-morrow.  But  such  people 
as  these  really  exercise  their  influence  for  the  world  and  not  for  God.  (W.  H.  M.  H. 
Aitken,  M.A.)  The  guileless  spirit  loving  not  the  loorld,  which  is  darkness,  but 
God,  who  is  light  .-—The  love  of  the  world  is  here  declared  to  be  irreconcilable  with 
the  love  of  the  Father.  And  the  declaration  applies  to  "  the  things  that  are  in  the 
world."  These  are  represented  under  three  categories  or  heads — "  the  lust  of 
the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life."  1.  "  The  lust  of  the  flesh." 
It  is  lust  or  desire  of  a  carnal  sort ;  such  as  the  flesh  prompts  or  occasions.  It  is 
the  appetite  of  sense  out  of  order,  or  in  excess.  The  appetite  for  which  food  is 
God's  appointed  ordinance,  and  the  appetite  for  which  marriage  is  God's  appointed 
ordinance — the  general  needs  and  cravings  of  the  body  which  the  laws  of  nature 
and  the  gifts  of  Providence  so  fully  meet — the  higher  tastes  which  fair  forms  and 
sweet  sounds  delight — the  eye  for  beauty  and  the  ear  or  the  soul  for  music — these 
are  not,  any  of  them,  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  But  they  all,  every  one  of  them,  may 
become  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  And  in  the  world  they  do  become  the  lust  of  the 
flesh.  It  is  the  world's  aim  to  pervert  them  into  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  to 
pander  to  them  in  that  character,  either  grossly  or  with  refinement.  2.  "  The  lust 
of  the  eyes."  It  is  not  merely  that  the  flesh  lusts  through  the  eyes,  or  that  the 
eyes  minister  to  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  The  eyes  themselves  have  their  own 
lust.  It  is  lust  that  can  be  satisfied  with  mere  sight,  which  the  lust  of  the 
flesh  never  is  nor  can  be.  I  may  be  one  in  whom  the  world's  sensual  or  sensuous 
delights  no  longer  stimulate  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  But  my  eyes  are  pained  when  I 
Bee  the  giddy  crowd  so  happy  and  secure.  My  bosom  swells  and  my  blood  boils 
when  I  am  forced  to  look  on  villany  triumphant  and  vice  caressed.  It  may  be  all 
righteous  zeal  and  virtuous  wrath — a  pure  desire  to  witness  wrong  redressed  and 
justice  done.  But,  alas  !  as  I  yield  to  it  I  find  it  fast  assuming  a  worse  character. 
I  would  not  myself  be  partaker  of  the  sinful  happiness  I  see  the  world  enjoying; 
but  I  grudge  the  world's  enjoyment  of  it.  3.  "  The  pride  of  life."  What  pains  are 
taken  in  the  world  to  save  appearances  and  keep  up  a  seemly  and  goodly  state  1  It 
is  a  business  all  but  reduced  to  system.  Its  means  and  appliances  are  ceremony 
and  feigned  civility.  All  is  to  be  in  good  taste  and  in  good  style — correct,  credit- 
able, commendable.  It  is  the  world's  pride  to  have  it  so.  What  is  otherwise  must 
be  somehow  toned  down  or  shaded  off,  concealed  or  coloured.  Falsehood  may  be 
necessary ;  a  false  code  of  honour  ;  false  notions  of  duty,  as  between  man  and  man 
or  between  man  and  woman  ;  false  liberality  and  spurious  delicacy.  It  debauches 
conscience  and  is  fatal  to  high  aims.  It  puts  the  men  and  women  of  the  world  on 
a  poor  struggle  to  out-manoeuvre  and  outshine  one  another,  to  outdo  one  another, 
for  the  most  part,  in  mere  externals,  while,  with  all  manner  of  politeness,  they 
affect  to  give  one  another  credit  for  what  they  all  know  to  be  little  better  than 
shams.  Nevertheless,  the  general  effect  is  imposing.  Need  I  suggest  how  many 
sad  instances  of  religious  inconsistency  and  worldly  conformity  spring  from  this 
source?  Do  you  not  sometimes  find  yourselves  more  ashamed  of  a  breach  of 
worldly  etiquette — some  apparent  descent  from  the  customary  platform  of  worldly 
respectability — than  of  such  a  concession  to  the  world's  forms  and  fashions  as  may 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  125 

compromise  your  integrity  in  the  sight  of  God  and  your  right  to  acquit  yourselves 
of  guile  ?    Aiid  now,  for  practical  use,  let  three  remarks  be  made.     1.  Of  "  all  that 
is  in  the  world  "  it  is  said  that  "it  is  not  of  the  Father,  but  of  the  world."     The 
choicest  blessings  of  home,  the  holiest  ordinances  of  religion,  the  very  gospel  itself, 
may  thus  come,  when  once  "  in  the  world,"  to  be   "  of  the  world."     There  is 
nothing  in  them  that  rises  above  the  natural  influences  of  self-love  and  social,  as 
these  are  blended  "in  the  world."     2.  "All  that  is  in  the  world  is  of  the  world," 
wherever  it  may  be  found.    Let  us  beware,  then,  of  letting  into  the  sanctuary  and 
Bhrine  of  our  soul,  now  become  the  dwelling-place  of  God  by  His  Spirit,  anything 
that  savours  of  the  world's  sloth  and  self-indulgence,  or  of  the  world's  jealousy  and 
envy,  or  of  the  world's  vain  pomp  and  pride.     3.  Let  us  remember  that  the  world 
which  we  are  not  to  love,  because  "  aU  that  is  in  it  is  not  of  the  Faliher  but  is 
of  the  world,"  is  yet  itself  the  object  of  a  love  on   the   part  of   the   Father, 
with  which,  as  His  children,  having  in  us  His  love,  we  are  to  sympathise.    Let 
us  look  at  it  as  the  Father  looks  at  it — as  a  deep,  dark  mass  of  guilt,  ungodli- 
ness,  and   woe.      Let   us    plunge    in    to    the    rescue.      (R.    S.    Candlish,    D.D.) 
Love  not  the  loorld : — I.  The  waening.     Are  we  not  required  dihgently  to  attend  to 
the  things  of  the  world  ?     And  is  not  a  promise  of  its  enjoyment  made  to  those  who 
do  so  ?   True.  The  command  is  "  Look  well  to  thy  flocks  and  herds."  "  Not  slothful 
in  business."  And  this  is  among  the  promises,  "  Godliness  is  profitable  to  all  things, 
having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  and  that  which  is  to  come."  We  may  value  the 
world,  we  may  seek  to  possess  it,  we  may  enjoy  it.  This  is  not  what  the  apostle  forbids. 
The  true  meaning  of  the  injunction  lies  in  the  term,  "  Love  not  the  world."     This 
affection  is  supreme  in  whatever  heart  it  dwells.    It  is  jealous,  and  admits  no  rival. 
If  a  man  loves  the  world,  he  gives  it  the  first  place  in  his  heart,  and  everything  is 
subordinated  to  it.     The  world  then  becomes  his  God,  and  he  worships  it.    What- 
ever comes  in  competition  with  it  is  discarded.     It  becomes  the  object  of  a  passion 
of  which  it  is  wholly  unworthy.      Yet  the  love  of  the  world  is  a  principle  fearfuUy 
prevalent.     It  is  to  be  found  in  many  who  do  not  suspect  it.     Here  is  a  man  placed 
in  a  position  where  he  may  add  to  his  worldly  substance.    But  there  is  a  difficulty. 
The  law  stares  him  in  the  face,  "  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men." 
He  would  like  to  keep  it,  but  the  prospect  is  tempting.     By  degrees  his  principle  of 
integrity  is  overcome,  and  he  takes  the  golden  bait,  overcome  by  the  love  of  the 
world.     One  other  illustration  may  be  added.     Here  is  a  man  who  does  respect  the 
laws  of  integrity ,  and  honour,  and  devotion.     But  he  is  associated  with  another, 
who  does  not  respect  them.      A  case  arises  where  both  must  act  together.     The 
former  expresses  his  desire  to  act  righteously.     The  other  uses  his  influence  to 
overcome  what  he  denominates  his  scruples.      He  is  afraid  to  offend  him ;  his 
interests  are  too  deeply  involved  to  run  so  great  a  risk ;  he  yields,  and  presents 
another  example  of  a  victim  overcome  by  the  love  of  the  world.      II.  The  reasons 
OF  THE  WARNING.     1.  The  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  the  world  are  incompatible 
with  one  another,  and  cannot  exist  together  in  the  same  mind.     This  is  precisely 
the  sentiment  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  vi.  24).     2.  The  world  is  sinful,  and  therefore  its 
service  is  incompatible  with  that  of  God.     3.  We  are  ourselves  perishing,  and  so  is 
all  that  is  earthly.     4.  But  to  all  this  there  is  a  glorious  contrast  in  the  last  reason. 
"  He  that  doeth  the  wiU  of  God  abideth  for  ever."       Such  a  man  is  the  subject  of 
principles  that  wiU  endure  through  aU  the  trials  and  vicissitudes  of  life.      {Jos. 
Morgan,  D.D.)        Love  not  the  world  : — Intimately  connected,  as  we  are,  with  this 
point  of   space,  we   are  connected  stOl  more  intimately  with  something  which 
transcends  alike  both  time  and  space — the  Eternal  and  the  Infinite  in  which  we  live 
and  move  and  have  our  being.    It  is  because  the  world  tends  to  draw  off  our 
thoughts  from  Him  who  is  the  centre  and  fountaiu  of  our  life  that  we  are  warned 
not  to  love  the  world.     The  world  against  which  we   are  Warned   is  something 
transitory  and  changeable.     It  is  that  which  appeals  to  our  senses,  which  supplies 
to  us  the  natural  field  of  enjoyment  and  thought  and  action.      It  is  plain  that  if 
the  world  means  all  this,  it  is  utterly  absurd  to  think  we  can  escape  from  it,  as  some 
have  fancied,  by  becoming  hermits,  or  avoiding  certain  kinds  of  society  or  amuse- 
ment.    The  world  is  wrapt  up  in  our  very  nature.     It  is  a  necessity  of  our  earthly 
life.      We  might  as  well  say  we  would  renounce  our  bodies,  renounce  eating  or 
breathing,  as  say  we  would  renounce  the  world  in  this  sense.     It  is  not  the  world 
then  in  itself,  but  a  particular  way  of  using  the  world,  a  particular  way  of  being 
affected  by  the  world,  which  we  Christians  are  to  give  up.     It  may  help  us  to 
understand  what  is  the  wrong  use  and  the  wrong  influence  of  the  world  if  we  tbinV 
first  what  is  the  right  nse  and  right  influence.    Why  did  God  place  as  in  suoh  a 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

world  as  this  ?  Was  it  not  in  order  that  we  might  be  raised  from  the  animal  to  the 
spiritual,  from  the  state  of  nature  to  the  state  of  grace,  that  we  might  learn  to  know 
God  and  do  His  will,  and  so  become  partakers  of  eternal  Ufe?  This,  then,  is  the 
right  use  of  the  world,  that,  through  the  things  which  are  made,  we  might  come 
to  understand  the  invisible  things  of  God.  Let  us  think  of  some  of  the  ways  in 
which  this  is  done.  The  infant's  world  is  its  mother's  lap.  In  and  through  that 
visible  world  it  is  taught,  even  before  it  can  think,  some  of  the  invisible  things  of 
God.  So  again  the  astronomer  when  he  ponders  over  the  varying  aspects  of  the 
starry  heavens,  the  naturalist  when  he  examines  with  the  microscope  the  structure 
of  creatures  invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  the  poet  when  he  bows  down  in  reverenc?e 
and  adoration  before  the  Holy  Spirit  revealing  itself  in  nature — these  all  use  the 
world  aright,  they  rise  through  the  visible,  the  outward  transitory  fact,  to  the 
invisible,  the  inner  law,  the  unchanging  character  and  will  of  the  Eternal  Father. 
Let  us  now  descend  from  this  wider  view  of  our  environment  to  that  which  we  most 
commonly  understand  by  the  term  "  the  world,"  and  which  no  doubt  approaches 
more  nearly  to  its  use  in  the  Bible — the  influence  of  society  in  general  upon  each 
member  of  the  society.  Many  men  have  been  kept  from  doing  wrong  by  fear  of  the 
world's  censure,  many  men  have  been  stimulated  to  do  right  from  hope  of  the 
world's  praise.  In  this  way,  then,  the  voice  of  society  is  to  a  certain  extent  an 
echo  of  the  voice  of  God.  But  far  more  valuable  and  important  is  that  other 
influence  of  society,  when  each  individual  man  ceases  to  think  of  himself  as  a 
separate  unit  with  his  separate  interests,  and  becomes  conscious  of  a  common 
membership  and  a  common  life.  As,  for  instance,  when  a  boy  at  school  learns  to 
care  more  for  the  honour  and  credit  of  the  school  than  he  does  for  any  advantage 
or  credit  to  himself,  or  when  the  soldier  is  so  penetrated  by  the  spirit  of  discipline 
and  loyalty  and  patriotism  that  he  willingly  sacrifices  his  life  to  ensure  the 
safety  of  his  comrades  or  the  triumph  of  his  country.  If  through  the  world  of 
nature  we  are  taught  something  of  the  might  and  the  wisdom  and  the  glory  of  God, 
surely  through  the  world  of  humanity,  through  the  natural  feeling  of  fellowship 
which  binds  us  all  together,  we  are  taught  a  yet  higher  truth,  we  are  brought  into 
sympathy  with  Him  who  left  the  throne  of  glory  to  take  upon  Him  the  form  of  a 
servant.  Such,  then,  being  the  right  use  and  the  right  influence  of  the  world,  it  wiU 
not  be  difl&cult  to  see  what  is  its  wrong  use  and  wrong  influence,  what,  in  fact,  is 
the  meaning  of  the  term  "world"  as  used  in  my  text.  The  world,  in  the  bad 
sense,  is  that  in  our  environment  which  has  a  tendency  to  lower  our  moral  nature, 
to  shut  out  the  thought  of  God,  to  make  us  disbelieve  in  the  eternal  righteousness 
and  love.  Let  us  take  a  few  examples.  Public  spirit,  esprit  de  corps,  which  is  the 
parent  of  so  much  that  is  good,  may  also  be  the  parent  of  terrible  evil.  Men  who  would 
have  shrunk  from  doing  harm  to  their  neighbour  on  private  grounds  have  been  ready 
to  commit  the  worst  atrocities  when  it  was  ordered  by  the  society  to  which  they 
belonged.  So  a  man  whom  we  have  known  as  fair  and  honourable  in  private  life, 
will  use  the  most  unfair  means,  will  descend  to  intimidation  and  slander,  if  not  to 
actual  falsehood,  in  order  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  religious  or  political  party 
to  which  he  belongs.  In  all  these  cases  we  see  the  evU  influence  of  that  world 
against  which  St.  John  warns  us.  The  man  forgets  that  the  first  and  greatest 
commandment  is  his  duty  to  God,  and  that  his  duty  to  man  can  only  be  rightly 
accomplished  as  long  as  he  remembers  his  duty  to  God.  I  turn  now  to  the  second 
kind  of  social  influence  of  which  I  spoke  before.  I  mean  where  a  man  is  not 
carried  away  by  the  prevailing  feeling,  but  where  he  consciously  adapts  himself  to 
it  with  a  view  to  gain  respect  or  admiration,  or  to  avoid  punishment,  or  blame,  or 
contempt,  or  inconvenience  of  any  kind.  As  I  said  before,  the  eiJect  of  this  motive 
is  to  a  certain  extent  favourable  to  virtuous  action,  but  no  action  is  made  virtuous 
or  right  simply  because  it  is  done  to  get  credit  or  avoid  discredit.  It  becomes  right 
when  it  is  done  to  please  God,  and  it  is  only  when  we  believe  that  human  judgment 
is  in  accordance  with  God's  judgment  that  we  may  properly  take  man's  approval 
as  a  guide  for  our  conduct.  The  great  danger  is  that  we  take  the  fashion,  whether 
of  a  larger  or  smaller  world,  as  being  itself  the  authoritative  standard  of  life ;  that 
we  are  so  deafened  by  the  outside  noise  that  we  cease  to  hear  the  still  small  voice 
of  God  in  the  heart ;  we  do  not  ask  whether  He  approves,  we  do  not  even  stop  to 
ask  what  is  the  origin,  or  meaning,  or  ground  of  the  custom  or  opinion  which 
fashion  enjoins,  till  at  last  we  become  simple  echoes,  we  have  no  genuine  tastes  or 
feelings  left,  our  one  anxiety  is  to  repeat  correctly  the  latest  catch-word  of  the 
moment.  {J.  B.  Mayor,  M.A.)  Love  of  the  world:— I.  Excessive  affection  for 
the  mere  things  of  the  world  must  always  be  incompatible  with  the  love  of  God. 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  127 

/  That  which  is  of  the  earth  is  earthy,  and  cannot  be  made  to  incorporate  with  that 
which  is  heavenly.  He  who  is  warm  in  the  chase  after  wealth  or  renown  finds  no 
time  nor  room  in  his  heart  for  spiritual  contemplation.  It  was  fabled  of  old  that 
when  the  arch  tempter  had  made  his  allurements  agreeable  to  a  man  his  guardian 
angels  uttered  a  sad  lament,  sang  a  melancholy  dirge,  and  left  him.  When  a 
licentious  passion  has  gained  dominion  over  the  thoughts  of  a  man,  or  when 
ambition  is  made  free  of  his  breast  and  constituted  his  privy-counciUor,  then  do 
his  anxious  watchings  over  the  purity  of  his  spirit,  and  his  delicate  perceptions  of 
right  and  wrong,  and  his  tender  feelings  of  universal  benevolence,  and  his  medita- 
tions on  futurity,  and  his  frequent  and  holy  communions  with  God,  which  may 
indeed  be  called  our  guardian  angels,  take  farewell  of  the  habitation  where  they, 
must  stay  no  longer,  carrying  out  their  peace  and  glory  with  them.  Alas  !  this  is 
no  fable,  but  a  daily  sight.  II.  The  love  of  the  world,  being  incompatible  with  the 
love  of  God,  is  consequently  at  enmity  with  His  service.  The  lover  of  the  world 
is  perhaps  a  votary  of  gain ;  if  so,  he  cannot  serve  God  with  the  accepted  obedience 
of  generosity  and  benevolence.  He  may  have  enrolled  himseK  on  the  lists  of 
ambition  ;  but  God  dwells  with  the  lowly  and  with  him  on  whose  lips  there  is  no 
guile.  He  may  have  plunged  into  the  roaring  vortex  of  dissipation  and  intoxi- 
cating pleasure ;  he  surely  cannot  serve  God  there.  III.  Theee  is  nothing 
DURABLE  IN  THESE  OBJECTS,  which  appear  so  enchanting,  and  are  pursued  so 
eagerly.  IV.  We  ought  not  to  love  the  world  because  an  excessive  attach- 
ment   TO    IT    MAKES   US    UNWILLING    TO    LEAVE    IT    AT    DEATH.        V.     It    is    but    little 

to  say  that  we  are  thus  rendered  unwilling  to  leave  it  when  we  have  also  to  say 
that  we  are  thus  rendered  unworthy  to  leave  it,  unfit  to  leave  it.  The 
discipline  which  the  soul  receives  in  the  schools  of  selfishness  and  the  bowers  of 
pleasure  and  the  haUs  of  pride  is  not  such  as  will  fit  it  for  heaven.  {F.  W.  P. 
Greenwood,  D.D.)  Love  of  the  world  : — Is  it  true,  then,  that  religion  requires  us 
to  sacrifice  every  natural  affection  ?  If  it  is,  then  comply  with  it.  If  religion  is 
such  a  thing,  then  Simeon  Stylites,  on  his  pillar-top,  was  a  pattern  saint.  But  if 
this  is  not  the  ideal  of  reUgion,  let  us  find  out  what  the  true  ideal  is.  If  there  is  a 
love  of  natural  things  perfectly  consistent  with  and  flowing  out  from  the  love  of 
God,  let  us  know  it  and  act  accordingly.  Now  what  is  the  doctrine  in  the  text  ? 
When  we  consider  it  in  its  connection  we  find  it  is  not  a  mere  statement 
of  negations.  "Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the 
world."  It  does  not  stop  with  this.  Why  not  love  these  ?  Because  we  are  called 
to  cherish  a  higher  and  more  comprehensive  affection.  We  are  to  love  the  Father 
supremely.  There  are  some  who  try  to  preserve  a  sort  of  balance  between  the  two 
— between  the  spirit  that  makes  this  world  supreme,  which  of  course  dissolves  aU 
moral  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  ;  and  the  spirit  that  makes  God  supreme, 
•which  claims  as  right  the  love  of  right  only.  It  is  like  compromising  with  a 
cancer,  or  holding  negotiations  with  the  yellow  fever.  There  are  only  two 
standards — that  which  proceeds  from  the  love  of  God  as  supreme ;  that  which 
proceeds  from  the  love  of  the  world  as  supreme.  You  cannot  serve  them  both. 
The  whole  statement  of  the  text  rests  upon  the  simple  fact  that  every  man  has  a 
master-motive  in  his  heart,  which  he  more  or  less  consciously  acts  upon.  There  is 
one  general  ground  from  which  a  man  measures.  Here,  for  instance,  is  a  man  that 
measures  from  the  love  of  the  world,  from  the  summit  of  worldly  advantage.  If 
you  want  to  explain  his  life  you  do  it  in  this  way :  he  starts  with  worldly  sanctions 
and  worldly  interests,  and  thus  sometimes  measures  up  to  spiritual  claims  and 
moral  laws.  So  you  see  men  in  every  avocation  of  life,  from  the  most  private  to  the 
most  public  transactions,  willing  enough  to  confess  the  right,  but  after  all  holding 
it  subordinate  to  the  ground  from  which  they  measure — worldly  advantage.  Now 
a  thing  is  either  right  or  it  is  wrong.  If  we  measure  from  God's  supreme  law,  the 
love  of  the  Father,  we  must  bring  everything  else  down  before  that ;  if  we  measure 
from  worldly  advantage,  we  must  bring  God's  law  down  before  that.  Love  not  the 
world,  is  the  principle.  What  the  apostle  means  by  loving  the  world  and  the 
things  of  the  world,  is  loving  them  supremely  and  making  them  a  standard ; 
measuring  from  the  ground,  of  worldly  sanction  and  interest  up  to  the  supreme 
right.  No,  we  are  to  measure  from  the  love  of  the  Father  downward — not  from  the 
love  of  worldly  advantage  and  sanction  upward.  That  is  the  real  meaning  of  the 
text.  Loving  the  Father  supremely,  we  shall  know  what  to  love  as  He  loves,  and 
we  shall  see  everythmg  in  the  relation  in  which  He  sees  it.  From  His  all- 
comprehending  aifection  we  shall  go  forth  to  see  everything  truly  and  to  love 
everything  as  we  ought  to  love  it.    Every  daily  duty,  every  daily  care,  every  common 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [[chap.  n. 

interest — your  homes,  your  toils,  your  trials,  will  all  be  loved  by  you  in  due  pro- 
portion, because  you  wiU  read  in  them  the  Father's  meaning  and  you  will  see 
them  in  their  true  relations  and  significance.  And  stUl  again,  when  we  start  from 
this  ground  of  love  we  learn  to  distinguish  the  essence  of  things  from  the  outside  ol 
things.  When,  for  instance,  a  man  becomes  so  enamoured  of  nature  that  he 
forgets  the  God  who  made  it ;  when  he  touches  not  the  pulses  of  the  infinite  in  the 
motions  of  the  worlds,  but  all  is  a  dead  blank  and  all  traces  of  God  have  vanished, 
then  man  has  that  love  of  the  world  and  of  the  things  that  are  in  it  which  is 
condemned  by  the  apostle.  So,  too,  a  man  may  love  humanity  simply  on  its  out- 
Bide — for  its  advantage  to  him — merely  for  that  which  is  pleasing  to  him,  not  in  its 
essence.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  look  at  the  outside  of  men.  He  looked  into 
humanity  as  an  emanation  from  God.  He  saw  it  in  its  priceless  worth,  and  died 
for  it — not  for  its  relations  to  hhn  of  friendliness,  or  kindness,  or  love,  or  service, 
or  beauty,  or  use,  but  for  its  intrinsic  worth.  That  is  the  way  to  love  humanity. 
Not  because  it  serves  us,  not  because  it  is  pleasant  to  us,  not  because  it  is  friendly 
to  us.  That  is  a  very  little  thing.  How  sour  men  get  by  and  by  who  love  it  on  that 
account  1  The  true  Christian  never  falters  in  his  high  faith  in  and  deep  love  for 
humanity,  because  he  sees  it  and  loves  it  as  Jesus  Christ  did — not  with  reference  to  him- 
self but  for  its  intrinsic  character  and  value  in  the  eyes  of  God.  {E.  H.  Chainn,  D.D.) 
When  do  we  love  the  world  too  much  ? — 1.  When,  for  the  sake  of  any  profit  or 
pleasure,  we  wilfully  and  knowingly  and  deliberately  transgress  the  commandments 
of  God  and  become  openly  and  habitually  wicked  and  vicious,  and  live  addicted  to 
sensuality,  to  intemperance,  to  fraud,  to  extortion,  to  injustice.  2.  When  we  take 
more  pains  to  obtain  and  secure  the  conveniences  of  this  life  than  to  qualify 
ourselves  for  the  rewards  of  the  next.  3.  When  we  cannot  be  Gontented,  or  patient 
and  resigned,  under  low  or  inconvenient  circumstances.  4.  When  we  cannot  part 
with  anything  that  we  possess  to  those  who  want  it,  who  deserve  it,  and  who  have 
indeed  a  right  to  it.  5.  When  we  envy  those  who  are  more  fortunate  and  more 
favoured  by  the  world  than  we  are,  and  cannot  behold  their  success  without 
repining ;  when  at  the  same  time  we  can  see  others  better  and  wiser  and  more 
religious,  if  they  be  in  a  lower  state  than  ourselves,  without  the  least  uneasiness, 
without  emulation  and  a  desire  to  equal  them.  6.  When  we  esteem  and  favour 
persons  purely  according  to  their  birth,  fortunes,  and  success,  measuring  our  j  udgment 
and  approbation  by  their  outward  appearance  and  situation  in  life.  7.  When  we 
dislike  and  sUght  others  only  because  the  world  favours  them  not,  and  thus  suffer  our 
affections,  our  judgment,  and  our  behaviour  to  be  regulated  by  the  notions  and 
customs  of  men,  and  indeed  of  the  worst  sort  of  men.  8.  When  worldly  prosperity 
makes  us  proud  and  vain,  and  we  expect  to  be  greatly  honoured  by  others,  only 
because  they  are  placed  beneath  us,  though  in  other  respects,  in  valuable  qualities, 
they  may  surpass  us  ;  and  when  we  resent  any  little  failure  of  homage  as  a  real 
injury.  9.  When  we  omit  no  opportunity  of  enjoying  the  good  things  of  this  life, 
when  our  great  business  and  serious  employment  is  to  amuse  ourselves,  tiU  we 
contract  an  indifference  for  manly  and  rational  occupations,  deceiving  ourselves, 
and  fancying  that  we  are  in  a  safe  condition,  because  we  are  not  so  bad  as  several 
whom  we  could  name,  nor  guilty  of  such  and  such  vices  with  which  the  world 
abounds.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  The  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection : — There  are  two 
ways  in  which  a  practical  moralist  may  attempt  to  displace  from  the  human  heart 
its  love  of  the  world — either  by  a  demonstration  of  the  world's  vanity,  so  as  that  the 
heart  shall  be  prevailed  upon  simply  to  withdraw  its  regards  from  an  object  that  is 
not  worthy  of  it ;  or  by  setting  forth  another  object,  even  God,  as  more  worthy  of 
its  attachment.  Love  may  be  regarded  in  two  different  conditions.  The  first  is, 
when  its  object  is  at  a  distance,  and  then  it  becomes  love  in  a  state  of  desire.  The 
second  is,  when  its  object  is  in  possession,  and  then  it  becomes  love  in  a  state  of 
indulgence.  Such  is  the  grasping  tendency  of  the  human  heart  that  it  must  have 
a  something  to  lay  hold  of — and  which,  if  wrested  away  without  the  substitution  of 
another  something  in  its  place,  would  leave  a  void  as  painful  to  the  mind  as  hunger  is 
to  the  natural  system.  It  may  be  dispossessed  of  one  object,  or  of  any,  but  it 
cannot  be  desolated  of  all.  We  know  not  a  more  sweeping  interdict  upon  the 
affections  of  nature  than  that  which  is  delivered  by  the  apostle  in  the  verse  before 
us.  To  bid  a  man  into  whom  there  has  not  yet  entered  the  great  and  ascendant 
influence  of  the  principle  of  regeneration,  to  bid  him  withdraw  his  love  from  all  the 
things  that  are  in  the  world,  is  to  bid  him  give  up  all  the  affections  that  are  in  his 
heart.  The  world  is  the  all  of  a  natural  man.  He  has  not  a  taste  nor  a  desire 
that  points  not  to  a  something  phiced  within  the  confines  of  its  visible  horizon.     He 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  129 

loves  nothing  above  it,  and  he  cares  for  nothing  beyond  it ;  and  to  bid  him  love  not 
the  world,  is  to  pass  a  sentence  of  expulsion  on  all  the  inmates  of  his  bosom.  The 
love  of  the  world  cannot  be  expunged  by  a  mere  demonstration  of  the  world's 
worthlessness.  But  may  it  not  be  supplanted  by  the  love  of  that  which  is  more 
worthy  than  itself  ?  The  heart  cannot  be  prevailed  upon  to  part  with  the  world  by 
a  simple  act  of  resignation.  But  may  not  the  heart  be  prevailed  upon  to  admit 
into  its  preference  another,  who  shall  subordinate  the  world,  and  bring  it  down 
from  its  wonted  ascendency  ?  This  explains  the  operation  of  that  charm  which 
accompanies  the  effectual  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Beside  the  world,  it  places 
before  the  eye  of  the  mind  Him  who  made  the  world,  and  with  this  peculiarity, 
which  is  all  its  own — that  in  the  gospel  do  we  so  behold  God,  as  that  we  may  love 
God.  It  is  there,  and  there  only,  where  God  stands  revealed  as  an  object  of 
confidence  to  sinners — and  where  our  desire  after  Him  is  not  chiUed  into  apathy, 
by  that  barrier  of  human  guilt  which  intercepts  every  approach  that  is  not  made  to 
Him  through  the  appointed  mediator.  It  is  the  bringing  in  of  this  better  hope, 
whereby  we  draw  nigh  unto  God — and  to  live  without  hope  is  to  live  without  God ; 
and  if  the  heart  be  without  God,  the  world  will  then  have  aU  the  ascendency.  It  is 
God  apprehended  by  the  believer  as  God  in  Christ,  who  alone  can  dispost  it  from 
this  ascendency.  And  here  let  us  advert  to  the  incredulity  of  a  worldly  man :  when 
he  brings  his  own  sound  and  secular  experience  to  bear  upon  the  high  doctrines  of 
Christianity — when  he  looks  on  regeneration  as  a  thing  impossible.  We  think  that 
we  have  seen  such  men,  who,  firmly  trenched  in  their  own  vigorous  and  homebred 
sagacity,  and  shrewdly  regardful  of  all  that  passes  before  them  through  the  week, 
and  upon  the  scenes  of  ordinary  business,  look  on  that  transition  of  the  heart  by 
which  it  gradually  dies  unto  time,  and  awakens  in  all  the  life  of  anew-felt  and  ever- 
growing desire  towards  God,  as  a  mere  Sabbath  speculation ;  and  who  thus,  with 
all  their  attention  engrossed  upon  the  concerns  of  earthliness,  continue  unmoved  to 
the  end  of  their  days,  amongst  the  feelings  and  the  appetites  and  the  pursuits  of 
earthliness.  Now,  it  is  altogether  worthy  of  being  remarked  of  those  men  who  thus 
disrelish  spiritual  Christianity,  and  in  fact  deem  it  an  impracticable  acquirement, 
how  much  of  a  piece  their  incredulity  about  the  demands  of  Christianity,  and 
their  incredulity  about  the  doctrines  of  Christianity,  are  with  one  another.  No 
wonder  that  they  feel  the  work  of  the  New  Testament  to  be  beyond  their  strength, 
so  long  as  they  hold  the  words  of  the  New  Testament  to  be  beneath  their  attention. 
Neither  they  nor  any  one  else  can  dispossess  the  heart  of  an  old  affection  but  by  the 
expulsive  power  of  a  new  one  ;  and  if  that  new  affection  be  the  love  of  God,  neither 
they  nor  any  one  else  can  be  made  to  entertain  it,  but  on  such  a  representation  of 
the  Deity  as  shall  draw  the  heart  of  the  sinner  towards  Him.  Now  it  is  just  their 
unbelief  which  screens  from  the  discernment  of  their  minds  this  representation. 
They  do  not  see  the  love  of  God  in  sending  His  Son  unto  the  world.  It  is  a  mystery 
to  them  how  a  man  should  pass  to  the  state  of  godhness  from  a  state  of  nature : 
but  had  they  only  a  beheving  view  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  this  would  resolve 
for  them  the  whole  mystery  of  godliness.  As  it  is,  they  cannot  get  quit  of  their  old 
affections,  because  they  are  out  of  sight  from  all  those  truths  which  have  influence 
to  raise  a  new  one.  But  if  there  be  a  consistency  in  the  errors,  in  like  manner  is 
there  a  consistency  in  the  truths  which  are  opposite  to  them.  The  man  who  behevea 
in  the  peculiar  doctrines,  wiU  readily  bow  to  the  pecuhar  demands  of  Christianity. 
The  effect  is  great,  but  the  cause  is  equal  to  it — and  stupendous  as  this  moral 
resurrection  to  the  precepts  of  Christianity  undoubtedly  is,  there  is  an  element  of 
strength  enough  to  give  it  being  and  continuance  in  the  principles  of  Christianity. 
Conceive  a  man  to  be  standing  on  the  margin  of  this  green  world  ;  and  that,  when 
he  looked  towards  it,  he  saw  abundance  smiling  upon  every  field,  and  all  the  blessings 
which  earth  can  afford  scattered  in  profusion  throughout  every  family,  and  the  joys 
of  human  companionship  brightening  many  a  happy  circle  of  society — conceive 
this  to  be  the  general  character  of  the  scene  upon  one  side  of  his  contemplation ; 
and  that  on  the  other,  beyond  the  verge  of  the  goodly  planet  on  which  he  was 
situated,  he  could  descry  nothing  but  a  dark  and  fathomless  unknown.  Think  you 
that  he  would  bid  a  voluntary  adieu  to  all  the  brightness  and  all  the  beauty  that 
were  before  him  upon  earth,  and  commit  himself  to  the  frightful  solitude  away 
from  it  ?  But  if,  during  the  time  of  his  contemplation,  some  happy  island  of  the 
blest  had  floated  by  ;  and  there  had  burst  upon  his  senses  the  light  of  its  surpassing 
glories,  and  its  sounds  of  sweeter  melody ;  and  he  clearly  saw  that  there  a  purer 
beauty  rested  upon  every  field,  and  a  more  heartfelt  joy  spread  itseK  among  all  the 
families;  and  he  could  discern  there,  a  peace,  and  a  piety,  and  a  benevolence, 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

which  put  a  moral  gladness  into  every  bosom,  and  united  the  whole  society  in  one 
rejoicing  sympathy  with  each  other,  and  with  the  beneficent  Father  of  them  all. — 
Could  he  further  see  that  pain  and  mortality  were  there  unknown  ;  and  above  all, 
that  signals  of  welcome  were  hung  out,  and  an  avenue  of  communication  was  made 
for  him — perceive  you  not,  that  what  was  before  the  wilderness,  would  become  the 
land  of  invitation ;  and  that  now  the  world  would  be  the  wilderness  ?  What 
unpeopled  space  could  not  do,  can  be  done  by  space  teeming  with  beatific  scenes, 
and  beatific  society.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Worldly  affections  destructive  of  love 
to  God : — There  are  things  in  the  world  which,  although  not  actually  sinful  in 
themselves,  do  nevertheless  so  check  the  love  of  God  in  us  as  to  stifle  and  destroy  it. 
For  instance,  it  is  lawful  for  us  to  possess  wealth  and  worldly  substance ;  we  may 
serve  God  with  it,  and  consecrate  it  at  His  altar  ;  but  we  cannot  love  wealth  without 
growing  ostentatious,  or  soft,  or  careful,  or  narrow-hearted  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  So, 
again,  with  friends  and  what  is  called  society.  I.  Love  of  the  world  beings  a. 
DULNESS  OVER  THE  WHOLE  OF  A  man's  SOUL.  Fastiug,  and  prayer,  and  a  spare  Ufe, 
and  plainness,  and  freedom  from  the  cumbering  offices  and  possessions  of  the  world, 
give  to  the  eye  and  ear  of  the  soul  a  keen  and  piercing  sense.  But  this  discipline  is 
almost  impossible  to  the  man  that  moves  with  the  stream  of  the  world ;  it  carries 
him  away  against  his'  will.  The  oppressive  nearness  of  the  things  which  throng 
upon  him  from  without  defrauds  him  of  solitude  with  God.  They  come  and 
thrust  themselves  between  his  soul  and  the  realities  unseen ;  they  drop  like  a  veil 
over  the  faint  outlines  of  the  invisible  world,  and  hide  it  from  his  eyes.  And  the 
spiritual  powers  that  are  in  him  grow  inert  and  lose  their  virtue  by  the  dulness  of 
inaction.  The  acts  of  religion,  such  as  reading,  thought,  contemplation  of  the 
unseen,  prayer,  self-examination,  first  seem  to  lose  their  savour,  and  are  less 
delighted  in :  then  they  grow  irksome,  and  are  consciously  avoided.  II.  As  we  grow 
to  be  attached  to  the  things  that  are  in  the  world,  there  comes  over  us  what  I  may 
call  a  vuLNEEABLENESS  OF  MIND.  We  lay  ourselves  open  on  just  so  many  sides  as 
we  have  objects  of  desire.  We  give  hostages  to  this  changeful  world,  and  we  are 
ever  either  losing  them,  or  trembling  lest  they  be  wrested  from  us.  What  a  life  of 
disappointment,  and  bitterness,  and  aching  fear,  and  restless  uncertainty,  is  the  life 
of  the  ambitious,  or  covetous,  or  self-indulgent !  But  it  is  not  only  in  this  form 
that  the  mind  is  made  vulnerable  by  a  love  of  the  world.  It  lays  itself  open  not 
more  to  chastisements  than  to  temptations  ;  it  gives  so  many  inlets  to  the  suggestions 
of  evil.  Every  earthly  fondness  is  an  ambush  for  a  thousand  solicitations  of  the 
wicked  one.  It  is  a  lure  to  the  tempter — a  signal  which  betrays  oui:  weaker  side ; 
and  as  the  subtle  infection  of  evil  temper  winds  itself  into  the  mind,  the  spirit  of 
the  Dove  is  grieved  by  an  irritable  and  unloving  spirit.  The  very  affections  of  the 
heart  recoil  sullenly  into  themselves,  and  sometimes  even  turn  against  the  objects 
of  their  immoderate  fondness.  In  this  way  the  love  of  the  world  becomes  a  cause 
of  very  serious  deterioration  of  character.  It  soon  stifles  the  love  of  God ;  and 
when  that  is  gone,  and  the  character  has  lost  its  unity,  particular  features  unfold 
themselves  into  a  fearful  prominence.  The  chief  among  its  earthly  affections 
becomes  thenceforth  its  ruling  passion,  and  so  predominates  over  all  the  rest,  and 
draws  the  whole  mind  to  itself,  as  to  stamp  the  man  with  the  character  of  a 
besetting  sin.  And  tliis  is  what  we  mean  when  we  call  one  man  purse-proud,  and 
another  ostentatious,  or  selfish,  and  the  like.  The  world  has  eaten  its  way  into  his 
soul,  and  "  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  III.  Now,  if  this  be  so,  what 
SHALL  WE  DO  ?  We  cauHot  withdraw  ourselves.  One  has  wealth,  another  a  family, 
a  third  rank  and  influence,  another  a  large  business  :  and  all  these  bring  with 
them  an  endless  variety  of  duties  and  oflices,  and  usages  of  custom  and  courtesy. 
If  a  man  is  to  break  through  all  these,  he  must  needs  go  out  of  this  world.  All  this 
is  very  true  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  certain  that  every  one  of  us  might  reduce 
his  life  to  a  greater  simplicity.  In  every  position  of  life  there  is  a  great  multitude 
of  unnecessary  things  which  ve  may  readily  abandon.  And  as  for  all  the  necessary 
cares  of  life,  they  need  involve  us  in  no  dangers.  In  them,  if  we  be  true-hearted, 
we  are  safe.  When  God  leads  men  into  positions  of  great  trial,  whether  by  wealth, 
or  rank,  or  business.  He  compensates  by  larger  gifts  of  grace.  (Archdeacon 
Mdnning.)  The  nature  and  danger  of  an  inordinate  love  of  the  world  : — I.  What 
WE  ABE  TO  UNDERSTAND  BY  THE  WORLD.  A  general  inventory  of  this  world's  goods  is 
given  us  by  the  apostle,  divided  into  three  lots.  The  first  contains  all  the  pleasures 
of  the  world,  called  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  because  they  are  proper  to  a  corporeal 
nature,  or  such  as  the  soul  now  desires,  only  by  reason  of  its  union  with  the  body. 
The  next  class  is  riches,  which  he  calls  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  because  the  eye  takes  a 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  131 

peculiar  pleasure  in  gazing  at  those  things  which  they  immediately  procure.  The 
pleasures  I  before  mentioned  are  gone  with  a  touch,  these  with  a  look.  So 
unsubstantial  are  the  goods  contained  in  the  two  first  lots  of  this  world's  inventory. 
Let  us  now  examine  the  third,  and  see  if  we  can  find  anything  more  solid  there. 
This  opens  to  us  all  the  honours,  the  high  stations,  the  power  and  preferments  of 
the  world.  This  the  apostle  calls  the  pride  of  life,  because  it  is  the  ambitious  man's 
great  object,  and  at  once  attracts  and  foments  the  vanity  of  his  heart.  But  it 
never  satisfies  the  vanity  which  it  excites.  Ambition  is  insatiable  as  avarice. 
II.  The  extent  op  this  prohibition  ;  or  with  what  restrictions  it  must  necessarily 
be  taken.  1.  This  does  not  forbid  us  (1)  to  prosecute  our  worldly  affairs  with 
application  and  diligence.  (2)  Nor  does  it  countenance,  much  less  require,  a  total 
separation  from  the  world.  (3)  Nor  are  we  hereby  forbid  to  enjoy  the  world,  or 
to  take  any  delight  in  the  good  things  of  the  present  life.  (4)  This  text  does  not 
forbid  us  to  value,  or  in  a  certain  degree  desire  to  possess  the  good  things  of  this 
world :  because  they  are  in  some  respects  desirable,  and  to  many  good  purposes  use- 
ful ;  and  therefore  a  wise  man  wiU  not  indulge  an  absolute  contempt  of  them,  or  be 
totally  indifferent  to  them.  (5)  Neither  are  we  forbid  a  conformity  to  the  innocent 
customs,  manners  and  fashions  of  the  world.  2.  What  is  it  then  that  it  does 
forbid  ? — I  answer  in  one  word,  an  excessive  love  of  the  world,  or  an  immoderate 
attachment  of  the  heart  to  it.  (1)  We  then  love  this  world  too  much  when  we 
neglect  our  souls,  or  oiur  interest  in  a  better  world,  for  the  sake  of  it.  (2)  'Tis  a 
certain  sign  that  a  man  loves  the  world  too  much  when  he  grows  vain,  imperious 
and  assuming,  and  despises  others  merely  on  the  score  of  their  wanting  that 
affluence  which  he  enjoys.  (3)  When  a  man  grows  confident  in  the  world,  and 
trusts  to  it  as  his  chief  good.  (4)  We  then  love  the  good  things  of  this  world  too 
much  when  we  dare  to  venture  on  any  known  transgression  with  a  view  to  secure  or 
increase  them.  (5)  When  a  man  has  no  heart  to  do  good  with  what  he  has  in  the 
world,  and  is  averse  to  acts  of  charity,  piety  and  beneficence.  (6)  When  we  are 
tormented  with  an  anxious  solicitude  about  the  things  of  this  world.  (7)  It  is  a 
sign  that  our  hearts  are  two  much  attached  to  earthly  things  if  we  cannot  bear  our 
earthly  losses  and  disappointments  with  temper.  (8)  It  is  an  indication  that  we 
love  the  good  things  of  this  life  too  much  when  we  are  not  thankful  for  them,  and 
forget  to  make  our  acknowledgements  to  Him  at  whose  hand  we  hold  them. 
in.  The  geounds  of  this  pkohibition.  1.  I  am  to  suggest  a  few  general 
considerations  proper  to  guard  us  against  an  immoderate  love  of  the  present  world. 
To  this  end  then  let  it  be  considered.  (1)  How  many  dangerous  temptations  it  lays 
in  the  way  of  our  souls.  (2)  The  more  fond  we  are  of  the  world  the  greater  is  our 
danger  from  it.  The  more  it  engages  our  hearts  the  more  power  it  has  to  captivate 
them.  (3)  An  excessive  passion  for  the  world  defeats  its  own  end.  The  more 
inordinately  we  love  it,  the  less  capable  we  are  of  the  true  enjoyment  of  it.  If  we 
squeeze  the  world  too  hard  we  wring  out  dregs.  In  our  cup  of  worldly  bliss  the 
sweetest  lies  at  top  :  he  who  drinks  too  deep  will  find  it  nauseous.  (4)  Why  should 
we  love  the  world  so  much,  when  there  is  nothing  in  it  that  suits  the  dignity  or 
satisfies  the  desires  of  our  souls  ?  2.  Let  us  now  particularly  consider  those  two 
motives  whereby  the  apostle  himself  enforces  the  caution  he  gives  in  the  text. 
(1)  An  excessive  love  of  the  world  is  inconsistent  with  a  sincere  love  of  God.  An 
immoderate  love  of  the  world,  or  of  anything  in  it,  is  paying  that  devotion  and  homage 
of  our  heart  to  the  creature  which  is  due  only  to  the  Creator.  What  vile  ingratitude  as 
well  as  folly  is  here  !  To  love  the  world  more  than  God  is  a  plain  indication  of  the 
apostacy  of  the  heart  from  him.  And  from  this  inward  apostacy  of  the  heart  begins 
the  outward  apostacy  in  hie.  (2)  The  world  and  everything  in  it  is  mutable  and 
mortal,  constantly  changing,  and  hastening  apace  to  dissolution.  (John  Mason,  M.A.) 
Worldliness  : — I  speak  to  you,  not  as  hermits,  but  as  men  of  the  world,  occupied 
constantly  in  honourable  vocations,  and  yet  conscious  that  there  is  a  life  above 
this  world — an  eternal,  spiritual,  divine  life.  WiU  you  suffer  me  to  put  before 
you  two  or  three  suggestions  which  may  enable  us,  while  living  in  this  world, 
yet  to  rise  above  it  ?  1.  And  the  fiLrst  suggestion  I  would  make  is,  that  it  would 
be  well  for  him  who  desires  the  spiritual  life  to  adopt  some  definite,  constant 
action  of  self-denial.  It  may  be  abstinence  from  alcoholic  drink,  from  theatres 
and  balls — things  perfectly  right  and  legitimate  in  themselves  ;  it  may  be  even  so 
small  a  thing  as  early  rising  in  the  morning,  or  it  may  be  some  pecuniary 
generosity ;  but  whatever  it  is,  if  it  be  adopted  as  a  definite  seL£-denial,  as  a  definite 
self-consecration  of  the  man  to  God,  it  will  undoubtedly  have  a  purifying  and 
elevating  influence.    2.  My  second  suggestion  is  this,  that  every  one  of  ua  who 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

desires  to  live  the  spiritual  life  should  ask  himself  the  question,  In  what  respect 
does  my  ordinary  life,  my  professional,  my  regular  routine  of  existence,  tend  to 
draw  me  from  God,  tend  to  deaden  the  spMtual  activities  and  faculties  ?  and  then 
that  he  should  set  himself  to  encourage  a  practice  which  wiU  limit  this  tendency. 
For,  according  to  the  familiar  illustration  of  the  philosopher  Aristotle,  if  a  stick 
is  bent  in  one  direction,  and  you  want  to  straighten  it,  you  must  bend  it  violently 
in  the  opposite  direction.  Suppose,  for  example,  as  is  quite  likely,  that  one  is 
engaged  in  the  business  of  commerce,  it  is  his  object  to  make  money,  and  this  is 
legitimate  in  itself ;  yet,  if  he  be  spiritually  minded,  he  will  not  be  blind  to  the 
fact  that  the  occupation  of  making  money  does  tend  to  set  the  soul  upon  earthly, 
and  not  upon  heavenly  things.  In  order  to  remedy  this  tendency  he  wiU  encour- 
age in  himself  a  definite,  systematic  practice  of  generosity ;  he  will  aim  at  using 
his  money,  not  as  an  owner,  but  as  a  trustee,  so  that  by  means  of  it  he  may  make 
the  world  better,  he  may  increase  the  happiness  and  joy  of  those  less  fortunate 
than  himself.  3.  Let  me  take  a  third  instance  to  show  the  duty  and  beauty  of 
this  spiritual  life.  It  is  easy  to  get  into  the  state  in  which  the  very  being  of  God 
Himself  becomes  a  doubt  and  a  difficulty,  and  yet  it  is  vital  to  avoid  that  state 
altogether  and  always.  Is  it  not  the  case  in  public  life  that  there  are  dangers 
which  threaten  the  well-being  of  the  spiritual  nature — I  mean  the  love  of  victory 
for  instance,  which  is  not  the  love  of  truth  ?  The  voice  of  the  people  is  not  the 
voice  of  God,  it  tends  now-a-days  to  drown  the  voice  of  God.  What  can  be  the 
effect  of  the  mahce  and  uncharitableness  which  men  display  so  often  towards  one 
another,  but  to  make  God  seem  distant,  and  as  if  He  had  no  relation  to  the  human 
soul?  Any  one  then  who  in  the  noble  field  of  public  Ufe  is  anxious  not  to  let 
his  spirituality  die  out  will  be  careful  at  times  to  retire  into  soUtude  to  commune 
with  his  Maker  and  with  his  own  soul,  and  he  will  cry  out,  "Lord,  what  wUt  Thou 
have  me  to  do  ?  "  Such  a  man  wiU  try  always  to  live  as  in  the  sight  of  God. 
{J.  E.  Welldon,  D.D.)  The  world  we  must  not  love  : — Let  us  not  confuse  "  the 
world  "  with  the  earth,  with  the  whole  race  of  man,  with  general  society,  with  any 
particular  set,  however  much  some  sets  are  to  be  avoided.  Look  at  the  thing 
fairly.  Yet  let  us  read  the  letters  of  Mary  Godolphin.  She  bore  a  life  unspotted 
by  the  world  in  the  dissolute  court  of  Charles  H.,  because  the  love  of  the  Father 
was  in  her.  In  small  serious  circles  are  there  no  hidden  lusts  which  blaze  up  in 
scandals?  Is  there  no  vanity,  no  pride,  no  hatred?  In  the  world  of  Charles  II. 's 
court  Mary  Godolphin  hved  out  of  the  world  which  God  hated ;  in  the  religious 
world  not  a  few,  certainly,  live  in  the  world  which  is  not  God's.  For  once  more, 
the  world  is  not  so  much  a  place — though  at  times  its  power  seems  to  have  been 
drawn  into  one  intense  focus,  as  in  the  empire  of  which  Eome  was  the  centre,  and 
which  may  have  been  in  the  apostle's  thought  in  the  followmg  verse.  In  the  truest 
and  deepest  sense  the  world  consists  of  our  own  spiritual  surrounding ;  it  is  the 
place  which  we  make  for  our  own  souls.  No  walls  that  ever  were  reared  can  shut 
out  the  world  from  us ;  the  "  Nun  of  Kenmare  "  found  that  it  followed  her  into  the 
Beemingly  spiritual  retreat  of  a  severe  Order.  The  world  in  its  essence  is  subtler 
and  thinner  than  the  most  infinitesimal  of  the  bacterian  germs  in  the  air.  They 
can  be  strained  off  by  the  exquisite  apparatus  of  a  man  of  science.  At  a  certain 
height  they  cease  to  exist.  But  the  world  may  be  wherever  we  are ;  we  carry  it 
with  us  wherever  we  go,  it  lasts  while  our  hves  last.  No  consecration  can  utterly 
banish  it  even  from  within  the  church's  walls ;  it  dares  to  be  round  us  while  we 
kneel,  and  follows  us  into  the  presence  of  God.  (Abp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  The 
Christian  in  the  world : — A  true  Christian  living  in  the  world  is  like  a  ship  sailing 
on  the  ocean.  It  is  not  the  ship  being  in  the  water  which  will  sink  it,  but  the 
water  getting  into  the  ship.  So  in  like  manner  the  Christian  is  not  ruined  by 
living  La  the  world,  which  he  must  needs  do  while  he  remains  in  the  body,  but  by 
the  world  Uving  in  him.  Our  daily  avocations,  yea,  our  most  lawful  employments, 
have  need  to  be  narrowly  watched,  lest  they  insensibly  steal  upon  our  affections,  and 
draw  away  our  hearts  from  God.  A  dangerous  experiment: — Whoever  is  contriving, 
by  how  little  faith  or  how  little  grace,  and  with  how  large  interspersing  of  gaieties 
and  worldly  pleasure  he  may  make  his  title  to  salvation  good,  is  engaged  in  a  very 
critical  experiment.  He  is  trying  how  to  be  a  Christian  without  being  at  all  a  saintly 
person.  How  to  love  God  enough  without  loving  Him  enough  to  be  taken  away  from 
his  lighter  pleasures,  and  he  really  thinks  that,  aiming  low  enough  to  be  a  little  of 
a  Christian,  he  still  may  just  hit  the  target  on  the  lower  edge.  Perhaps  he  will ;  but 
is  he  sure  of  it?  And,  if  he  really  is,  what  miserable  economy  is  it  to  be  so  little 
in  the  love  of  God  and  the  joys  of  a  glorious  devotion,  that  he  can  be  just  empty 


CHAP,  II.]  I.  JOHN.  133 

enough  to  want  his  deficit  made  up  by  amusements  !  If  that  will  answer,  a  very 
mean  soul  certainly  can  be  saved.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  UiUading : — When 
ballast  is  thrown  out,  the  balloon  shoots  up.  A  general  unlading  of  the  "  thick  clay" 
which  weighs  down  the  Christian  hfe  of  England  and  of  America,  would  let  thou- 
sands soar  to  heights  which  they  will  never  reach  as  long  as  they  love  money  and 
what  it  buys  as  much  as  they  do.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Worldliness  impedes  the 
sight  of  higher  things : — Suppose  I  were  shut  up  within  a  round  tower,  whose 
massive  wall  had  in  some  time  of  trouble  been  pierced  here  and  there  for  musketry  ; 
suppose,  further,  that  by  choice  or  necessity,  I  am  whirled  rapidly  and  incessantly 
round  its  inner  circumference,  will  I  appreciate  the  beauties  of  the  surrounding 
landscape  or  recognise  the  features  of  the  men  who  labour  in  the  field  below  ?  I  will 
not  1  Why  ?  Are  there  not  openings  in  the  wall  which  I  pass  at  every  circuit  ? 
Yes  ;  but  the  eye,  set  for  objects  near,  has  not  time  to  adjust  itself  to  objects  at  a 
distance  until  it  has  passed  the  openings  ;  and  so  the  result  is  the  same  as  if  it  were 
a  dead  wall  aU  round.  Behold  the  circle  of  human  life  !  of  the  earth,  earthy  it  is, 
almost  throughout  its  whole  circumference.  A  dead  wall,  very  near  and  very  thick, 
obstructs  the  view.  Here  and  there,  on  a  Sabbath  or  other  season  of  seriousness, 
a  sht  is  left  open  in  its  side.  Heaven  might  be  seen  through  these ;  but  alas ! 
the  eye  which  is  habitually  set  for  the  earthly  cannot,  during  such  momentary 
glimpses,  adjust  itself  to  higher  things.  Unless  you  pause  and  look  steadfastly, 
you  will  see  neither  clouds  nor  sunshine  through  these  openings,  or  the  distant  sky. 
So  long  has  the  soul  looked  upon  the  world,  and  so  firmly  is  the  world's  picture  fixed 
in  its  eye,  that  when  it  is  turned  for  a  moment  heavenward,  it  feels  only  a  quiver 
of  inarticulate  light,  and  retains  no  distinct  impression  of  the  things  that  are 
unseen  and  eternal.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Love  not  the  world  : — "  Love  not  the 
world,"  cries  St.  John  in  a  shuddering  laconicism.  A  multitude  of  voices  echo 
his  words.  The  shores  of  time  are  strewn  with  many  a  wreck,  each  serving  as  a 
beacon  to  point  out  the  rock  on  which  they  stranded.  Here  the  merchant  who 
worked  seven  days  in  the  week,  who  forgot  God  in  piling  up  riches,  and  failed  at 
last,  cries,  "  Love  not  the  world."  Here  the  miUionaire  who  inherited  a  fortune 
and  doubled  it  every  ten  years,  and  drained  every  cup  of  pleasure,  and  now  faces 
death  with  a  tainted  body  and  a  leprous  character,  cries,  "  Love  not  the  world." 
Here  the  statesman  who  reached  the  senate  chamber  and  laid  his  hand  on  dishonest 
gold  and  went  down  in  ignominy,  cries,  "  Love  not  the  world."  Here  the  brilliant 
journalist,  the  clever  student,  the  gifted  artist,  who  reached  distinction  at  the 
sacrifice  of  strength,  Ufe,  reputation,  cry,  "  Love  not  the  world."  Could  we  lift 
the  curtain  that  shrouds  the  tomb,  what  awful  warnings  would  break  upon  our 
ears !  Miser,  spendthrift,  drunkard,  libertine,  sensuahst,  what  sayest  thou  ?  That 
gluttony  is  shame,  and  drunkenness  woe,  and  debauchery  corruption,  and  the 
wages  of  sin  death.  "  Love  not  the  world."  Apart  from  God  there  is  nothing.  In 
Him  are  all  things.  The  love  of  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator  is  the  curse 
and  condemnation  of  the  soul.  Supreme  affection  toward  God  is  the  coronation  of 
humanity.     (S.  S.  Roche.) 

Yer.  16.  For  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  last  of  the 
eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world.  The  three 
elements  of  a  worldly  life :  love  of  pleasure,  the  love  of  knowledge,  and  the  love  of 
power  : — What  then  is  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  "  desire  of  the  flesh?  "  It  is  the 
desire  which  we  naturally  have  to  gratify  our  lower  impulses,  that  animal  nature 
which  we  share  with  the  brutes,  but  which  in  man  ought  to  be  under  the  control 
of  the  superior  faculty  of  reason.  If  we  name  this  desire  from  its  object,  rather 
than  from  its  origin  or  source,  we  might  call  it  loosely  "  the  desire  of  pleasure 
uncontrolled  by  a  sense  of  duty."  It  is  more  diihcult  to  ascertain  the  exact  force  of 
the  "  desire  of  the  eyes."  If  taken  literally,  it  would  simply  stand  for  a  particular 
form  of  the  desire  of  the  flesh,  a  more  refined  and  human  form  of  sensual 
pleasure,  the  desire  of  seeing  beautiful  objects  ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that,  so 
far  as  this  is  sensual,  it  is  included  under  the  former  head,  and  that  it  is  more  in 
accordance  with  Hebrew  ideas  and  with  the  facts  of  life  to  suppose  that  we  have 
here  a  quite  distinct  class  of  desires,  the  desires  of  the  intellect.  But  how,  it  may 
be  asked,  can  the  desire  of  knowledge  be  condemned  as  characteristic  of  the 
world.  Knowledge  is  not  dependent  on  society,  like  pleasure,  and  moreover  the 
desire  of  knowledge  is  especially  commended  in  the  Bible.  How  then  can  it  be  to 
the  discredit  of  the  world,  or  make  its  influence  more  injurious,  if  it  is  accompanied 
by  the  desire  of  knowledge  ?     The  answer  is  that  neither  pleasure  nor  knowledge 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

is  in  itself  condemned  in  the  Bible.  The  pleasure  which  is  condemned  in  the 
phrase  "  lust  of  the  flesh,"  is,  as  we  have  seen,  selfish  and  predominantly  sensual, 
unchecked  by  higher  thoughts  and  feelings.  And  so  by  the  "  desire  of  the  eyes" 
is  meant  primarily  not  the  desire  for  truth  as  such,  but  the  desire  for  a  knowledge 
of  the  world,  knowledge  as  contrasted  not  with  ignorance  and  stupidity,  but  with 
simphcity,  ingenuousness  and  innocence.  How  many  owe  their  fall  to  an  impatience 
of  restraint  and  a  curiosity  which  is  attracted  to  evil  rather  than  to  good !  How 
few  remember  that  knowledge  no  more  than  pleasure  can  claim  our  absolute 
allegiance !  We  now  come  to  the  third  of  these  worldly  lusts,  as  they  are  styled 
in  the  Epistle  to  Titus,  the  "  pride,"  or  as  the  Revised  Version  has  it,  the  "  vain- 
glory "  of  life,  the  desire  to  make  a  show,  the  desire  of  honour  and  distinction, 
which  is  as  naturally  characteristic  of  the  active  principle  within  us,  as  the 
desire  of  pleasure  is  of  the  passive  or  sensitive  principle.  Supposing  this  to  be  a 
generally  correct  account  of  St.  John's  analysis  of  the  spuit  of  the  world,  it  is 
evident  that  it  corresponds  with  the  common  division  of  man's  nature  into  the 
feeUng,  the  thinking,  and  the  willing  part ;  the  desire  of  pleasure  corresponding  to 
the  appetites,  the  desire  of  knowledge  to  the  intellect,  while  ambition,  the  desire  of 
honour  and  of  power,  corresponds  to  the  will.  But  human  life  consists  in  the  exercise 
of  these  different  elements  of  man's  nature.  How  is  it  possible,  then,  that  these 
gifts  of  God  should  be  the  squrce  of  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world  ?  If  man  were 
perfect,  as  God  intended  him  to  be,  this  would  not  be  the  case.  His  various 
impulses  would  all  work  harmoniously  together  under  the  control  of  reason  and 
conscience,  enlightened  and  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God  himself.  But  we  know 
that,  whatever  we  may  hope  for  the  future,  this  is  far  from  being  the  case  at 
present.  At  present  every  impulse  is  a  source  of  danger,  because  it  is  not  satisfied 
with  doing  the  work  and  attaining  the  end  for  which  it  was  implanted  in  our  nature, 
but  continues  to  urge  us  on  where  its  action  is  injurious,  antagonistic  to  higher 
ends  and  higher  activities,  and  contrary  to  the  will  of  Him  Who  made  us.  It  is 
these  blind  unruly  impulses  which  constitute  the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  are 
employed  by  him,  who  is  described  as  the  prince  of  this  world,  to  band  men  together 
in  evil,  and  so  build  up  a  kingdom  of  the  world,  in  opposition  to  the  kingdom  of 
God.  St.  John  implies  the  unrestrained  action  of  these  impulses  when  he  tells  us 
they  make  up  all  that  is  in  the  world.  If  we  can  trust  contemporary  evidence,  the 
historians  and  satirists  of  Eome,  no  less  than  Christian  writers,  the  moral  condi- 
tion of  society  in  the  imperial  city  is  not  too  darkly  coloured  in  St.  Paul's  Epistle 
to  the  Romans.  In  the  catalogue  of  sin  and  vice  there  given,  two  main  lines  of 
evil  may  be  distinguished,  which  at  first  sight  seem  to  be  very  remote  from  each 
other,  but  which  are  in  fact  closely  allied,  being  continually  associated  together  in 
history,  as  they  are  in  Milton's  famous  line,  "  Lust  hard  by  hate."  Cruelty  and 
profligacy  were  the  most  marked  characteristics  of  the  Caligulas  and  the  Neros  of 
Rome ;  they  were  the  notes  of  that  degraded  aristocracy,  in  which  even  the  women, 
dead  to  all  sense  of  shame,  were  also  dead  to  all  feeling  of  pity,  and  could  look  on 
with  a  horrible  delight  at  the  sports  in  the  arena,  where  gladiators  were  butchered 
to  make  a  Roman  holiday,  and  Christians  were  burnt  alive  at  night  in  order  to 
light  up  the  chariot  races  of  the  emperor.  And  the  profligacy  of  the  capitol  was 
faithfully  copied  in  the  provinces.  St.  Paul's  epistles,  with  their  constant  warnings 
against  impurity,  show  how  deeply  even  the  humbler  ranks  of  society,  from  which 
the  Church  was  mainly  recruited,  were  infected  with  this  vice  of  paganism.  We 
see,  then,  that  as  regards  the  desire  or  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  state  of  contemporary 
society  fuUy  bore  out  St.  John's  description  of  the  world.  How  did  the  case  stand 
with  regard  to  the  second  point  in  his  description,  the  lust  of  the  eyes?  Under- 
standing this  of  the  desire  of  knowledge,  we  find  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  describing  it  as  the  distinctive  feature  of  the  Greek  as  opposed  to  the 
Hebrew,  that  the  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom ;  but  "  God  (he  says)  hath  chosen  the 
foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise";  "Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but 
charity  edifieth."  So  St.  Luke  mentions  curiosity,  which  is  merely  the  undiscip- 
lined desire  of  knowledge,  as  the  chief  characteristic  of  the  Athenians,  "  all  the 
Athenians  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else  but  either  to  tell  or  to  hear  some  new 
thing."  Ephesus,  where  St.  John  is  believed  to  have  spent  the  latter  part  of  his 
life,  was  especially  noted  for  the  study  of  curious  arts,  prying  into  forbidden  things. 
Lastly,  if  we  ask  how  far  that  third  constituent  of  the  worldly  spirit,  ambition, 
vainglory,  the  pride  of  life,  was  to  be  found  in  Paganism  at  the  time  of  St.  John's 
writing,  we  need  not  look  further  than  the  temple  of  Ephesus,  which  was  held  to 
be  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world  ;  we  need  only  think  of  the  magnificence  of  the 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  135 

architecture,  the  splendour  of  the  ceremonial,  the  frenzied  enthusiasm  of  the 
multitudes  which  gathered  at  the  festival  of  "  the  great  goddess  Diana,  whom  aU 
Asia  and  the  world  worshippeth."  How  hard  it  must  have  been  for  the  Uttle  band 
of  Christians  to  realise  that  all  this  pageantry  and  power  was  but  an  empty  show, 
destined  in  a  few  short  years  to  vanish  away ;  to  feel  that  the  weakness  of  God  was 
stronger  than  men,  that  "  God  had  chosen  the  base  things  of  the  world  to  confound 
the  things  which  are  mighty,  that  no  flesh  might  glory  in  His  presence."  And  if 
this  was  true  of  a  provincial  town  like  Ephesus,  how  much  more  of  what  was  even 
then  known  as  the  eternal  city,  to  which  all  the  wealth  and  power  and  greatness,  all 
the  art  and  science  and  skill  of  the  whole  earth  was  attracted,  where  one  man 
commanded  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  all,  and  was  worshipped  as  God  on  earth, 
the  only  God  whose  worship  was  obligatory  on  all.  It  was  such  a  world-dominion 
as  this,  that  St.  John  had  in  his  mind,  when  he  warned  his  disciples  against  being 
dazzled  by  the  vainglory  of  life,  when  he  spoke  of  the  whole  world  lying  in  wicked- 
ness, when  he  encouraged  them  with  the  thought  that  "  He  that  is  born  of  God 
overcometh  the  world."  I  think  that  what  we  have  seen  to  be  true  of  the  pagan 
world  of  St.  John's  day,  is  also  true  of  aU  the  more  marked  historical  appearances 
of  the  worldly  spirit.  Two  such  appearances  may  be  especially  noticed.  One  wag 
that  period  of  revolt  against  the  Middle  Ages,  which  preceded  and  accompanied  the 
Eeformation,  the  other  was  that  period  of  scepticism  which  prepared  the  way  for  the 
French  Eevolution.  In  both  we  find  the  most  influential  classes  of  society,  those 
which  may  be  regarded  as  the  truest  embodiment  of  the  worldly  spirit  of  their 
time,  characterised  by  the  combination  of  these  three  elements,  the  love  of  pleasure, 
the  love  of  knowledge,  and  the  love  of  power.  Enlightenment  was  the  special 
boast  of  both  eras,  and  the  effect  of  this  enlightenment  was  to  shake  off  the  old- 
fashioned  restraints  of  religion  and  morality  and  give  free  scope  to  the  selfish 
instincts,  whether  in  the  direction  of  pleasure  or  ambition.  Ccesar  Borgia  was  the 
natural  outcome  of  the  first  era ;  Napoleon  Bonaparte  of  the  second.  {J.  B.  Mayor, 
M.A.)  Transitoriness  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh  : — By  "the  lust  of  the  flesh"  I 

understand  the  animal  needs  and  appetites,  the  physical  strength  and  vigour. 
There  is  a  period  in  life  when  the  desires  of  the  flesh  exercise  immense  influence 
and  subtle  power  over  the  imagination.  They  seem  to  promise  illimitable  delight 
and  inexhaustible  pleasures.  The  imagination  runs  through  the  world  and  sees 
everywhere  alluring  forms  which  point  to  intoxicating  joys.  That  is  not  an  unusual 
experience.  It  is  common  to  all  of  us  in  the  heyday  of  youth  and  strength,  and  I 
only  allude  to  it  to  ask — Have  you  considered  that  this  is  passing  away  ?  Do  you 
know  that  the  gamut  of  appetite  and  passion  is  very  limited  after  all  ?  You  can 
soon  reach  up  and  strike  the  topmost  note,  and  downward  and  stiike  the  lowest. 
Do  you  know  that  these  violent  delights  have  violent  ends  ?  They  are  soon 
exhausted,  and  the  hungry  passion  is  satiated,  and  the  promise  which  it  made  is 
found  a  cheat.  It  is  so.  It  is  so  if  for  no  other  reason  than  this — because  physical 
life  itseK  fails.  Youth  is  soon  gone;  manhood  is  soon  passed;  old  age  is  soon 
reached.  You  are  not  what  you  were.  Already  the  keen  edge  and  zest  of  earthly 
appetite  is  blunted.  You  dislike,  perhaps,  to  admit  it,  and  yet  you  know  in  your 
hearts  that  the  best  cup  of  wine  which  life  has  to  give  you  is  already  drunk,  and 
that  Ufe  will  never  prepare  again  for  you  the  like.  (W.  J.  Dawson.)  The  lust  of 
the  eyes  : — The  eye  is  the  portal  of  innumerable  delights.  It  is  "the  meeting-place 
of  many  worlds."  Through  it  there  stream  in  upon  the  mind  the  vision  of  beauty, 
the  revelation  of  sciences,  the  pomp  and  pageantry  of  earthly  power,  all  the  bright, 
Bhifttng  splendour  of  human  glory.  Have  you  ever  considered  that  riches  appeal 
mainly  to  the  eye  ?  It  is  the  eye  which  interprets  to  a  man  the  stateliness  of  the 
house  which  he  has  buUt,  the  beauty  of  the  gardens  which  he  has  laid  out,  the 
picture's  charm,  the  statue's  grace,  the  horse's  symmetry — in  a  word,  all  those 
costly  embellishments  with  which  wealth  can  adorn  life.  To  the  blind  man  they 
are  nothing.  To  be  blind  is  to  lose  almost  everything  that  riches  can  bestow.  Yet, 
Bays  John,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  too,  is  a  fading  passion  which  is  soon  satiated. 
The  first  house  a  man  buys  looks  better  and  bigger  to  him  than  any  house  he  owns 
afterwards.  The  first  picture  a  man  owns  brings  him  more  genuine  pleasure  than 
aU  the  others  put  together.  That  lust  of  the  eye  which  desires  to  add  house  to 
house  and  land  to  land  has  a  lessening  pleasure  in  its  acquisitions.  Like  the  lust 
of  the  flesh,  after  all  it  is  a  life  of  sensation,  and  all  sensation  is  limited  and  soon 
exhausted.  You,  perhaps,  have  set  your  hope  in  some  such  direction  as  this.  You 
desire  to  be  rich  ;  your  eye  lusts  for  the  luxurious  abodes  of  wealth  and  the  circum- 
stance and  state  of  social  greatness.     When  the  lust  of  the  flesh  taUs,  the  lust  of 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  eye  often  develops ;  and  the  man  who  has  lost  the  one  frantically  tries  to  recoup 
himself  by  flying  to  the  other.  But  it  is  vain.  The  miseries  of  the  idle  rich,  their 
ennui,  their  listlessness,  their  discontent,  their  imbecile  thirst  for  new  sensations, 
their  perpetual  invention  of  new  and  artificial  joys,  remind  us  how  true  are  the 
■words  of  John,  that  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  too,  passes  away.  {Ibid.)  The  pride 
of  life  is  transitory  : — It  may  signify  either  the  pride  of  power  or  the  pride  of 
Imowledge.  1.  Take  it,  for  instance,  as  the  pride  of  power.  Take  it  in  regard  to  that 
great  and  splendid  empire  with  which  the  apostles  were  familiar.  It  seemed  built 
to  last  for  ever.  To  be  a  Eoman  was  to  be  armed  with  an  invincible  defence.  It 
was  a  proud  boast  which  clothed  the  meanest  man  with  dignity.  The  tramp  of  the 
legions  of  Rome  echoed  in  every  city ;  the  silver  eagles  were  borne  in  triumph 
through  aU  the  world ;  its  laws  had  imposed  civilisation  upon  the  most  barbarous 
peoples ;  and  its  power  had  crushed  nation  after  nation.  There  was  no  sign  in 
John's  day  of  any  overthrow.  Yet  this  solitary  man  told  the  truth  when  he  said, 
not  merely  that  it  would  pass  away,  but  that  it  was  passing  away.  He  recognised 
that  mysterious  law  of  God,  which  seems  to  give  to  nations  their  chance  and 
strengthen  them  with  universal  victory,  and  then  depose  them,  lest  one  good  custom 
should  corrupt  the  world.  Egypt,  Chaldea,  Babylon,  Greece,  all  had  had  their  day, 
and  ceased  to  be.  And  so  it  would  be  with  Rome.  We  to-day  know  that  it  has 
passed  away.  2.  And  it  is  true  of  the  pride  of  knowledge.  The  noblest  pride  of 
life,  because  the  highest,  is  the  pride  of  knowledge.  Yet  that,  too,  is  transient. 
Nothing  shifts  its  boundaries  so  often.  Nothing  is  so  illusive.  Nothing  passes 
through  such  strange  and  rapid  transformations.  The  knowledge  of  Galileo  would 
be  the  ignorance  of  to-day  ;  and  if  Isaac  Newton  were  alive  now  he  would  have  to 
go  to  school  again.  A  century,  a  haK-century,  a  single  decade,  is  often  sufficient 
to  thrust  the  most  brilliant  discoveries  into  oblivion.  The  steam-engine  has  sup- 
planted the  coach ;  but  the  steam-engine  is  already  passing  away,  and  in  fifty  years' 
time  will  be  supplanted  by  some  greater  and  more  serviceable  power.  The  telegraph 
has  bound  nations  together  and  has  made  all  nations  neighbours ;  but  the  telephone 
is  becoming  its  rival,  and  in  another  century,  and  less  perhaps,  men  will  hear 
each  other's  whispers  round  the  globe.  A  thousand  illustrations  might  be  given 
of  how  knowledge  perpetually  effaces  its  past.  Nor  is  this  a  mournful  truth.  It  is 
no  toUlng-bell  which  announces  that  the  world  is  passing  away.  It  is  rather  a 
trumpet.  It  means  that  God's  law  is  progress :  and  that  is  a  glorious  truth  for 
those  who  can  understand  it.  (Ibid.)  The  worldling's  trinity : — Pleasure, 
profit,  preferment  (called  here  "  tne  lust  of  the  flesh,"  &o.)  are  the  worldling's 
trinity,  to  the  which  he  performeth  inward  and  outward  worship.  (J.  Trapp.) 
What  is  "  the  world  "  ? — The  world  is  not  altogether  matter,  nor  yet  altogether 
spirit.  It  is  not  man  only,  nor  Satan  only,  nor  is  it  exactly  sin.  It  is  an  infec- 
tion, an  inspiration,  an  atmosphere,  a  life,  a  colouring  matter,  a  pageantry,  a 
fashion,  a  taste,  a  witchery.  None  of  all  these  names  suit  it,  and  aU  of  them 
suit  it.     (5.  Faber.) 

Ver.  17.  Tlie  world  passetli  away,  and  the  lust  thereof! — River  and  rock : — 
There  are  but  two  things  set  forth  in  this  text — a  great  antithesis  between  some- 
thing which  is  in  perpetual  flux  and  passage  and  something  which  is  permanent. 
If  I  might  venture  to  cast  the  two  thoughts  into  metaphorical  form,  I  should  say 
that  here  are  a  river  and  a  rock.  I.  The  BrvER,  or  the  sad  truth  of  sense. 
"The  world"  is  in  the  act  of  "passing  away."  Like  the  slow  travelling  of  the 
scenes  of  some  movable  panorama  which  glide  along,  even  as  the  eye  looks  upon 
them,  and  are  concealed  behind  the  side  flats  before  the  gazer  has  taken  in  the 
whole  picture,  so  constantly,  silently,  and  therefore  unnoticed  by  us,  all  is  in  a 
state  of  continual  motion.  There  is  no  present,  but  all  is  movement.  But  besides 
this  transiency  external  to  us,  John  finds  a  corresponding  analogous  transiency 
within  us.  "  The  world  passeth,  and  the  lust  thereof."  Of  course  the  word  "lust" 
is  employed  by  him  in  a  much  wider  sense  than  in  our  use  of  it.  With  us  it  means 
one  specific  and  very  ugly  form  of  earthly  desire.  With  him  it  includes  the  whole 
genus — all  desires  of  every  sort,  more  or  less  noble  or  ignoble,  which  have  this  for 
their  characteristic,  that  they  are  directed  to,  stimulated  by,  and  fed  or  disappointed 
on,  the  fleeting  things  of  this  outward  life.  If  thus  a  man  has  anchored  himself  to 
that  which  has  no  perpetual  stay,  so  long  as  the  cable  holds  he  follows  the  fate  of 
the  thing  to  which  he  has  pinned  himself,  and  if  it  perish  he  perishes,  in  a  very 
profound  sense,  with  it.  But  these  fleeting  desires,  of  which  my  text  speaks,  point 
to  that  sad  feature  of  human  experience,  that  we  all  outgrow  and  leave  behind  us. 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  137 

and  think  of  very  little  value,  the  things  that  once  to  us  were  all  but  heaven.  The 
self-conscious  same  man  abides,  and  yet  how  different  the  same  man  is !  Our 
lives,  then,  wiU  zig-zag  instead  of  keeping  a  straight  course  if  we  let  desires 
that  are  Umited  by  anything  that  we  can  see  guide  and  regulate  us.  The  march  of 
these  fleeting  things  is  like  that  of  cavalry  with  their  horses'  feet  wrapped  in  straw 
in  the  night,  across  the  snow,  silent  and  unnoticed.  We  cannot  realise  the  revolu- 
tion of  the  earth  because  everything  partakes  in  it.  We  talk  about  standing  still, 
and  we  are  whirhng  through  space  with  inconceivable  rapidity.  By  a  like  illusion 
we  deceive  ourselves  with  the  notion  of  stability  when  everything  about  us  is 
hastening  away.  Some  of  you  do  not  like  to  be  reminded  of  it,  and  think  it  a  kill- 
joy. Now,  surely  common  sense  says  to  all  that  if  there  be  some  fact  certain  and 
plain  and  applying  to  you,  which,  if  accepted,  would  profoundly  modify  your  life, 
you  ought  to  take  it  into  account.  Suppose  a  man  that  Uved  in  a  land  habitually 
shaken  by  earthquakes  were  to  say,  "  I  mean  to  ignore  the  fact,  and  I  am  going  to 
build  a  house  just  as  if  there  was  not  such  a  thing  as  an  earthquake  expected,"  he 
would  have  it  toppling  about  his  ears  very  soon.  And  suppose  a  man  says,  "  I  am 
not  going  to  take  the  fleetingness  of  the  things  of  earth  into  account  at  all,  but  am 
going  to  Uve  as  it  all  things  were  to  remain  as  they  are,"  what  would  become  of  him 
do  you  think  ?  Is  he  a  wise  man  or  a  fool  ?  And  is  he  you  ?  When  they  bmld  a 
new  house  in  Eome  they  have  to  dig  down  through  sometimes  sixty  or  a  hundred 
feet  of  rubbish  that  runs  like  water,  the  ruins  of  old  temples  and  palaces  once 
occupied  by  men  in  the  same  flush  of  hfe  in  which  we  are  now.  We,  too,  have  to 
dig  down  through  ruins,  until  we  get  to  Kock  and  build  there,  and  build  secure. 
Withdraw  your  affections  and  thoughts  and  desires  from  the  fleeting,  and  fix  them 
on  the  permanent.  K  a  captain  takes  anything  but  the  pole  star  for  his  fixed  point 
he  will  lose  his  reckoning,  and  his  ship  will  be  on  the  reefs.  If  we  take  anything 
but  God  for  our  supreme  delight  and  desire  we  shall  perish.  There  was  an  old 
rabbi  long  ago  whose  own  real  name  was  aU  but  lost  because  everybody  nicknamed 
him  "  Eabbi  This-also."  The  reason  was  because  he  had  perpetually  on  his  lips 
the  saying  about  everything  as  it  came,  "  This  also  will  pass."  He  was  a  wise  man. 
Let  us  go  to  his  school  and  learn  his  wisdom.  II.  The  Eock,  ob  the  glad  teuxh 
OF  FAITH.  We  might  have  expected  that  John's  antithesis  to  "  the  world  that 
passeth  "  would  have  been  "  the  God  that  abides."  But  he  does  not  so  word  his 
sentence,  although  the  thought  of  the  Divine  permanence  underUes  it.  Eather  over 
against  the  fleeting  world  he  puts  the  abiding  man  who  does  the  will  of  God. 
There  is  only  one  permanent  reality  in  the  universe,  and  that  is  God.  AU  else  is 
shadow.  The  wiU  of  God  is  the  permanent  element  in  all  changeful  material 
things,  and  consequently  he  who  does  the  will  of  God  links  himself  with  the  Divine 
eternity,  and  becomes  partaker  of  that  blessed  Being  which  lives  above  mutation. 
What  will  you  do  when  you  are  dead  ?  You  have  to  go  into  a  world  where  there 
are  no  gossip  and  no  housekeeping,  no  mUls  and  no  offices,  no  shops,  no  books,  no 
colleges,  and  no  sciences  to  learn.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for 
ever."  If  you  have  done  your  housekeeping,  and  your  weaving  and  spinning,  and 
your  book-keeping,  and  your  buying  and  selling,  and  your  studying,  and  your 
experimenting  with  a  conscious  reference  to  God,  it  is  all  right.  That  has  made 
the  act  capable  of  eternity,  and  there  will  be  no  need  for  that  man  to  change.  The 
material  on  which  he  works  will  change,  but  the  inner  substance  of  his  life  will  be 
unaffected  by  the  trivial  change  from  earth  to  heaven.  Whilst  the  endless  ages 
roll  he  will  be  doing  just  what  he  was  doing  down  here,  only  here  he  was  playing 
with  counters  and  yonder  he  wiU  be  trusted  with  gold  and  dominion  over  ten  cities. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  National  worldliness : — There  is  one  thing  makes  and  keeps 
a  nation  great ;  it  is  a  love  of  invisible  ideas.  There  is  one  thing  that  makes  and 
keeps  it  base ;  it  is  love  of  the  visible  and  the  transient.  The  one  love  we  call 
Bpiritual  and  the  other  worldly.  The  latter,  when  it  is  fijrst,  excludes  the  former ; 
the  former  does  not  exclude  the  latter,  but  ennobles  its  work  by  making  the  motives 
of  it  worthy.  What  is  the  spiritual  life  in  a  nation  ?  That  is  our  first  question. 
It  is  when  there  is  an  ever-present  spiritual  power  in  the  people  which  rules  and 
influences  their  whole  national  hfe.  I  may  state  what  I  mean  by  that  in  this  way. 
Through  knowledge  of  our  nation's  history  in  the  past,  through  admiration  of  her 
greatness,  through  love  of  her  scenery,  through  the  subtle  traditionary  feelings 
which  have  been  sent  down  in  our  blood — through  these,  and  through  a  crowd  of 
desires  and  enjoyments  and  sorrows  which  are  shared  by  us  aU  as  Englishmen,  and 
through  a  crowd  of  hopes  for  the  future  of  our  country,  there  grows  up  before  us  an 
ideal  image  of  our  nation.     Afterwards  we  separate  the  qualities  of  her  character, 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  from  them,  seen  one  by  one,  we  conceive  other  spiritual  ideas.  She  loves,  we 
say,  righteousness  in  her  children,  and  there  are  certain  ways  of  action  which  she 
has  always  thought  right  for  Englishmen.  Knowing  this,  her  children  conceive  the 
idea  of  duty  to  her.  She  says.  It  is  better  to  die  than  to  be  false  to  these  demands ; 
and  the  ideas  of  duty  and  courage  are  both  invisible.  Then  we  conceive  that  she 
loves  all  her  children  equally,  and  we  believe  that ;  and  immediately  we  conceive 
the  spiritual  idea  of  a  brotherhood  in  which  all  Englishmen  are  one.  When  each 
man,  far  beyond  his  personal  interests,  beyond  his  home  affections,  beyond  his 
passions,  feels  these  things  as  the  power  of  his  life  and  lives  by  them,  and  lives  to 
do  them  ;  when  the  love  he  has  to  them  is  so  powerful  that  he  bends  to  its  service 
all  he  is  and  all  he  has,  then  the  nation  that  has  such  men  within  it  lives  a 
spiritual  national  life  and  not  a  worldly  one.  Can  you  imagine  this  or  part  of  it 
being  in  a  nation's  life  and  that  nation  not  being  great  and  keeping  great  ?  The 
nearest  approach  to  the  picture  was  in  the  days  of  Elizabeth.  Not  long  after  her 
accession  men  began  to  realise  the  freedom  they  had  won,  and  passed  from  despair 
into  a  passionate  love  of  their  country.  They  idealised  England,  and  represented 
their  ideal  in  the  queen.  And  the  life  that  came  out  of  this — the  adventure,  the 
sacrifices,  the  abounding  thought,  the  audacious  power — is  even  to  us  astonishing. 
A  vehemence  of  activity  and  faith  filled  the  commonest  sailor  and  yeoman  with  the 
same  spirit  as  Baleigh  and  Greville.  The  intellectual  work  was  just  as  great.  We 
cannot  yet  cease  to  wonder  at  a  time  when  all  men  seemed  giants,  when  Elizabeth 
and  Cecil  played  on  Europe  as  on  an  instrument,  when  Spenser  re-created  romance 
and  wedded  her  to  religion,  when  Shakespeare  made  all  mankind  talk  and  act  upon 
a  rude  stage,  when  Bacon  reopened  the  closed  doors  of  Nature  and  philosophy, 
when  Hooker's  judgment  made  wise  the  Church,  and  when  among  these  kings  of 
thought  there  moved  a  crowd  of  princes  who  in  any  other  age  would  themselves 
have  been  kings  of  art  and  song  and  learning.  That  was  a  noble  national  life,  and 
it  was  such  because  it  was  lived  in  and  for  spiritual  ideas.  Nor  because  of  that 
was  it  less  practical.  The  life  the  ideas  made  and  supported  entered  into  the  work 
of  wealth.  The  commerce  of  England  began  under  Elizabeth,  the  agriculture  of 
the  country  was  trebled,  houses  rose  everywhere,  comfort  and  luxury  and  art 
increased.  But,  though  wealth  and  comfort  grew,  they  were  never  the  first.  Ideal 
motives  ruled  them — worship  of  God  and  England,  and  the  queen  as  the  image  of 
England.  An  ideal  national  life  then  included  aU  the  good  of  a  worldly  one.  It 
was  no  less  practical  in  its  results  on  the  spirit  of  the  country.  There  is  none 
among  us  who  is  not  the  better  for  the  example  of  that  time,  who  is  not  prouder  of 
our  land  with  that  pride  that  makes  heroic  deeds,  who  does  not  look  back  with 
reverence  to  the  great  names  that  then  adorned  our  country.  The  opposite  life  to 
that  is  that  of  national  worklliness.  It  is  when  there  are  but  very  few  ideas  in  a 
nation,  and  when  these  few  do  not  rule  it;  when  its  action,  thoughts,  and  feeUngs 
are  governed  by  what  is  present  or  visible  or  transitory.  It  is  when  the  men  in  it 
worship  as  the  first  thing  personal  getting-on ;  when  wealth  is  first  and  any  means 
are  good  that  attain  it ;  when  those  who  have  it  or  rank  or  position  are  bowed  down 
to  without  consideration  of  character ;  when  art  is  even  stained  and  men  work  at  it 
not  for  love  of  its  own  reward  but  to  sell  it  dearly ;  when  politics  are  governed 
solely  by  desire  for  the  material  prosperity  of  the  country  ;  when  the  commerce  of 
a  nation  is  to  be  kept  at  all  hazards,  even  the  hazard  of  disgrace.  And  as  there  are 
a  great  many  among  us  who  are  in  that  condition  or  tending  to  it,  we  should  be  in 
a  bad  way  were  it  not  that  there  are  numbers  who  hate  that  condition,  who  do  not 
live  in  it  or  for  it,  to  whom  it  is  vile  and  hideous  and  contemptible.  Let  all  those 
who  think  thus  do  their  best  to  keep  the  worldly  spirit  out  of  the  nation's  Ufe ;  it 
will  be  a  sacred  duty.  And  it  is  one  of  those  things  which  every  one  can  do,  each 
in  his  own  society.  Take  a  few  instances  of  it  in  certain  spheres  of  thought  and 
act  that  we  may  know  it.  Take  the  scientific  world.  On  one  side  of  it  it  is  quite 
unworldly.  It  demands  that  it  should  be  allowed  to  do  its  work  without  any  prac- 
tical motive,  without  any  end  such  as,  when  reached,  would  increase  the  wealth  or 
comfort  of  the  world.  But  in  two  ways  it  may  become  worldly.  First,  it  becomes 
partially  worldly  when  it  tries  to  put  aside  all  ideal  life  but  its  own,  when  it  mocks 
at  any  belief  in  the  invisible  except  its  own  invisibles,  when  it  is  so  foolish  as  to  see 
nothing  beyond  itself.  Secondly,  it  may  become  altogether  worldly  if  it  should  tie 
itself  to  the  car  of  the  practical  man,  hire  itself  out  to  the  manufacturer,  or  the  police, 
or  the  politician,  or  the  people  who  love  luxury,  making  itself  like  Aladdin's  lamp 
in  the  hands  of  a  clodhopper.  Oh,  protect  it  from  that  fate !  Again  take  art.  Of 
all  men  it  is  true,  but  of  the  artist  it  is  especially  true,  that  he  must  not  love  the 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  139 

world  nor  the  things  of  the  world.  He  runs  passionately  towards  the  ideal  beauty. 
The  impossible  is  his  aim  ;  nothing  he  does  should  ever  satisfy  him.  If  he  could 
say,  "  Now  I  grasp  the  perfect ;  the  present  is  all  in  all  to  me  ;  I  live  in  and  through 
the  visible  thing  I  have  made,"  then  were  he  really  dead  in  sin  ;  then  would  art 
glide  away  from  him  for  ever,  and  when  he  knew  that  misery  as  his  he  would  die 
of  the  knowledge  of  it.  But  worse,  infinitely  worse,  than  such  a  death  is  his 
becoming  worldly,  and  he  may  be  lured  into  that  by  the  love  of  money.  He  may 
give  up  all  his  own  ideas,  all  the  ideal  he  once  had  of  his  work,  to  do  work  he 
hates  and  despises.  He  may  even  get  to  like  the  base  work  for  the  sake  of  the  goods 
it  brings  him.  There  is  no  ruin  so  ghastly  as  this.  Once  more,  take  national 
economy.  There  is  a  good  thrift  when  the  money  of  a  people  is  caref uUy  watched 
that  the  greatest  amount  of  reproductive  good  may  be  got  out  of  it,  when  none  is 
wasted,  when  work  is  honestly  paid  its  fuU  value  and  no  more,  when  no  money  is 
given  for  bad  work,  or,  as  is  often  the  case,  for  no  work  at  all.  Such  economy  is 
ruled  by  ideas,  especially  by  this  main  one  :  All  expenditure,  even  to  the  last  six- 
pence, must  have  some  relation  to  the  good  of  England.  But  there  is  a  base  thrift, 
and  that  is  ruled  by  this  maxim :  All  expenditure  must  increase  material  wealth, 
or  have  a  visible  practical  end,  practical  as  enabling  men  to  get  on  better  in  this 
world.  Love  not  the  world,  nor  the  things  of  the  world  in  your  nation,  any  more 
than  in  your  own  heart.  You  may  think  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  religion,  with 
the  faith  and  life  of  Christ.  Then  you  will  be  much  mistaken.  Such  a  national 
temper  will  put  men  into  the  atmosphere  in  which  a  Christian  life  is  possible.  If 
you  can  get  men  to  live  an  unworldly  national  life  you  have  made  the  first  step  to 
get  them  to  live  after  Christ.  (S.  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  The  evanescent  and  the 
enduring  in  human  history  : — I.  Everything  in  worldliness  is  evanescent.  1.  The 
worldly  man's  possessions  are  evanescent.  Though  he  has  pyi'amids  of  gold  they 
wiU  pass  away  like  a  morning  cloud.  2.  The  worldly  man's  purposes  are  evan- 
escent. His  great  schemes  are  only  splendid  dreams  which  pass  away  in  the  waking 
hour.  3.  The  worldly  man's  pleasures  are  evanescent.  4.  The  worldly  man's  pro- 
ductions are  evanescent.  Architecture,  painting,  commerce,  hterature,  legislation 
— what  are  these  ?  A  glaring  pageant  that  passeth  away.  II.  Everything  in  god- 
liness is'ENDUBiNG.  "  He  that  doeth  the  wiU  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  Such  a 
man  has  received  a  "kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved."  1.  His  principles  are 
abiding.  2.  His  possessions  are  abiding.  No  moth  nor  rust  can  corrupt  his 
treasures.  "  The  Lord  is  his  portion."  3.  His  prospects  are  abiding.  His  hopes 
are  not  fixed  on  objects  that  are  passing  away,  but  on  an  "  inheritance  incorrup- 
tible," &c.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  But  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for 
ever. — The  guileless  spirit,  amid  the  dark  loorld'sflow,  established  in  the  light  of  god- 
liness : — I.  The  characteristic  of  the  world  is  that  it  does  not  "  do  the  will  of 
God  "  ;  it  is  the  sphere  or  region  in  which  the  will  of  God  is  not  done.  As  not 
doing  the  will  of  God,  the  world  and  its  lust  must  pass  away,  for  it  is  identical 
with  the  darkness  which  is  passing.  Passing !  But  it  is  passing  to  where  it  will 
pass  no  more,  but  stay,  fixed  unchangeably  for  ever.  It  is  not  annihilated,  it  does 
not  cease  to  be,  it  only  ceases  to  be  passing.  Have  you  ever  thought  how  much  of 
the  world's  endurableness — I  say  not  its  attractiveness  but  its  endurableness — 
depends  on  its  being  a  world  that  passes,  and  therefore  changes  ?  Is  there  any 
sensation,  any  delight,  any  rapture  of  worldly  joy,  however  engrossing,  that  you 
could  bear  to  have  prolonged  indefinitely,  for  ever,  unaltered,  unalterable  ?  But  I 
put  the  case  too  favourably.  I  speak  of  your  finding  the  world  with  its  lust,  not 
passing  but  abiding,  in  the  place  whither  you  yourselves  pass  when  you  pass  hence. 
True,  you  find  it  there.  But  you  find  it  not  as  you  have  it  here.  There  are  means 
and  appliances  here  for  quenching  by  gratification,  or  mitigating  by  variety,  its 
impetuous  fires.  But  there  you  find  it  where  these  fires  burn,  unslaked,  unsolaced, 
the  world  being  all  within  and  the  world's  lust,  and  nothing  outside  but  the  Holy 
One.  Place  yourself  with  your  loved  world  and  its  cherished  lust  where  you  and  it 
and  God  are  alone  together,  with  nothing  of  God's  providing  that  you  can  use  or 
abuse  for  your  relief.  Your  creature  comforts  are  not  there  with  you.  Nothing  of 
this  earth,  which  is  the  Lord's,  is  there  ;  nothing  of  its  beauty  or  its  bounty,  its 
grace  or  loveliness  or  warm  affection ;  nothing  of  that  very  bustle  and  distraction 
and  change  which  dissipates  reflection  and  drowns  remorse ;  nothing  but  your 
worldly  lust,  your  conscience,  and  your  God.  That  is  hell,  the  hell  to  which  the 
world  is  passing.  II.  But  now  let  us  turn  to  a  brighter  picture.  "  He  that  doeth 
the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  Suppose  that  the  world  has  passed  away  and  the 
lust  thereof.   Does  it  follow  that  the  earth  is  dissolved  or  perishes  ?   Nay,  it  remains. 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

And  whatever  in  it  or  about  it  is  of  God  remains.  This  abode  of  men  is  to  be 
assimilated  thoroughly  to  yonder  abode  of  angels  in  respect  of  the  will  of  God  being 
alike  done  in  both.  That  at  all  events  is  the  heavenly  state,  let  its  localities  be 
adjusted  as  they  may.  But  the  precise  point  of  his  statement  is  not  adequately 
brought  out  unless  we  connect  and  identify  the  future  and  the  present.  There  may 
be  stages  of  advancement  and  varieties  of  experience,  a  temporary  break,  perhaps, 
in  the  outer  continuity  of  your  thread  of  life,  between  the  soul's  quitting  the  body 
to  be  with  Christ  where  now  He  is  and  its  receiving  the  body  anew  at  His  coming 
hither  again.  But  substantially  you  are  now  as  you  are  to  be  always.  {R.  S. 
Candlish,  D.D.)  Obedience  and  abiding  : — What  God  wills  He  approves  or  loves. 
What  God  wills  He  is.  If,  then.  He  has  an  express  wUl  concerning  us,  it  follows 
that  when  we  know  it  we  know  all  that  vitally  concerns  us.  There  can  be  nothing 
above,  behind,  beyond  it.  The  will  of  God  is  all.  Knowing  that,  we  know  the 
nature  of  things ;  we  know  the  character  of  virtue,  we  know  what  truth  is,  and 
goodness.  We  get  to  the  source  of  law,  obligation,  authority.  All  are  inseparably 
connected  with,  all  indeed  are  contained  in,  the  will  of  God.  We  ask,  now,  what 
the  natural  wiU  of  man  is  ?  Is  it  for  or  against  the  will  of  God  ?  Against,  unques- 
tionably. Not  that  there  is  declared,  or  even  in  most  cases  very  conscious,  opposi- 
tion. For  it  is  not  true  that  men  to  their  own  consciousness,  and  by  direct  acts  of 
their  own  will,  go  against  God.  They  fill  their  lives,  or  strive  to  do,  without  Him 
who  is  the  alone  abidiqg  fulness,  and  direct  their  conduct  without  reference  to  His 
authority,  and  habitually  act  from  principles  which  He  condemns,  and  seek  after 
ends  which  are  different  from  and  inconsistent  with  the  great  ends  He  has  put 
before  us  all.  Now  remember  that  as  in  God,  so  in  man,  will  is  character.  What 
a  man  wills  settles  what  he  is.  And  since  men  do  will  against  the  wLU  of  God  the 
character  and  condition  of  man  must  be  evil.  What  could  be  sin  if  this  is  not  sin  ? 
And  since  God  did  not  design  man  for  this,  since  His  ideal  of  the  human  creature 
and  life  is  just  the  opposite  of  this,  it  follows  that  we  are  justly  and  honestly 
described  as  "  fallen,"  "  alienated,"  "  depraved."  It  is  always  more  or  less  touch- 
ing to  see  feebleness  matched  against  strength,  even  when  the  feebleness  is  all  in 
the  wrong  and  the  strength  is  all  in  the  right ;  and  therefore,  simply  as  a  conflict, 
it  is  pitiful  enough  to  see  man  in  his  frailty  matching  himseli  against  the  omnipo- 
tence and  justice  of  God.  But,  viewed  from  the  highfer  ground,  it  is  even  more 
terrible  than  it  is  touching.  What  can  come  of  it?  Nothing  but  destruction, 
nothing  but  the  fate  of  that  which  changeth  and  "  passethaway."  Can  a  man  will 
against  time  so  as  to  stop  the  flow  of  its  moments  ?  Can  a  man  will  against  space 
and  put  himself  out  of  it,  in  thought  even,  not  to  say  in  act  ?  Can  a  man  will 
against  mathematical  or  necessary  truth  by  making  two  and  two  into  five,  or  by 
changing  himself  into  another  being  ?  He  may  do  any  of  these  things  as  soon  as 
wUl  against  the  wiU  of  God,  and  make  his  wiU  prevail  and  succeed.  Surely,  then, 
it  is  evident  that  if  there  be  a  gospel — a  message  from  God  that  shall  be  "  good 
news  "  to  a  man — it  must  bear  directly  and  effectually  upon  man's  evil  will. 
There  are  many  ways  of  compendiously  expressing  the  gospel,  but  a  better  it  would 
be  hard  to  find  than  this — that  it  is  the  good  will  of  God  overcoming  the  evil  will  of 
man.  By  means,  no  doubt,  wondrous  means  1  By  His  own  self-sacrifice,  by 
suffering  love,  by  revelation  of  truth,  by  donation  of  the  Spirit,  because  these  are 
necessary  elements  for  the  case,  the  nature  of  man  being  such  as  to  forbid  the  hope 
of  any  change  being  wrought  in  it  by  mere  strength,  by  what  we  call  omnipotence. 
Then  the  question  of  questions  to  a  man  must  be  this,  "  Am  I  now  with  my  will 
doing  the  wUl  of  God  ?  "  Not,  "  Have  I  undergone  a  certain  spiritual  change  ?  and 
have  I  had,  subsequently,  a  requisite  amount  of  spiritual  experience?"  But  just 
this,  "  Am  I  yet  a  self-willed  creature,  or  have  I  become  one  of  the  Saviour's  willing 
people  ?  Am  I  still  keeping  up  the  black,  silent  controversy  of  a  misjudging  heart 
with  and  against  God  ?  Or  have  I  been  won  over,  at  least  in  spirit  and  will, 
although  not  yet  perfectly  in  feeling  and  act,  from  self  and  sin  to  truth  and  love  and 
God?  "  Happy  he  who  can  at  once  say,  "  I  am  of  those  who  do  the  will  of  God. 
Through  grace  I  am  aiming  at  the  life  of  whole  and  constant  obedience."  Happy 
he,  for  whoso  thus  doeth  the  will  of  God  has  entered  the  world  of  reality  and  per- 
manence as  one  belonging  to  it.  He,  too,  is  going  to  abide  for  ever,  is  now  already 
in  the  ever-abiding  state.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  abiding  life: — Like  most 
writers  and  speakers,  John  had  favourite  expressions.  One  of  his  pet  words  is  this 
"  abide,"  significant  of  the  quiet,  contemplative  temper  of  the  man,  but  significant 
of  a  great  deal  more.  He  uses  it,  if  I  reckon  rightly,  somewhere  between  sixty  and 
seventy  times  in  the  Gospel  and  Epistles.     And  he  almost  always  employs  it  in  a 


CHAP,  ir.]  I.  JOHN.  141 

metaphorical,  or,  if  you  like  the  word  better,  a  "  mystical  "  sense.  The  frequency 
of  its  recurrence  is  masked  to  an  English  reader  by  the  variety  of  translation  which 
our  renderers  have  chosen  to  adopt,  but  wherever  you  find  in  John's  writings  the 
synonyms  "  dwell,"  "  abide,"  "  continue,"  "  remain,"  it  is  pretty  safe  to  conclude 
that  he  is  using  this  word.  To  John  one  great  characteristic  of  the  Christian  life 
was  that  it  was  the  abiding  life.  I.  The  Christian  life  is  a  life  of  dwelling  in 
Cheist.  I  have  said  that  this  is  one  of  John's  favourite  words.  He  learnt  it  from 
his  Master.  It  was  in  the  upper  room  where  it  came  from  Christ's  lips  with  a 
pathos  which  was  increased  by  the  shadow  of  departure  that  lay  over  His  heart  and 
theirs.  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you."  No  doubt  the  old  apostle  had  meditated 
long  on  the  words.  "  Abide  in  me  and  I  in  you."  That  is  the  ideal  of  the  Chris- 
tian life,  a  reciprocal  mutual  dwelling  of  Christ  in  us  and  of  us  in  Christ.  These 
two  thoughts  are  but  two  sides  of  the  one  truth,  the  interpenetration  by  faith  and 
love  of  the  believing  heart  and  the  beloved  Saviour,  and  the  community  of  spiritual 
life  as  between  them.  The  one  sets  forth  more  distinctly  Christ's  gracious  activity 
and  wondrous  love  by  which  He  condescends  to  enter  into  the  narrow  room  of  our 
spirits,  and  to  communicate  their  life  and  all  the  blessings  that  He  can  bestow. 
The  other  sets  forth  more  distinctly  our  activity,  and  suggests  the  blessed  thought 
of  a  home  and  a  shelter,  an  inexpugnable  fortress  and  a  sure  dwelling-place,  a 
habitation  to  which  all  generations  may  continually  resort.  Christ  for  us  is  the 
preface  and  introduction.  I  do  not  want  that  that  great  truth  should  be  in  any 
measure  obscured,  but  I  do  want  that,  inseparably  connected  with  it  in  our  belief 
and  in  our  experience,  there  should  be  far  more  than  there  is,  the  companion 
sister-thought,  Christ  in  us  and  we  in  Christ.  I  need  not  remind  you  how  this 
great  thought  of  mutual  indwelling  is,  through  John's  writings,  extended  not  only 
to  our  relation  to  Christ,  but  to  our  relations  to  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Spirit. 
The  apostle  almost  as  frequently  speaks  about  our  dwelling  in  God  and  God's 
dwelling  in  us,  as  he  does  about  our  dwelling  in  Christ  and  Christ's  dwelling  in  us. 
Let  me  say  one  word  about  the  ways  by  which  this  mutual  indwelling  may  be  pro- 
cured and  maintained.  You  talk  about  the  doctrine  as  being  mystical.  Well,  the 
way  to  reahse  it  as  a  fact  is  plain  and  unmystical  enough  to  suit  anybody.  There 
are  two  streams  of  representation  in  John's  writings  about  this  matter.  Here 
is  a  sample  of  one  of  them,  "  He  that  eateth  My  flesh  and  drinketh  My  blood 
abideth  in  Me,  and  I  in  him."  Similarly  He  says,  "  If  that  which  ye  have  heard 
from  the  beginning  abide  in  you,  ye  also  shall  abide  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father." 
And,  still  more  definitely,  "  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God, 
God  dweUeth  in  him,  and  he  in  God."  So,  then,  the  acceptance  by  our  under- 
standings and  by  our  hearts  of  the  truth  concerning  Jesus  Chiist,  and  the  grasping 
of  these  truths  so  closely  by  faith  that  they  become  the  nourishment  of  our  spirits, 
so  that  we  eat  His  flesh  and  drink  His  blood,  is  the  condition  of  that  mutual 
indwelling.  And  if  that  seems  to  be  too  far  removed  from  ordinary  moralities  to 
satisfy  those  who  wUl  have  no  mysteries  in  their  religion,  and  wUl  not  have  it  any- 
thing else  than  a  repetition  of  the  plain  dictates  of  conscience,  take  the  other  stream 
of  representations,  "  If  we  love  one  another,  God  abideth  in  us."  "  He  that  abideth 
in  love  abideth  in  God."  "  If  ye  keep  My  commandments  ye  shall  abide  in  My 
love."  The  harm  of  mysticism  is  that  it  is  divorced  from  common  pedestrian 
morality.  The  mysticism  of  Christianity  enjoins  the  punctilious  discharge  of  plain 
duties.  "  He  that  keepeth  His  commandments  abideth  in  Him,  and  He  in  him." 
II.  The  Christian  life  should  be  one  of  steadfast  persistence.  One  of  the 
synonyms  with  which  our  translators  have  represented  this  word  of  which  I  am 
speaking  is  "  continue."  You  will  find  that  the  same  double  representation  which 
I  have  spoken  of  is  kept  up  with  regard  to  other  matters  belonging  to  the  Christian 
life.  For  instance,  we  sometimes  read  of  "  God's  word,"  "  Christ's  sayings,"  or 
"the  truth  " — as  John  puts  it — "  abiding  in  us  "  ;  and  as  frequently  we  read  of  our 
"  abiding  "  in  these — the  words  of  God,  the  teaching  of  Christ,  the  truth.  In  the 
one  case  something  is  represented  as  permanently  establishing  itself  in  my  nature 
and  operating  there.  In  the  other  case  I  am  represented  as  holding  fast  by  and 
perseveringly  attending  to  something  which  I  possess.  Ah  1  I  am  afraid  that  there 
are  few  things  which  the  average  Christian  man  of  this  generation  more  needs  than 
the  exhortation  to  steadfast  continuance  in  the  course  which  he  says  he  has 
adopted.  Most  of  us  have  our  Christianity  by  fits  and  starts.  It  is  spasmodic  and 
interrupted.  We  grow  as  the  vegetable  world  grows,  in  the  favourable  months  only, 
and  there  are  long  intervals  in  which  there  is  no  progress.  A  Christian  life  should 
be  one  of  steadfast,  unbroken  persistence.    Oh !  but  you  say,  "  that  is  an  ideal 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

that  nobody  can  get  to."  Well,  I  am  not  going  to  quarrel  with  anybody  as  to 
•whether  such  an  ideal  is  possible  or  not.  It  seems  to  me  a  woful  waste  of  time  to 
be  fighting  about  possible  limits  when  we  are  so  far  short  of  the  limits  that  are 
known.  III.  The  Christian  life  mat  be  one  of  abiding  blessedness.  Our 
Lord  in  that  same  discourse  in  which  He  spoke  about  abiding  in  us  and  we  in  Him, 
xised  the  word  very  frequently  in  a  great  variety  of  aspects,  and  amongst  them  He 
said,  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy  may  abide  in  you."  And 
in  other  places  we  read  about  "  abiding  in  the  light,"  or  having  eternal  Ufe  abiding 
in  us.  And  in  all  these  various  places  of  the  use  of  this  expression  there  lies  the 
one  thought  that  it  is  possible  for  us  to  make,  here  and  now,  our  lives  one  long 
series  of  conscious  enjoyment  of  the  highest  blessings.  And  even  if  there  be  a 
circumference  of  sorrow,  joy  and  peace  may  be  the  centre,  and  not  be  truly 
broken  by  the  incursions  of  calamities.  There  are  springs  of  fresh  water  that  dart 
up  from  the  depths  of  the  salt  sea  and  spread  themselves  over  its  waves.  It  is 
possible  in  the  inmost  chamber  to  be  still  whilst  the  storm  is  raging  without.  It  is 
our  own  fault  if  ever  external  things  have  power  over  us  enough  to  shake  our  inmost 
and  central  blessedness.  "  As  sorrowful  yet  always  rejoicing."  IV.  Lastly,  the 
Chbistian  life  will  tukn  out  to  be  the  one  peemanent  life.  So  say  the  words 
which  I  have  taken  as  a  text.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 
That  implies  not  so  much  dwelling  or  persistence  or  continuousness  during  our 
earthly  career  as,  rather,  the  absolute  and  unlimited  permanence  of  the  obedient 
life.  It  will  endure  when  all  things  else,  "  the  world,  and  the  lust  thereof,"  have 
slid  away  into  obscurity  and  have  ceased  to  be.  Now  of  course  it  is  true  that  Chris- 
tian men,  temples  of  Christ,  are  subject  to  the  same  law  of  mutation  and  decay  as 
all  created  things  are.  But  still,  whilst  on  the  one  hand  Christian  men  share  in 
the  common  lot,  and  on  the  other  hand  non-Christian  men  endure  for  ever  in  a  very 
solemn  and  dreadful  sense,  the  word  of  my  text  reveals  a  great  truth.  The  lives  that 
run  parallel  with  God's  will  last,  and  when  everything  that  has  been  against  that  will, 
or  negligent  of  it,  is  summed  up  and  comes  to  nought,  these  lives  continue.  The  life 
that  is  in  conformity  with  the  will  of  God  lasts  in  another  sense,  inasmuch  as  it 
persists  through  all  changes,  even  the  supreme  change  that  is  wrought  by  death,  in 
the  same  direction,  and  is  substantially  the  same.  If  we  grasp  the  throne  of  God 
•we  shall  be  co-eternal  with  the  throne  that  we  grasp.  We  cannot  die,  nor  our  work 
pass  and  be  utterly  abolished  as  long  as  He  Uves.  Some  trees  that,  like  sturdy 
Scotch  firs,  have  strong  trunks  and  obstinate  branches  and  unfading  foliage,  looking 
as  if  they  would  defy  any  blast  or  decay,  run  their  roots  along  the  surface,  and 
down  they  go  before  the  storm.  Others,  far  more  slender  in  appearance,  strike 
theirs  deep  down,  and  they  stand  whatever  winds  blow.  So  strike  your  roots  into 
God  and  Christ.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  The  moral  only  permanent: — The  first  affirmation  of  this  sentence  is 
common  enough  and  obvious  enough.  And  yet  perhaps  it  might  be  questioned 
whether  any  of  us  truly  and  profoundly  believe  it.  Ask  us  whether  we  believe  that 
the  world  passes  away,  and  pointing  to  these  lapsing  years  we  unhesitatingly  say 
Yes,  but  encounter  us  twelve  hours  after  the  new  year  is  born  in  Cheapside  or  on 
•Change,  and  you  will  see  no  diminution  of  our  eager  pursuit,  no  relaxation  of  our 
eager  grasp  of  it.  Not  only  does  the  world  pass  away,  but  "  the  lust  thereof  " — the 
very  thoughts  and  passions  with  which  we  desire  it.  I  know  no  more  affecting 
affirmation  concerning  death  than  one  that  is  made  in  one  of  the  Psalms,  "  In  that 
very  day  his  thoughts  perish."  The  man  as  we  knew  him  and  could  recognise  him 
has  perished,  his  palpable  body  is  no  longer  conscious  of  thought  and  passion.  So 
far  as  the  world  is  concerned,  and  so  far  as  we  look  at  him,  his  thoughts  have 
perished.  He  is  only  dust — the  eye,  the  hand,  the  tongue,  and,  above  aU,  the 
mysterious  brain,  have  forgotten  their  functions.  And  more  than  this,  the  thoughts 
of  the  man  are  perished  in  fact  as  well  as  in  seeming,  for  although  we  beUeve  the 
thinking,  loving  man  to  hve  in  the  unseen  world,  active  from  the  very  necessity  of 
their  nature,  yet  how  few  of  the  particular  thoughts  and  desires  that  a  man  enter- 
tains here  does  he  retain  after  he  dies  I  How  many  of  them  perish  !  too  vain,  too 
fooUsh,  too  sinful  to  be  retained  in  the  light  and  under  the  conditions  of  another 
world.  How  few  of  our  conscious  thoughts  and  affections  can  we  even  now  reason- 
ably hope  to  retain  1  They  are  possible  for  this  hfe  of  ignorance  and  sin,  but 
possible  for  no  other.  Ay,  and  before  a  man  dies  "the  lust  of  the  world"  may 
perish  out  of  him.  Difficult  as  it  is  to  cure  a  man  of  an  undue  love  of  the  world, 
disappointment  and  suffering  may  do  it,  and  disgust  may  succeed  to  desire. 
Possession  may  bring  a  hatred  and  disgust  surpassing  our  love  and  desire,  and  thus 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  JOHX.  143 

even  before  the  world  itself  passes  away  the  "  lust"  of  it  may.  But  this  is  true  of 
things  only  in  part,  true  only  as  to  their  outward  seeming,  true  only  of  their 
material  and  external  element.  There  is  an  element  of  everything  that  a  moral 
being  touches  and  is  related  to  that  is  unchanging  and  eternal ;  that,  namely,  which 
expresses  or  addresses  itself  to  his  moral  feeling.  The  material  element  of  this 
world's  things  passes  away,  the  moral  abides  for  ever.  This  is,  I  think,  what  is 
meant  by  the  second  member  of  this  sentence.  And  there  is  a  moral  element  in 
everything.  Everything  that  comes  to  us  comes  with  a  moral  lesson  and  influence 
from  God — a  teaching  of  duty  or  a  test  of  temper  :  and  everything  that  goes 
from  us  carries  with  it  a  record  of  our  moral  principles  and  tempers.  There  is 
nothing  so  material  and  so  trivial  as  not  to  be  a  possible  means  of  grace  to  us.  Let 
us  be  careful  not  to  err,  therefore,  in  our  estimates  of  the  transitoriness  of  things. 
Just  as  we  do  not  all  die  because  the  material  body  dies,  so  we  do  not  all  pass  away 
because  the  material  externals  of  things  do ;  there  is  a  kind  of  moral  soul  of  the 
world  as  well  as  a  material  body.  Our  pure  thoughts,  our  loving  affections,  our 
holy  actions,  our  penitence  and  prayer  and  communion  with  God,  our  service  of 
God,  our  self-denial  and  self-consecration,  all  enabled  by  the  things  of  the  world 
around  us,  these  are  the  elements  of  the  things  of  the  world  that  will  live  and  abide 
for  ever.  I.  Take,  first,  the  gener.Uj  history  of  the  yeae,  the  public  deeds  that 
have  been  done,  the  national  and  social  movements  that  have  been  effected,  the 
sum  total  of  what  has  been  contributed  to  the  world's  history,  wisdom,  and  good- 
ness. We  need  attempt  no  enumeration  of  these ;  it  is  enough  to  say  of  them  that 
all  that  is  merely  material  and  external  in  them  has  passed  away,  only  that  which 
is  moral  abides.  There  is  no  moral  influence,  no  moral  life  in  the  mere  record  of 
an  event  upon  the  page  of  history ;  it  may  lie  there  a  dead  fact,  without  a  living 
pulse,  without  a  particle  of  quickening  power.  Only  so  far  as  moral  principles  were 
exercised  in  it,  only  so  far  as  it  was  an  example  of  virtue  or  a  beacon  of  vice,  an 
illustration  of  obedience  or  an  instance  of  sin,  has  it  power  to  appeal  to  and  quicken 
us.  How,  then,  shall  we  estimate  the  history  of  the  past  year  ?  We  will  brush 
away  its  surface  of  mere  phenomena,  and  look  into  the  world's  moral  life  and  try 
to  understand  what  the  year  has  added  to  the  world's  holiness  or  sin,  how  far 
Christian  civilisation  has  been  extended  and  Christian  piety  increased.  Is  the 
world  purer  and  more  elevated  ?  It  has  an  additional  record  of  sin,  what  additional 
record  has  it  of  virtue,  obedience,  and  faith  ?  II.  Take  next  your  own  individual 
history  through  the  year.  Now,  whatever  may  have  befallen  you,  whatever 
sorrows  or  joys,  pains  or  pleasures,  the  only  permanent  result  of  the  year  is  its  sum 
of  moral  actions  and  experiences.  Of  how  little  value  now  apart  from  it  are  your 
toils  for  the  perishing  body,  your  care  for  the  physical  wants  of  your  mortal  condi- 
tion, your  ploughing  the  earth,  your  barter  of  merchandise,  your  hoarding  of 
money,  your  toil  as  an  orator,  scholar,  or  statesman !  So  far  as  you  have  done 
these  things  without  spiritual  feeling  and  reference,  how  little  they  all  appear  now. 
And  as  with  our  possessions,  so  with  our  self -culture,  both  of  mind  and  of  heart. 
How  much  of  what  a  man  acquires  is  mere  property,  never  entering  into  the 
essence  of  his  moral  life.  Suppose  that  you  have  been  a  student  during  the  year, 
acquirmg  knowledge  of  history,  science,  philosophy,  well,  how  much  of  what  you 
have  acquired  is  mere  knowledge,  the  mere  chattel  of  the  man?  How  little  of  it 
has  been  incorporated  with  your  moral  life !  And  all  that  has  not  shall  pass  away, 
save  as  mere  memory.  "  Whether  it  be  knowledge,  it  shall  fail ;  whether  they  be 
prophecies,  they  shall  cease  "  ;  only  Divine  charity,  only  that  which  is  inwrought 
moral  feeling,  shall  abide.  Or  suppose  that  you  are  a  religious  man,  cultivating  a 
religious  character,  and  seeking  to  "make  your  calling  and  election  sure."  You 
have  read  your  Bible,  you  have  uttered  prayers,  you  have  helped  in  Christian 
labour.  Well,  as  mere  acts  these  have  aU  passed  away,  congregations  have  broken 
up,  duties  have  been  finished.  What,  then,  remains  ?  Only  the  moral  element 
that  there  was  in  all  these  things,  only  the  inward  religious  feeling  that  prompted 
them  or  that  they  expressed.  And  it  abides  in  two  ways.  First,  all  the  moral 
element  and  influence  of  your  religious  acts  produces  an  effect  upon  others — upon 
those  who  are  the  objects  of  your  act,  and  upon  others  who  behold  it.  Not  merely 
does  it  relieve  poverty  or  pain — that  is  only  the  material  form  and  effect  that  will 
perish  when  pain  shall  end ;  but  it  exhibits  a  moral  principle  or  feeling,  and  men 
are  morally  moved  by  it — moved  to  moral  admiration  and  imitation.  And  then 
upon  yourself  the  moral  influence  of  your  act  is  very  mighty.  Every  exercise  of  a 
virtue  or  a  vice  acts  inwardly  far  more  powerfully  than  it  acts  outwardly ;  it 
strengthens  and  expands  your  moral  principle,  it  enlarges  and  deepens  your 
brotherly  sympathies.     {H.  Allon,  D.D.) 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

Vers.  18-23.  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time  :  and  as  ye  have  heard  that  anti- 
christ shall    come,  even    now    are    there    many  antichrists. — St.  John's  "  last 
hour " ; — The  Apostle  John  is  an  old  man ;   he  has  lived  through   a  long    day. 
The  way  of  the  Lord  that  he  teaches  is  by  this  time  a  well-marked  path,  trodden 
by  the  feet  already  of  two  generations.     Time  has  vindicated  the  bold  inference 
that  the  aged  apostle  drew  from  his  experience.     The   disciples   of  Jesus   "have 
known  the  truth,  which   abideth  in  us  and  shall  be  with  us  for   ever."      St. 
John  has  but  one  thing  to  say  to  his  successors:  "Abide  in  Him."    As  for  the 
recent  seceders  from  the  apostolic  communion,  their  departure  is  a  gain  and  not  a 
loss  ;  for  that  is  manifest  in  them  which  was  before  concealed  (vers.  18,  19).     They 
bore  the  name  of  Christ  falsely :  antichrist  is  their  proper  title ;  and  that  there  are 
"many"  such,  who  stand  threateningly  arrayed  against  His  servants,  only  proves 
that  His  word  is  doing  its  sifting  and  judicial  work,  that  the  Divine  life  within  the 
body  of  Christ  is  casting  off  dead  limbs  and  foreign  elements,  that  the  truth  is 
accomplishing  its  destined  result,  that  the  age  has  come  to  its  ripeness  and  its 
crisis:  "whence  we  perceive  that  it  is  the  last  hour."     We  may  best  expound  the 
paragraph  under  review  by  considering  in  order  the  crisis  to  which  the   apostle 
refers,  the  danger  which  he  denounces,  and  the  safeguards  on  which  he  relies — in 
other  words,  the  last  hour,  the  many  antichrists,  and  the  chi"ism  from  the  Holy 
One.    I.  "  My  children,  it  is  the  last  houk — we  perceive  that  it  is  the  last  hour." 
Bishop  Westcott,  in  his  rich  and  learned  Commentary  on  this  Epistle,  calls  our 
attention  to  the  absence  of  the  Greek  article:    "A  last  hour  it  is  (icTxarr]  iipa 
iffTiv) " — so  the    apostle  literally  puts   it ;    and  the  anarthrous  combination  is 
peculiar  here.     (St.  Paul's,  "A  day  of  the  Lord  is  coming,"  in  1  Thessalonians  v. 
2,  resembles  the  expression.)     The  phrase  "  seems  to  mark  the  general  character  of 
the  period,  and  not  its  specific  relation  to  '  the  end.'     It  was  a  period  of  critical 
change."     "  The  hour"  is  a  term  repeatedly  used  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John  for  the 
crisis  of  the  earthly  course  of  Jesus,  the  supreme  epoch  of  His  death  and  return  to 
the  Father.     This  guides  us  to  St.  John's  meaning  here.     He  is  looking  backward, 
not  forward.     The  venerable  apostle  stands  upon  the  border  of  the  first  Christian 
age.     He  is  nearing  the  horizon,  the  rim  and  outmost  verge  of  that  great  "  day  of 
the  Lord  "  which  began  with  the  birth  of  the  first  John,  the  forerunner,  and  would 
terminate  with  his  own  departure :   himself  the   solitary  survivor  of  the  twelve 
Apostles  of  the  Lamb.     The  shadows  were  closing  upon  John;   everything  was 
altered  about  him.     The  world  he  knew  had  passed  or  was  passing  quite  away. 
Jerusalem  had  fallen :  he  had  seen  in  vision  the  overthrow  of  mighty  Eome,  and 
the  empire  was  shaken  with  rumours  and  fears  of  change.     The  work  of  revelation, 
he  felt,  was  all  but  complete.     The  finished  truth  of  the  revelation  of  the  Father  in 
the  Son  was  now  confronted  by  the  consummate  lie  of  heresy  which  denied  them 
both  (ver.  22).     He  presided  over  the  completion  of  the  grand  creative  age,  and  he 
saw  that  its  end  was  come.     Clearly  it  was  his  last  hour  ;  and  for  aught  he  knew  it 
might  be  the  world's  last,  the  sun  of  time  setting  to  rise  no  more,  the  crash  of 
doom  breaking  upon  his  dying  ears.     The  world  passes  through  great  cycles,  each 
ol  which  has  its  last  hour  anticipating  the  absolute  conclusion.    The  year,  with  its 
course  from  spring  to  winter,  from  winter  to  autumn,  the  day  from  dawn  to  dark, 
image  the  total  course  of  time.     The  great  epochs  and  "  days  "  of  human  history 
have  a  finality.    Each  of  these  periods  in  turn  sensibly  anticipates  the  end  of  all 
things.     Many  great  and  notable  days  of  the  Lord  there  have  been,  and  perhaps 
will  be,  many  last  hours  before  the  last  of  all.     The  earth  is  a  mausoleum  of  dead 
worlds;  in  its  grave-mounds,  tier  above  tier,  extinct  civilisations  lie  orderly  interred. 
Each  "  day  "  of  history,  with  its  last  hour,  is  a  moment  in  that  "  age  of  the  ages  " 
which  includes  the  measureless  circumference  of  time.    11.  The  Apostle  John  saw 
the  proof  of  the  end  of  the  age  in  the  appearance  of  many  antichbists.     The  word 
"  antichrist "   has,   by  etymology,  a   double  meaning.     The  antichrist  of  whose 
coming  St.  John's  readers  had  "  heard,"  if  identical,  as  one  presumes,  with  the 
awful  figure  of  2  Thessalonians  ii.,  is  a  rival  or  mock-Christ,  a  Satanic  caricature 
of  the  Lord  Jesus;   the  "many  antichrists"  were  not  that,  but  deniers,  indeed 
destroyers  of  Christ ;  and  this  the  epithet  may  equally  well  signify.     So  there  is  no 
real  disagreement  in  the  matter   between   St.  Paul  and  St.  John.     The  heretic 
oppugners  of  Christ,  starting  up  before  John's  eyes  in  the  Asian  Churches,  were 
forerunners,  whether  at   a  greater  or  less  distance,  of  the  supreme  antagonist, 
messengers  who  prepared  his  way.     They  were  of  the  same  breed  and  likeness,  and 
set  forth  principles  that  find  in  him  their  fuU  impersonation.     These  antichrists  of 
St.  John's  last  hour,  the  opponents  then  most  to  be  dreaded  by  the  Church,  were 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  145 

teachers  of  false  doctrine.  They  "  deny  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  "  (ver.  22).  This 
denial  is  other  than  that  which  the  same  words  had  denoted  fifty  years  before.  It 
is  not  the  denial  of  Jewish  unbelief,  a  refusal  to  accept  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  the 
Messiah  ;  it  is  the  denial  of  Gnostic  error,  the  refusal  to  admit  the  Divine  Sonship 
of  Jesus  and  the  revelation  of  the  Godhead  in  manhood  through  His  person.  Such 
a  refusal  makes  the  knowledge  of  both  impossible ;  neither  is  God  understood  aa 
Father,  nor  Jesus  Christ  as  Son,  by  these  misbelievers.  The  nature  of  the  person 
of  Christ,  in  St.  John's  view,  is  not  a  question  of  transcendental  dogma  or  theo- 
logical speculation ;  in  it  lies  the  vital  point  of  an  experimental  and  working 
Christian  belief.  "  Who  is  he,"  the  apostle  cries,  "  that  overcometh  the  world, 
except  he  that  believes  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God?"  (v.  5) ;  and  again,  "Every 
one  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  begotten  of  God  "  (v.  1).  In  passing 
from  St.  Paul's  chief  Epistles  to  this  of  St.  John,  the  doctrinal  conflict  is  carried 
back  from  the  atonement  to  the  incarnation,  from  the  work  to  the  nature  of  Christ, 
from  Calvary  to  Bethlehem.  There  it  culminates.  Truth  could  reach  no  higher 
than  the  affirmation,  error  could  proceed  no  further  than  the  contradiction,  of  the 
completed  doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ  as  it  was  taught  by  St.  John.  The  final 
teaching  of  Divine  revelation  is  daringly  denied.  "  What  think  ye  of  the  Christ? 
— what  do  you  make  of  Me  ?  "  is  His  crucial  question  to  every  age.  The  two 
answers — that  of  the  world  with  its  false  prophets  and  seducers  (ii.  19  ;  iv.  5),  and 
that  of  the  Christian  brotherhood,  one  with  its  Divine  Head — are  now  delivered  in 
categorical  assertion  and  negation.  Faith  and  unfaith  have  each  said  their  last 
word.  HI.  While  the  Apostle  John  insists  on  the  radical  nature  of  the  assaults 
made  in  his  last  days  upon  the  Church's  Christological  belief,  he  points  with 

ENTIEE    CONFIDENCE    TO    THE    SATEGUABDS    BY   WHICH  THAT  BELIEF  IS  GUAKANTEED.       1. 

In  the  first  place,  "  you, — in  contrast  with  the  antichrists,  none  of  whom  were 
really  *  of  us  '  (ver.  19) — you  have  a  chrism  from  the  Holy  One  (i.e.,  Christ) ;  aU  of 
you  know  "  the  truth  and  can  discern  its  verity  (vers.  20,  21).  Again,  in  ver.  27, 
"  The  chrism  that  you  received  from  Him  abides  in  you,  and  you  have  no  need 
that  any  one  be  teaching  you.  But  as  His  chrism  teaches  you  about  aU  things, 
and  is  true,  and  is  no  lie,  and  as  it  did  teach  you,  abide  in  Him."  Chrism  is 
Greek  for  anointing,  as  Christ  for  anointed  ;  St.  John's  argument  lies  in  this  verbal 
connection.  The  chrism  makes  Christians,  and  is  wanting  to  antichrists.  It  is  the 
constitutive  vital  element  common  to  Christ  and  His  people,  pervading  members 
and  Head  alike.  We  soon  perceive  wherein  this  chrism  consists.  What  the 
apostle  says  of  the  chrism  here  he  says  of  the  Spirit  afterwards  in  chapter  v.  7 :  "It 
is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because  the  Spirit  is  the  truth."  Aiid  in  chapter 
iv.  6  he  contrasts  the  influences  working  in  apostolic  and  heretical  circles  respec- 
tively as  "  the  spirit  of  truth "  and  "  of  error."  The  bestowal  of  the  Spirit  on 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  described  under  the  figure  of  unction  by  St.  Peter  in  Acts 
X.  38,  who  tells  "  How  God  anointed  (christened)  Him — made  Him  officially  the 
Christ — with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  power."  It  was  the  possession,  without  limit,  of 
"the  Spirit  of  truth  "  which  gave  to  the  words  of  Christ  their  unhmited  authority 
(John  iii.  34,  35).  Now  out  of  that  Holy  Spirit  which  He  possessed  infinitely  in 
His  Divine  fashion,  and  which  His  presence  and  teaching  continually  breathed,  the 
Holy  One  gave  to  His  disciples ;  and  all  members  of  His  body  receive,  according 
to  their  capacity,  "  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which  the  world  cannot  receive,"  but 
"whom"  He  "sends"  unto  His  own  "from  the  Father"  (John  xiv.  17;  xv.  26, 
&c.).  The  Spirit  of  the  Head  is  the  vital  principle  of  the  Church,  resident  in  every 
limb,  and  by  its  universal  inhabitation  and  operation  constituting  the  Body  of 
Christ.  "  The  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  is  the  inner  side  of  all  that  is  out- 
wardly visible  in  Church  activity  and  fellowship.  It  is  the  life  of  God  in  the 
society  of  men.  This  Divine  principle  of  life  in  Christ  has  at  the  same  time  an 
antiseptic  power.  It  affords  the  real  security  for  the  Church's  preservation  from 
corruption  and  decay.  For  this  gift  St.  Paul  had  prayed  long  ago  on  behalf  of 
these  same  Asian  Christians  (Eph.  i.  17-23).  This  prayer  had  been  answered. 
Paul's  and  John's  children  in  the  faith  were  endowed  with  a  Christian  discernment 
that  enabled  them  to  detect  the  sophistries  and  resist  the  blandishments  of  subtle 
Gnostic  error.  This  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  has  never  deserted  the  Church. 
"  You  know,  all  of  you  "  (ver.  20) — this  is  what  the  apostle  really  says.  It  is  the 
most  remarkable  thing  in  the  passage.  "  I  have  not  written  unto  you,"  he 
continues,  "  because  you  know  not  the  truth,  but  because  you  know  it,  and  because 
no  lie  is  of  the  truth."  He  appeals  to  the  judgment  of  the  enlightened  lay  com- 
monalty of  the  Church,  just  as  St.  Paul  when  he  writes,  "  I  speak  as  to  men  of 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

sense;  judge  ye  what  I  say."  St.  John's  "chrism"  certainly  did  not  guarantee  a 
precise  agreement  in  all  points  of  doctrine  and  of  practice ;  but  it  covers  essential 
truth,  such  as  that, of  the  Godhead  of  the  Redeemer  here  in  question.  Much  less 
does  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  warrant  individual  men,  whose  hearts  are  touched 
with  His  grace,  in  setting  up  to  be  oracles  of  God  and  mouthpieces  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  In  that  case  the  Holy  Spirit  must  contradict  Himself  endlessly,  and  God 
becomes  the  author  of  confusion  and  not  of  peace.  But  there  is  in  matters  of 
collective  faith  a  spiritual  common  sense,  a  Christian  public  opinion  in  the 
communion  of  saints,  behind  the  extravagances  of  individuals  and  the  party  cries 
of  the  hour,  which  acts  informally  by  a  silent  and  impalpable  pressure,  but  all  the 
more  effectually,  after  the  manner  of  the  Spirit.  2.  To  this  inward  and  cumulative 
witness  there  corresponds  an  outward  witness,  defined  once  for  all.  "  You  know 
the  truth  .  .  .  that  no  lie  is  of  the  truth.  .  .  .  That  which  you  heard  from  the 
beginning,  let  it  abide  in  you  "  (vers.  21,  24).  Here  is  an  objective  criterion,  given  in 
the  truth  about  Christ  and  the  Father  as  John's  readers  heard  it  from  the  apostles 
at  the  first,  and  as  we  find  it  written  in  their  books.  Believing  that  to  be  true,  the 
Church  rejected  promptly  what  did  not  square  with  it.  In  the  most  downright  and 
peremptory  fashion  St.  John  asserts  the  apostolic  witness  to  be  a  test  of  religious 
truth :  "  We  are  of  God  :  he  that  knows  God  hears  us  ;  he  that  is  not  of  God  hears 
us  not.  By  this  we  recognise  the  spirit  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error  "  (iv.  6). 
Here  is  the  exterior  test  of  the  inner  light.  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  in  the  living 
Church,  and  in  the  abiding  apostolic  word,  authenticate  and  guard  each  other. 
This  must  be  so,  if  one  and  the  self -same  Spirit  testifies  in  both.  Experience  and 
Scripture  coincide.  Neither  will  suffice  us  separated  from  the  other.  Without 
experience.  Scripture  becomes  a  dead  letter ;  without  the  norm  of  Scripture, 
experience  becomes  a  speculation,  a  fanaticism,  or  a  conceit.  3.  The  third 
guarantee  cited  by  St.  John  lies  outside  ourselves  and  the  Church :  it  is  neither  the 
chrism  that  rests  upon  all  Christians,  nor  the  apostolic  message  deposited  with  the 
Church  in  the  beginning ;  it  is  the  faithfulness  of  our  promise-giving  Lord.  His 
fidelity  is  our  ultimate  dependence;  and  it  is  involved  in  the  two  safeguards 
previously  described.  Accordingly,  when  the  apostle  has  said,  in  verse  24,  "If 
that  abide  in  you  which  ye  heard  from  the  beginning,  ye  too  shall  abide  in  the  Son 
and  the  Father,"  he  adds,  to  make  all  sure,  in  the  next  verse :  "  And  this  is  the 
promise  which  He  promised  us — the  eternal  life  !  "  It  is  our  Lord's  own  assurance 
over  again  (John  viii.  51 ;  xv.  4).  The  life  of  fellowship  with  the  Father  in  the 
Son,  which  the  antichrist  would  destroy  at  its  root  by  denying  the  Son,  the  Son  of 
God  pledges  Himself  to  maintain  amongst  those  who  are  loyal  to  His  word,  and  the 
word  of  His  apostles,  which  is  virtually  His  own.  He  has  promised  us  this  {avrbc 
iirtjyyiiXaTo) — He  who  says,  "I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life."  No  brief  or 
transient  existence  is  that  secured  to  His  people,  but  "  the  eternal  life."  Now 
eternal  life  means  with  St.  John,  not  as  with  St.  Paul  a  prize  to  be  won,  but  a 
foundation  on  which  to  rest,  a  fountain  from  which  to  draw  ;  not  a  future  attain- 
ment so  much  as  a  present  divine,  and  therefore  abiding,  possession.  It  is  the  life 
which  came  into  the  world  from  God  with  Jesus  Christ  (i.  1,  2),  and  in  which  every 
Boul  has  its  part  that  is  grafted  into  Him.  Understanding  this,  we  see  that  the 
promise  of  life  eternal,  in  verse  25,  is  not  brought  in  as  an  incitement  to  hope,  but 
as  a  reassurance  to  our  troubled  faith.  "  These  things  have  I  written  unto  you," 
the  apostle  says,  "  concerning  those  that  mislead  you"  (ver.  26).  Christ's  word  is  set 
against  theirs.  Error  cannot  prevail  against  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  "  Our 
little  systems  have  their  day  " ;  but  the  fellowship  of  souls  which  rests  upon  the 
foundation  of  the  apostles  has  within  it  the  power  of  an  indissoluble  life.  Such  are 
the  three  guarantees  of  the  permanence  of  Christian  doctrine  and  the  Christian  life, 
as  they  were  conceived  by  St.  John  and  are  asserted  by  him  here  at  his  last  hour, 
when  the  tempests  of  persecution  and  sceptical  error  were  on  all  sides  let  loose 
against   the   Church.      {George   G.   Findlay,  B.A.)  The   dix2)ematio7is  .-—How 

could  those  days  of  primitive  Christianity  be  called  the  last  days,  inasmuch  as  since 
those  days  eighteen  hundred  years  have  elapsed,  and  still  the  world's  history  has 
not  reached  its  close  ?  The  answer  is  obvious.  The  whole  period  lying  between 
the  first  advent  and  the  present  year  of  grace  is  but  one  ceconomy;  and  it  is 
destined  to  be  the  last  ceconomy,  under  which  man  is  to  be  tried.  What  is  a  dis- 
pensation— OiKovouia  ?  0!kov('>hoq  is  the  administrator  of  a  household,  the  lord  of 
a  family,  he  who  dispenses  to  the  household  their  portion  of  meat  in  due  season. 
It  is  a  certain  measure,  more  or  less,  of  moral  light  and  help  meted  out  by  God,  the 
great  Householder,  to  His  human  family  for  the  purpose  of  their  probation.     Any 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  147 

and  every  light  and  help  which  man  has  from  heaven  constitutes,  strictly  speaking, 
a  dispensation.  It  seems,  moreover,  to  be  a  principle  of  God's  dealings  that  the 
light  and  knowledge  having  been  once  supernaturally  communicated,  shall  thence- 
forth be  left  to  radiate  from  its  centre,  to  diffuse  itself  among  mankind,  by  the 
ordinary  means  of  human  testimony.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  review  the  leading 
dispensations  under  which  mankind  has  been  placed.  1.  A  single  arbitrary  restric- 
tion, issued  merely  as  a  test  of  obedience,  was  the  first  of  them.  The  threat  of 
death,  in  case  of  disobedience,  was  a  moral  help  to  our  first  parents,  tending 
to  keep  them  in  the  narrow  path  of  obedience  and  happiness.  But  it  did 
not  enable  them  to  stand.  They  broke  the  commandment,  and  they  fell.  2. 
The  fall  had  in  some  mysterious  manner  put  our  first  parents  in  possession 
of  a  moral  sense,  or  faculty  of  discerning  between  good  and  evil,  independently 
of  Divine  precept.  To  second  and  aid  the  remonstrances  of  this  faculty,  the 
heads  of  the  human  family  had  such  bitter  experience  of  the  fruits  of  trans- 
gression as  would  abide  with  them  to  their  dying  day.  Into  this  experience  of  the 
results  of  transgression  was  infused,  lest  man  should  despair,  an  element  of  faith 
and  hope.  Who  shall  say  whether  man,  with  these  powers  brought  to  bear  upon 
him,  may  not  retrieve  his  ground  and  return  in  true  penitence  to  the  bosom  of  his 
Father  ?  So  the  dispensation  of  experienced  punishment  on  the  part  of  the  parent, 
of  ancestral  precept  on  the  part  of  the  children  began  and  run  its  course.  But  it 
proved  an  utter  failure.  The  principle  of  sin,  engendered  in  its  primeval  act,  ate 
into  the  "moral  nature  of  man  like  a  gangrene,  until  at  length  blasphemy  and  im- 
morality stalked  rampant  upon  the  earth,  and  the  vices  of  human  kind,  like  the 
stature  of  the  men  of  those  days,  towered  to  a  gigantic  height.  3.  While  the  shades 
of  guilt  were  thus  deepening  towards  a  night  of  utter  depravity,  and  the  few  faithful 
ones  in  the  line  of  Seth  shone  but  with  the  feeble  ray  of  glowworms  amid  the 
surrounding  darkness — an  additional  dispensation  was  instituted  in  the  announce- 
ment of  the  deluge  to  the  Patriarch  Noah,  and  the  direction  associated  with  it,  to 
commence  the  building  of  the  ark.  What  a  stirring  voice  from  heaven  was  this  I 
What  a  Divine  trumpet-note  of  warning  in  the  ears  of  a  generation  sinking  deeper 
every  moment  into  the  fatal  torpor  of  moral  insensibility  !  At  length,  when  Divine 
patience  had  had  her  perfect  work — the  flood  CEconomy  came  to  its  close  amid  out- 
poured torrents  and  gushing  fountains  of  the  deep.  4.  When  the  stage  of  the  earth 
had  been  cleared  by  the  flood  for  another  probation  of  the  human  race,  a  new 
measure  of  light  and  help  was  meted  out  by  God,  or,  in  other  terms,  a  new  dispen- 
sation was  introduced.  Human  law  was  now  instituted  and  sanctioned  by  heaven. 
It  was  now  to  be  seen  whether  man's  innate  depravity  would  break  through  this 
barrier  of  restraint  also.  5.  It  was  succeeded  by  the  dispensation  of  Divine  law, 
promulgated  with  the  most  awful  solemnity,  and  having  annexed  to  it  the  most 
tremendous  sanctions.  6.  With  Samuel  and  the  succession  of  prophets,  as  many  as 
spoke  or  wrote  after  him,  commenced  a  new  era,  about  three  hundred  and  fifty 
years  after  the  giving  of  the  law.  And  of  this  dispensation  the  distinguishing 
characteristic  is,  that  it  was  constantly  expanding  itself,  that  fresh  accessions  were 
continually  being  made  under  it  to  man's  moral  and  spiritual  resources,  that  it  was 
a  light  continually  increasing  in  brightness,  shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect 
day  when  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  should  rise  with  healing  in  His  wings.  7.  And 
now  at  length  men's  yearnings  and  anticipations  were  to  be  realised.  The  last  hour 
of  the  world's  day — or,  in  other  words,  the  final  dispensation  under  which  man  was 
to  be  tried — was  at  hand.  The  great  DeUverer  appeared  and  revealed  a  whoUy  new 
arrangement,  or  series  of  arrangements,  under  and  in  virtue  of  which  God  would 
henceforth  deal  with  man.  (1)  Perfect  absolution  from  the  guilt  of  past  sin — an 
absolution  obtained  in  such  a  manner  as  should  effectually  strike  the  chord  of  love 
and  gratitude  in  every  heart  of  man.  (2)  A  communication  of  Divine  strength 
through  outward  means.  (3)  A  perfect  and  explicit  law  embodying  the  purest 
morality  which  it  is  possible  to  conceive.  But  as  man  was  still,  under  this  final 
dispensation,  in  a  state  of  probation,  and  a  state  of  probation  is  not  and  cannot  be  a 
final  or  fixed  state,  the  mind  was  still  thrown  forward  by  predictions  of  the  Second 
Advent,  to  a  period  when  He,  in  whom  the  heart  and  hope  of  God's  people  is  bound 
up,  shall  come  again  to  receive  them  to  Himself,  and  to  visit  them  with  eternal 
comfort,  while  vengeance,  terrific  vengeance,  is  taken  upon  all  who,  though  "the  new 
dispensation  has  been  proclaimed  to  them,  shall  not  have  taken  shelter  under  the  refuge 
which  it  provides.  We  have  now  passed  in  review  the  various  dispensations  under 
which  man  has  been  placed  ;  and,  thus  furnished  for  the  fuller  understanding  of  our 
text,  we  revert  to  the  solemn  asseveration  of  the  apostle,  that  this  under  which  we  Uva 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

is  the  final  ceconomy,  and  that  with  its  close  will  terminate  for  ever  the  probation  of 
mankind.  (Dean  Goulburn.)  Last  things  : — I.  My  hearers  are  coming  nearer  their 
LAST  BUSINESS-DAY.  Men  will  ask  about  you,  and  say,  "  Where  is  so-and-so  ?  "  And 
your  friend  will  say,  "  Have  you  not  heard  the  news  ?  "  and  will  take  a  paper  from 
his  pocket  and  point  to  your  name  on  the  death-list.  If  things  are  wrong  they  will 
always  stay  wrong.  No  chance  of  correcting  a  false  entry,  or  repairing  the  loss  done 
to  a  customer  by  a  dishonest  sample,  or  apologising  for  the  imposition  inflicted  upon 
one  of  your  clerks.  II.  Men  are  coming  nearer  to  their  last  sinful  amusement.  A 
dissipated  life  soon  stops.  The  machinery  of  life  is  so  delicate  that  it  will  not  endure 
much  trifling.  III.  Men  are  coming  nearer  to  their  last  Sabbath.  IV.  We  come 
near  the  last  xeak  of  our  life.  The  world  is  at  least  six  thousand  years  old. 
Sixty  thousand  years  may  yet  come,  and  the  procession  may  seem  interminable ;  but 
our  own  closing  earthly  year  is  not  far  off.  V.  We  are  coming  nearer  the  last 
MOJiENT  OF  OUE  LIFE.  That  is  often  the  most  cheerful  moment.  John  Howard 
talked  of  it  with  exhilaration,  and  selected  his  own  burial-place,  saying  to  his  friend, 
"  A  spot  near  the  village  of  Dauphiney  would  suit  me  nicely."  It  is  a  poor  time  to 
e-tart  to  get  your  house  insured  when  the  flames  are  bursting  out  of  all  the  windows  ; 
and  it  is  a  poor  time  to  attempt  to  prepare  for  death  when  the  realities  of  eternity 
are  taking  hold  of  us.  (T.  de  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Antichrist. — Antichrist : — 
This  word  is  absolutely  peculiar  to  St.  John.  The  general  use  of  dvri  (contra)  and 
the  meaning  of  the  similarly  formed  word  dvriOEoe,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
term  means  "  adversary  of  Messiah."  The  Jews  derived  their  conception  from 
Dan.  vii.  25,  viii.  25,  xi.  36  ;  Ezek.  xxxviii.-ix.  The  name  was  probably  formed 
by  St.  John.  It  was  believed  by  the  Jews  that  Antichrist  would  appear  immediately 
before  the  advent  of  Christ  (c/.  chap.  ii.  22,  iv.  3  ;  2  John  7).  Our  Lord  mentioned 
"  pseudo-Christs  "  as  a  sign  (Matt.  xxiv.  24).  St.  Paul  gave  a  solemn  warning 
to  the  very  Churches  which  St.  John  now  specially  addressed  (Acts  xx.  29). 
St.  John  saw  these  principles  and  the  men  who  embodied  them  in  full  action, 
and  it  was  an  indication  for  him  of  "  the  last  period."  So  far  Christians 
had  only  learnt  in  general  to  expect  the  personal  appearance  of  one  great 
enemy  of  Christ,  the  Antichrist.  In  his  Epistle  St.  John  gives  solemn  warning 
that  those  heretics  who  denied  the  God-Man  were  not  merely  precursors  of  Anti- 
christ, but  impersonations  of  the  anti-Christian  principle — each  of  them  in  a  true 
sense  an  antichrist.  The  term  is  used  by  no  other  sacred  writer,  by  St.  John  him- 
self only  five  times  (chap.  ii.  18,  twice,  ii.  22,  iv.  3 ;  2  John  7),  and  that  specifi- 
cally to  characterise  heresy  denying  the  incarnation,  person,  and  dignity  of  Christ 
as  God-Man.  Antichrist  is  *'  the  liar  " ;  his  spirit  and  teaching  is  a  lie  pure  and 
simple.  The  one  Antichrist,  whose  coming  was  stamped  into  the  living  tradition  of 
the  early  Church,  and  of  whom  believers  had  necessarily  "  heard,"  is  clearly  dis- 
tinguished from  many  who  were  already  in  existence,  and  were  closely  connected 
with  him  in  spirit.  Probably  St.  John  expected  the  chief  Antichrist,  the  "  theolo- 
gical antagonist  of  Christ,"  before  the  Personal  Advent.  In  2  Thess.  ii.  we  find  the 
same  idea  of  a  singular  individual  of  pre-eminent  wickedness,  while  St.  Paul  does 
not  call  the  "  Man  of  Sin  "  Antichrist.  In  the  Apocalypse  (xiii.-xvii.)  a  deUneation 
of  an  anti-Christian  power ;  in  St.  Paul  and  in  St.  John's  Epistles  of  the  "  eximious 
anti-Christian  person."  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Antichrist  and  antichrists  : — It  is 
a  dangerous  voyage  which  every  Christian  sails  upon  the  sea  of  hfe.  Sunken  rocks, 
deceitful  currents,  and  boisterous  winds  endanger  his  brittle  bark.  He  needs  con- 
stantly to  beware  that  he  makes  not  shipwreck  of  his  faith.  Here  we  are  called  to 
consider  the  danger  arising  from  the  seduction  of  false  teachers.  In  the  early 
Church  these  were  the  source  of  constant  disquietude.  Nor  is  it  otherwise  yet.  It 
is  melancholy  to  observe  how  little  they  are  feared.  Many  trifle  with  them.  1.  The 
apostle  addresses  himself  to  believers  under  the  title  of  "  Uttle  children."  There 
is  a  peculiar  propriety  in  using  such  language  to  those  who  are  warned.  Little 
children  need  to  be  warned.  They  are  ignorant  and  unsuspecting,  because  they  are 
inexperienced.  When  they  are  tempted  they  possess  little  power  of  resistance.  And 
once  betrayed  they  have  neither  the  skill  nor  the  power  to  deliver  themselves  out  of 
the  «vl1s  into  which  they  have  been  betrayed.  It  is  to  be  lamented  that  in  all  these 
respects  many  Christians  bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  little  children.  2.  To  these 
the  apostle  says,  "  It  is  the  last  time,"  and  this  is  an  appropriate  introduction  to  the 
■warning  he  was  about  to  give  them.  The  meaning  of  the  phrase  will  be  seen  by 
citing  the  parallel  passage  in  Heb.  i.  1.  The  last  time  is  therefore  the  day  of  Christ. 
It  is  the  age  of  Christianity.  And  there  are  two  views  in  which  it  may  be  appro- 
priately so  denominated.    It  is  the  last  economy  viewed  in  its  historical  relation  to 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  149 

those  which  have  preceded  it.  And  it  may  be  called  so  also  in  relation  to  the  future. 
There  will  be  no  other  economy.  "  Then  cometh  the  end,  when  Christ  shall  have 
delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God  the  Father."  It  is  a  high  privilege  that  we  live 
under  an  economy  which  is  the  completion,  the  perfection  of  all  that  went  before  it. 
But  we  must  not  forget  we  shall  have  no  higher  privileges  than  those  which  we  now 
enjoy.  K  we  are  not  saved  by  means  of  those  we  have  we  must  perish.  3.  Thus 
mtroduced,  the  apostle  begins  to  announce  his  warning,  "  Ye  have  heard  that  anti- 
christ shall  come."  The  very  name  is  sufBcient  to  awaken  deep  concern.  We  are 
at  once  given  to  understand  that  we  must  see  a  grand  opponent  to  Him  whom  we 
delight  to  honour,  and  in  whom  is  all  our  confidence.  For  His  sake  and  our  own, 
such  an  announcement  should  awaken  our  timely  fear.  As  for  Him,  we  cannot 
doubt  his  abiUty  to  overcome  every  enemy.  But  we  may  well  fear  for  ourselves.  4. 
The  apostle,  however,  comes  closer  to  the  case  of  those  little  children  whom  he 
addressed,  and  says,"  Even  now  are  there  many  antichrists."  Observe  the  distinc- 
tion between  this  statement  and  the  former  one.  The  former  is  a  prophecy,  the 
latter  is  a  fact.  Antichrist  shall  come,  but  he  has  not  yet  been  revealed.  Time  will 
be  required  for  his  development.  But  there  are  other  forms  of  evil  and  other 
seducers  who  exist  now.  You  are  not  to  imagine  that  you  are  safe  because  the  great 
antichrist  has  not  yet  appeared.  The  leaven  was  working  which  would  in  time 
corrupt  the  mass  of  professors,  so  insiduous  and  dangerous  is  error ;  and  so  necessary 
it  is  to  watch  its  first  rise  and  destroy  it  at  the  bud.  In  our  own  day  we  may  well  cry 
with  the  apostles,  "  There  are  many  antichrists."  And  who  or  what  are  they  ? 
They  are  all  persons  and  things  that  are  opposed  to  Christ  and  His  people  and  His 
cause.  And  how  can  they  be  enumerated?  Infidelity  is  antichrist,  and  pours 
contempt  upon  the  truth.  The  scoffer  is  antichrist,  and  scorns  the  truth.  All 
ungodly  men  are  antichi-ists,  and  while  they  resist  the  truth  themselves  they 
tempt  others  to  deny  it.  All  errorists  are  antichrists,  and  obscure  and  oppose 
the  truth.  5.  The  apostle  applies  this  announcement  of  many  antichrists  to  a 
practical  use,  saying  in  the  next  clause,  "  Whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  last 
time."  The  words  amount  to  a  declaration  that  this  mighty  host  with  all  their 
enmity  to  the  truth  should  be  a  marked  and  prominent  feature  in  the  Christian  era. 
Christianity  is  the  best  economy,  and  therefore  it  is  the  most  hated  and  opposed  by 
the  wicked  one.  6.  We  should  beware  that  we  are  not  found  among  these  anti- 
christs. And  for  our  warning  and  guidance  a  description  of  them  is  given  in  the 
19th  verse — "  they  went  out  from  us."  Once  they  belonged  to  the  Church  of 
Christ.  They  apostatised  from  the  faith  and  practice  of  the  gospel.  "  But  they 
were  not  of  us,"  adds  the  apostle.  They  never  were.  "  They  are  not  aU  Israel  that 
are  of  Israel."  They  may  have  professed  the  faith,  but  in  reahty  they  had  never 
embraced  it.  "  For,"  says  he,  "  had  they  been  of  us,  they  would  no  doubt  have 
continued  with  us."  This  is  certain.  The  nature  of  the  Divine  life  makes  it  so. 
"  The  just  shall  Uve  by  faith."  The  apostle  concludes,  "But  they  went  out,  that 
they  might  be  made  manifest  they  were  not  all  of  us."  On  the  whole,  it  was  better 
they  departed.  It  was  better  for  themselves,  that  they  may  not  be  deceived  by  a 
name,  but  be  led  to  penitence.  It  was  better  for  others,  that  they  might  not  be 
a  burthen  and  hindrance  to  those  with  whom  they  were  associated.  And  it  was 
better  for  the  cause  of  religion,  that  it  might  not  be  scandalised  by  their  incon- 
sistencies. {Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not 
of  us. — Anti-Christian  : — I.  Where  could  these  apostates  go  out  fbom  but  thb 
Church  ?  If  they  had  not  been  in  it  they  could  not  have  gone  out  from  it.  The 
Church  they  went  out  of  was  the  true  Church  of  Christ,  in  which  the  true  and 
everlasting  gospel  was  preached.  And  these  persons  had  professed  their  faith  in 
all  the  essential  truths  of  the  gospel.  Yet  their  ambitious  spirits  were  such  they 
could  not  be  content  but  they  must  bring  in  another  gospel,  contrary  to  what  the 
apostles  preached,  pretending  to  have  greater  light  into  truth,  and  what  they  called 
the  Person  of  Christ,  and  grace,  than  the  very  apostles  themselves.  They  turned 
their  back  on  Christ,  His  gospel.  His  ordinances,  His  apostles.  His  Churches,  and 
everything  belonging  unto  Him,  and  framed  out  of  their  own  errors,  heresies, 
whims^  and  fancies,  a  Christ  and  gospel  for  themselves.  The  apostle  assigns  the 
reason  why  they  went  out  from  the  Churches  in  the  way  and  manner  they  did — it 
was  because  they  were  not  of  one  heart  and  soul  with  the  Churches  in  the  truth. 
As  it  was  then,  so  it  has  been  ever  since.  All  the  heresies  which  have  tormented 
the  Churches  of  Christ,  down  even  to  our  present  times,  have  originated  from 
persons  who  have  been  in  the  Churches,  who  have  departed  from  the  Churches. 
From  such  as  have  made  schisms  and  divisions  in  the  Churches ;  and  when  any 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

old  error  is  newly  revived,  it  in  general  springs  from  such  persons  as  are  disaffected 
to  the  true  Churches  of  Jesus  Christ.  II.  How  the  apostle  confirms  his  asseb- 
TioN — "  For  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  no  doubt  have  continued  with  us." 
How  solemn  !  how  awful !  These  antichrists  came  out  of  the  apostolical  Church 
of  Jesus.  They  had  been  in  it.  It  answered  their  end  for  a  season  to  remain  in 
the  Churches  to  whom  they  had  given  in  their  names.  It  suited  them  to  leave 
these  Churches  at  such  seasons  ;  when  they  could,  to  distil  their  pernicious 
influences,  as  they  thought  and  hoped,  it  would  gain  converts  to  them.  These 
heretics  left  the  Churches  because  they  were  not  of  them,  only  nominally.  They 
might,  and  undoubtedly  did,  boast  of  superior  light  to  all  others  in  the  doctrines  of 
grace.  They  were  slaves  to  their  own  lusts.  They  were  covetous.  They  were 
greedy  of  reward.  They  were  full  of  gainsaying.  III.  Why  these  antichrists  went 
OUT  OF  THE  Church.  It  was  that  they  might  be  made  manifest,  that  they  did  not 
belong  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  let  them  make  their  boast  of  the  same  as  they 
might.  This  was  their  end  for  their  going  out,  but  it  was  the  Lord's  end  in  thrust- 
ing them  out,  and  it  might  be  some  of  these  might  have  been  thrust  out  by  apostolio 
and  also  by  Church  authority.  In  the  holy  and  secret  mystery  of  the  Lord's 
providence  it  was  evidenced  they  were  not  the  Lord's  beloved  ones.     {S.  E.  Pierce.) 

Ver.  20.  But  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things. — 

The  guileless  spirit  amid  anti-Christian  defections,  established  by  a  messianic  unction 
and  illumination  .-—I.  The  anointing — '*  Ye  have  an  unction."  This  anointing,  or 
being  anointed  with  oil,  you  have  "  from  the  Holy  One  "  ;  from  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord.  There  is  great  significancy  in  the  unction  thus  viewed  as  coming  from  this 
Holy  One.  Antichrists  are  spoken  of.  These  are  antagonists  to  Christ,  to  Him 
who  is  anointed  to  be  the  Holy  One.  You,  on  the  other  hand,  have  anointing  from 
Him.  They  are  antichrists,  you  are  joint-christs ;  for  you  have  an  unction  from 
Him  as  the  Holy  One,  making  you  "holy  as  He  is  holy."  The  holiness  here 
meant  is  consecration.  It  is  what  the  Lord  indicates  in  His  farewell  prayer, 
"  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth :  Thy  word  is  truth."  The  anointing  is  with  the 
Holy  Ghost.  He  is  the  anointing  oil ;  the  oil  of  gladness  with  which  God  has 
anointed  Christ  above  His  fellows.  The  unction,  therefore,  which  "  you  have  from 
the  Holy  One  "  is  His  own  unction  ;  it  is  identically  the  same  with  what  was  His. 
He  sheds  forth  upon  you  and  in  you  the  very  same  presence,  power,  and  influence 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  was  shed  forth  upon  and  in  Himself  when  He  was  about 
the  business  for  which,  as  the  Holy  One,  He  was  consecrated.  In  His  case  that 
unction  was  real,  sensible,  manifest.  If  we  have  it  from  Him,  it  must  be  so  in  ours 
also.  In  Jesus  this  unction  was,  on  the  one  hand.  His  having  always  the  Holy 
Spirit  helping,  comforting,  and  strengthening  Him.  The  unction  which  we  have 
from  Him  as  the  Holy  One  is  our  being  in  the  same  way  upheld  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  all  our  goings  ;  our  being  enabled  therefore  to  show  "  the  meekness  and 
gentleness  of  Christ "  ;  our  making  it  thus  manifest  that  "  the  same  mind  is  in  us 
that  was  also  in  Him."  Again,  on  the  other  hand,  in  Jesus  the  Holy  One,  this 
unction  was  His  constant  and  abiding  apprehension  or  realisation  of  the  Spirit 
moving  Him  to  the  work  for  which  He  was  sent  into  the  world.  The  unction 
which  we  have  from  Him,  that  we  may  be  consecrated  to  be  holy  ones  as  He  is  the 
Holy  One,  is  our  feeling  and  owning  the  inward  call  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  moving 
us  in  our  sphere  to  give  ourselves  to  the  same  lifework  that  always  occupied  Him ; 
to  carry  out  the  great  design  of  His  coming  into  the  world  ;  to  be  His  wholly  and 
unreservedly,  as  He  was  always  and  altogether  the  Father's.  II.  As  thus  anointed, 
WE  "  know  all  things."  This  is  not,  of  course,  omniscience,  but  full  and  complete 
knowledge  of  the  matter  in  hand,  as  opposed  to  knowledge  that  is  fragmentary  and 
partial.  The  anointing  of  Jesus,  His  being  the  Christ — what  it  is  and  what  it 
means ;  His  consecration  as  the  Holy  One ;  His  oneness  as  the  Son  with  the 
Father ;  all  that  we  know.  And  we  know  it,  not  by  catching  at  some  one  aspect  of 
the  mighty  plan — the  great  "  mystery  of  godliness,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  " — 
that  may  happen  to  suit  our  convenience,  or  to  strike  our  fancy,  but  by  a  calm, 
clear,  and  comprehensive  insight  into  all  that  it  unfolds  of  the  highest  glory  of 
God,  and  all  that  it  contemplates  of  higlipst  good  to  man.  We  look  at  this  great 
theme,  or  rather  this  great  fact,  in  all  its  bearings  ;  as  it  vindicates  the  righteous 
sovereignty  of  the  Lord  of  all,  while  it  secures  full  and  free  salvation  to  the  worst 
and  guiltiest  of  His  creatures,  if  they  will  but  own  that  sovereignty  and  submit  to 
it.  III.  The  unction  which  we  have  from  the  IIoi,y  One,  and  our  knowing  all 
things,  are  intimately  connected.    It  is  only  "  He  who  is  spiritual "  who  "  judgeth 


CHAP,  n.]  I,  JOHN.  151 

all  things,"  who  can  know  them  so  as  to  judge  them.     For  He  alone  is  in  a 
position  and  has  the  capacity  to  form  a  fair  estimate  or  judgment  of  the  relations 
among  the  things  of  God.    And  it  is  by  their  mutual  relations  that  things  are 
really  known  and  judged.     This  is  a  maxim  true  in  all  sciences,  and  not  least 
manifestly  so  in  the  science  of  divinity.     If,  in  the  science  of  astronomy  we  would 
know  all  its  things,  all  its  truths,  to  any  satisfactory  end,  theoretical  or  practical, 
we  must  get,  not  the  eye  of  a  clown  or  vulgar  stargazer,  nor  that  of  Chaldean  sage 
or  poetic  dreamer,  nor  that  of  one  to  whom  the  clear,  calm  midnight  sky  is  a 
confused   galaxy  of  bright  gems,  a  brilliant  shower  of  diamonds   shed  in  rich 
disorder  on  the  dark  brow  of  nature's  sleeping  beauty,  but  the  eye  of  Newton's 
scholar  and  Laplace's,  who  has  learned  of  them  to  calculate  planetary  magnitudes 
and  distances  and  forces,  and  to  bring  the  whole  splendid  chaos  under  the  sway  of 
the  one  simple  law  that  reigns  supreme  throughout  all  space.      So,  in  the  region  of 
what  is  spiritual  and  Divine,  the  faculty  of  seeing  things  in  their  true  relations  is 
not  elsewhere  or  otherwise  to   be  acquired   than  in  the  school  and  under  the 
teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    IV.  The  security  which  our  "having  an  unction 
FROM  THE  Holy  One,  and  knowing  all  things,"  affords,  in  trying  times,  must 
now  surely  be  seen  to  be  very  ample  and  firm.     Others  may  "  go  out  from  us  "  ;  it 
being  thus  "  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  of  us,"  and  may  become  anti- 
christs, or  the  prey  of  antichrist.     But  "  will  ye  also  go  away  ?  " — ye  who  share  the 
very  unction  and  the  very  knowledge  which  the  Holy  One  Himself  has  ?    Is  not 
this  your  preservative   against   all   error   and   apostasy?    Is  it  not   a  sufficient 
preservative  ?     {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)     The  anointing  ; — I.  What  the  anointing  is. 
n.  Where  this  anointing  is.    It  "  abideth."     Other  anointings  do  not  abide.    The 
fragrance  of  other  unguents  soon  passes  off.     But  here  is  an  anointing  which,  like 
"  the  ointment  of  the  right  hand,  which  bewrayeth  itself,"  abideth,  "  abideth  in 
you."     But  you  say  it  is  not  true ;  nothing  is  more  plain  than  that  ardent  Chris- 
tians get  cold,  and  those  who  lived  Christ  may  grow  self-willed  and  self-assertive. 
How  can  St.  John  say  that  the  unction  abideth  ?     Well,  I  suppose  he  wants  to  call 
attention  to  the  Divine  side  of  the  case,  to  show  us  that  whatever  we  may  do,  or 
whatever  we  may  be,  God  remaineth  faithful.     IH.  "  What  doth  the  anointing?  " 
He  teacheth,  and,  saith  St.  John,  He  has  every  right  to  teach,  for  "He  is  truth 
and  no  lie."    Besides,  "  He  hath  already  taught  you,"  and  what  you  have  learned 
of  Him  should  give  you  confidence  in  Him  for  what  you  may  have  yet  to  learn. 
Read  your  Bibles,  but  read  them  in  His  light ;  listen  to  your  teachers,  but  listen  to 
them  with  continual  application  to  a  higher  Teacher.     It  is  to  that  higher  Teacher 
you  owe  the  greatest  blessing  you  ever  received  in  the  world,  the  blessing  which 
made  you  a  Christian.     Eemember  to  trust  to  Him  as  Guide  and  Counsellor,  to  ask 
Him  what  to  believe  on  every  subject.    IV.  What  is  the  outcome  of  all  this  ? 
It  is,  "Ye  shall  abide  in  Him.".    {J.  B.  Figgis,  M.A.)         The  unction  from  the 
Holy  One  : — I.   "The  Holy  One."     Who  is  He?     Christ.     It  had  been  repeatedly 
ascribed  to  Him  before,  not  only  by  men,  but  by  voices  falling  from  another  world 
(see  Psa.  xvi.  10 ;  Isa.  xliii.  14,  15,  xlix.  7 ;  Luke  vii.  35  ;  Mark  x.  24 ;  Acts  iii.  14). 
And,  although  all  ransomed  spirits  are  called  God's  "  holy  ones,"  the  term  applies 
in  its  highest  truth  to  Christ  alone  ;  for  to  which  of  the  sons  of  men  could  you 
ever  point  and  say,  "Behold  the  Holy  One  of  God  !  "      But  the  evangelist  is  not 
now  speaking  merely  in  a  general  way  of  Christ,  but  of  Christ  as  our  High  Priest. 
A  priest  who  could  be  charged  with  the  slightest  infraction  of  the  law  would  have 
been  no  Saviour.     In  Him,  for  the  first  time  on  our  earth,  holiness  shone  forth  in 
its  perfect  brightness,  and  yet  in  a  shape  which  man  could  bear  to  see.     In  Christ, 
holiness  is  our  friend  ;  it  gives  our  crown,  guards  our  safety,  and  inspires  our  joy. 
We  can  give  thanks,  not  at  the  remembrance  of  love  alone,  but  at  the  remem- 
brance of  holiness,  through  the  redemptive  death  of  Him  who  is  the  Holy  One  of 
God.     II.   "  The   Unction  from  the  Holy   One."     What  does  that  expression 
mean  ?     The  Spirit  of  God  is  here  intended ;  not  as  to  His  nature,  but  as  to  His 
agency  ;  not  in  His  essential  attributes,  but  in  His  emanations.     Now  mark  three 
things.     1.  This  unction  comes  down  from  Christ  to  all  His  people.     Again  and 
again  did  He  seek  to  quicken  the  languid  attention  of  His  followers  to  the  fact 
that  this   influence  would  come  to   them   as  the  very  consequence  of   His  own 
departure  (John  xvi.  7).     Now,  remember  Christ  is  not  only  our  Priest,  He  is  our 
Head.     Combine  these  ideas,  and  you  catch  the  spirit  of  the  metaphor.     As  the 
body  of  the  priest  received  the  unction  from  the  Head,  we  have  received  an  unction 
from  the  Holy  One ;  for  we  are  members  of  His  body.  His  flesh,  and  His  bones." 
"  The  Spirit  was  given  without  measure  to  Him  "  ;  and  from  Him  it  flows  to  all 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

who  are  identified  with  His  life.     2.  This  influence  from  Christ  makes  all  His 
members  holy.     A  holy  influence  must  have  a  holy  effect,  and  this  effect  must  be 
the  true  test  of  your  character.      I  say  not  that  Chi-istians,  to  verify  their  high 
vocation,  must  all  at  once  be  perfectly  holy  men,  but   that  they  must  be  the 
recipients  of  a  holy  Influence— an  influence  that  will  show  the  traces  of  its  presence, 
and  work  effects  accordant  with  its  nature.     3.  Christ,  by  giving  this  unction  to  all 
His  people,  shows  their  essential  unity  with  Himself  and  with  each  other.     TTT. 
"Ye  know  AiL  THINGS."      This  holy  influence  has  an  enlightening   virtue.     It 
rested  upon  Christ  as   "  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of 
counsel  and  might,  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord."    It  made 
Him  of  "  quick  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."     Communicated  by  Him 
to  us,  it  must  have  similar  effects.     The  expression  used  to  declare  this  fact  startles 
us  by  its  boldness.     1.  Things  that  are  holy  are  meant.     The  emphasis  here  on  the 
word   holy  suggests   that  the   knowledge  spoken   of  must  be  knowledge  of  holy 
things.     Without  holiness  you  may  indeed  understand  Hebrew  as  well  as  Caiaphas 
did ;  Latin  as  well  as  Pilate  did ;  the  Greek  as  weU  as  that  Athenian  did  who 
charged  Paul  with  setting  forth  "  strange  gods  "  ;  the  geography  and  antiquities  of 
Palestine  as  perfectly  as  the  proudest  Pharisee  that  ever  wore  phylacteries  ;  but 
God's  book  will  be  a  sealed  book  to  you :  and,  though  you  may  have  a  grammatical 
knowledge  of  the  words  which  reveal  holy  things,  you  wiU  never  know  the  things 
themselves.     2.  Things  that   are   essential  are  meant.     Spuitual  men,  however 
mistaken  they  may  be  on  marginal  and  subsidiary  questions,  know  aU  essential 
things.    If  they  are  wrong  in  other  respects  they  wUl  not  repair  to  the  wrong  Eef  uge, 
or  plunge  in  the  wrong  Fountain,  or  foUow  the  wi'ong  Shepherd.    (C.  Stanford,  D.D.) 
The  vnction  from  the  Holy  One : — I.  This  is  a  common  Cheistian  endowment.     It  is 
to  a  body  of  Christian  disciples  that  John  is  writing ;  not  to  the  highly  gifted  among 
them,  not  even  to  the  elder  Christians  who  have  acquired  a  long  experience  and 
grown  prudent  through  a  life's  discipline,  but  to  all.   Simple  conscientiousness  is  of 
more  practical  value  than  the  readiest  ability.    A  plain  unlettered  man  will  often 
see  the  falsity  which  ensnares  men  in  their  long-drawn  reasonings.    A  child's  dis- 
cernment of  character  is  proverbial ;  the  simple  soul  is  repelled  from  a  hidden 
impurity  or  ungraciousness  that  escapes  the  subtle  observation.     "  Ye  have  an 
unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  aU  things."    A  mind  like  Christ  is  given 
to  you  in  the  very  consecration  of  yourselves  to  Him;  and  that  mind  "abideth  in 
you,"  and  "  teacheth  you  aU  things."   You  have  an  inward  and  unfailing  standard, 
which  tests  all  sayings,  aU  traditions  and  maxims,  all  the  suggestions  that  may 
come  to  you,  all  the  ways  of  the  world.     II.  What  this  Spieit  is  which  is  given 
TJS  m  ouE  consecration,  and  by  which  we  aee  enabled  to  disceen  the  teuth  of 
THINGS.    1.  It  is  the  spirit  of  the  consecration  itseU.    This  involves  God's  revelation 
to  us  of  a  Divine  service,  and  His  call  to  us  to  serve  Him ;  God's  endowment  of  us 
for  the  service  into  which  He  bids  us  enter.     It  involves  our  recognition  of  His  pur- 
pose, our  acceptance  of  His  will,  and  all  the  influence  upon  our  character  of  the 
acceptance  of  it.   Decision  of  purpose  is  the  secret  of  directness  of  judgment.  When 
you  resolved  that  you  would  foUow  Christ,  and  obey  Him  in  all  your  future,  did  you 
not  feel  at  once  a  new  power  to  discern  the  evil  and  good  of  all  things  ?  You  looked 
on  old  confusing  motives,  and  pronounced  them  base.    Doubt  cleared  itself  from 
your  vision ;  the  scales  of  selfishness  fell  from  your  eyes ;  you  felt  that  you  had 
attained  a  new  power  of  judgment.    A  truer  spirit,  a  spirit  clearer  and  more  con- 
fident, was  yours  in  your  consecration.     "  You  had  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One, 
and  you  knew  aU  things."    2.  It  is  the  spirit  of  Christ.    "  Ye  have  an  unction  from 
the  Holy  One  " ;  a  chrism  from  Christ.  Here,  then,  is  the  virtue  of  our  consecration  ; 
this  our  defence  against  all  antichrists,  this  our  power  to  discern  all  things :  the 
spirit  in  sympathy  with  Jesus,  that  feels  with  and  for  Him.     A  personal  Ufa  is  a 
surer  standard  than  all  reasonings ;  sympathy  is  at  once  responsive,  or  is  at  once 
repelled.     The  habit  of  fellowship  with  Christ ;  the  culture  of  our  sympathies,  the 
formation  of  all  our  judgments  by  His ;  the  bringing  of  every  maxim  and  oif  all 
conduct  to  the  standard  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  will  have  its  result  in  clear  directness 
of  thought  and  feeling.     It  will  give  thoroughness  and  practicalness  to  our  cha- 
racter ;  will  demand  not  only  truth  upon  the  whole,  but  truth  in  everything,  truth 
in  even  minor  matters,  truth  throughout.     3.  The  spirit  of  consecration  is  the  spirit 
of  devotedness  to  our  fellows.     Whatever  destroys  our  reverence  for  men,  whatever 
denies  their  redemption  and  restrains  our  sympathies  with  them ;  whatever  leads 
us  to  distrust  the  power  of  the  gospel  to  elevate  and  save  from  folly,  and  from 
selfishness,  and  from  sin,  any  class  of  men,  or  race  of  men,  or  any  individual  of  all 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  153 

mankind,  must  be  condemned  by  us  as  owning  the  spirit  of  antichrist.  Our  fellow- 
ship is  with  Christ's  love  and  hopefulness ;  a  spirit  devoted  like  His  to  men  is  given 
us,  and  by  this  spirit  we  discern  all  things.  [A.  Mackcnnal,  D.D.)  The  omniscience 
of  holiness — an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  : — In  some  minds  the  love  of  knowledge 
is  very  strong.  It  is  the  supreme  desire.  As  the  warrior  thirsts  for  glory,  as  the 
miser  thirsts  for  gold,  "  as  the  hart  panteth  for  the  water-brooks,"  so  do  they  long 
to  know — to  possess  truth.  Compared  with  this,  life  itself  is  cheap,  "  It  is  more 
to  be  desired  than  gold,  yea,  than  fine  gold."  He  who  really  loves  and  is  loyal  to 
the  truth  will  make  any  sacrifice  for  it.  With  scanty  income,  he  is  sometimes 
found  starving  the  body  that  he  may  feed  the  soul.  Even  to  extend  our  knowledge 
of  this  physical  globe,  what  hardships  will  not  men  encounter  I  Knowledge  is 
happiness ;  and  man  seeks  to  know.  How  deep  the  satisfaction  of  a  Columbus 
when,  after  long  tossing  on  the  treacherous  sea,  and  wearisome  expostulations  with 
mutinous  men,  he  saw  the  new  world  arise  from  the  deep  !  We  experience  some- 
thing of  this  joy  when  we  are  brought,  in  the  works  of  others,  to  new  princij)les 
and  thoughts — when  we  come  into  the  possession  of  a  great  and  true  definition  that 
casts  a  flood  of  light  upon  everything  around  us.  Elnowledge  is  power,  and 
man  seeks  to  know.  The  desire  of  power  has  led  great  kings  at  certain  times 
to  attempt  the  conquest  of  the  world,  and  the  founding  of  a  universal  empire. 
That  was  great  ambition,  but  there  is  a  greater  still ;  even  that  of  the  man 
who  aspires  to  universal  knowledge.  The  text  contains  the  astounding  state- 
ment that  true  Christians  know  all  things.  We  take  the  words  "  aU  things"  in 
their  widest  comprehension,  as  including  aU  existence  and  all  events — the  whole 
universe,  material  and  spiritual.  It  is  of  aU  these  we  understand  the  assertion  to 
be  made ;  and  it  is  admitted  that,  at  first  sight,  such  an  assertion  seems  extrava- 
gant. For  how  can  we  know  that  which  we  have  never  seen ;  and  the  greater  part 
of  the  universe  we  have  not  seen  ?  How  can  we  know  that  in  the  past  of  which 
we  have  never  heard  ?  How  can  we  know  the  future  which  does  not  yet  exist  in 
relation  to  us  ?  Here  we  must  inquire  into  the  nature  of  our  knowledge — what  it  is 
to  know.  Our  present  knowledge  is  different  in  its  character  from  God's.  God 
comprehends  all  things  fully  and  perfectly.  God  sees  truth  face  to  face.  But 
while  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  Christian  knows  aU  things  as  God  knows 
them,  it  still  remains  true  that  He  knows  all  things  in  a  sense  similar  to 
that  in  which  He  can  be  said  to  know  anything.  To  know  one  thing  fuUy  is  to 
know  all  things  fully.  Take  a  piece  of  rock.  To  know  that  fully  impUes  a  know- 
ledge of  the  history  and  formation  of  aU  rocks ;  and  that  implies  a  knowledge  of 
the  whole  structure  of  the  world,  which  again  implies  a  knowledge  of  creation  or 
the  fuU  and  perfect  knowledge  of  everything.  The  reason  why  the  full  knowledge 
of  one  thing  implies  a  full  knowledge  of  aU  things  is  that  every  object  of  knowledge 
is  more  or  less  directly  connected  with  every  other.  Nothing  in  the  universe  stands 
alone,  and  therefore  nothing  can  be  understood  alone.  The  statement  in  the  text 
is  not  more  astonishing  or  difficult  to  understand  than  another  more  common  state- 
ment, which  is  accepted  without  qualification  or  hesitation,  namely  that  the  Chris- 
tian knows  God.  God  is  infinitely  greater  than  the  universe,  and  infinitely  deeper 
in  the  significance  of  His  being ;  and  therefore  of  the  two  statements,  "  Ye  know 
all  things,"  and  "  Ye  know  God,"  the  latter  is  by  far  the  greater  and  more  wonderful 
of  the  two.  What,  then,  does  the  Bible  mean  when  it  says  the  Christian  knows 
God  ?  It  does  not  mean  that  he  knows  God  fully  or  absolutely — that  he  has 
fathomed  the  unfathomable,  or  comprehended  the  infinite  ;  for  only  God  can  thus 
know  God.  What  the  Scriptures  mean  by  knowing  God  is,  that  we  stand  in  a  just 
relation  to  Him — that  we  are  in  a  true  sense  related  personally  to  Him — our  mind 
being  truly  related  to  His  mind,  our  heart  to  His  heart,  and  our  wUl  to  His  will. 
We  are  in  a  true  relation  to  His  righteousness,  justice,  and  mercy,  and  so  of  all  the 
other  aspects  of  His  being.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  knowing  God  in  our  present 
state,  and  seems  to  be  the  character  of  aU  our  knowledge.  As  we  advance  in 
Divine  truth,  our  knowledge  will  not  change  in  this  respect.  It  will  only  increase 
in  depth  and  compass,  in  fulness  and  degree.  Further,  in  order  to  sustain  a  true 
relation  to  the  universe,  we  must  sustain  a  true  relation  to  God  ;  for,  since  there  is 
not  a  gulf  between  God  and  His  works — seeing  He  continually  sustains  an  intimate 
and  living  relation  to  them— to  be  justly  related  to  Him  is  to  sustain  a  similar 
relation  to  them  ;  and  to  know  Him  is  to  know  them.  At  the  Fall  man  lost  both 
the  knowledge  of  God  and  the  true  meaning  of  the  world.  When  the  highest  light 
went  out  all  the  lower  lights  were  extinguished.  Now  Jesus  Christ  came  to  restore 
us  to  such  a  righteous  relation  to  God,  and  to  take  that  enmity  and  unbelief  out  of 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  heart  which  distorts  for  us  the  whole  character  of  God.  He  says,  "  I  thank 
Thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from 
the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes ;  even  so.  Father,  for  so 
it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight."  This  agrees  with  what  St.  Paul  says,  that  ungodly 
men  are  "  ever  learning,  and  yet  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  " 
— a  remarkable  statement,  distinguishing,  as  it  does,  between  learning  and  know- 
ledge. To  learn  is  to  collect  information  merely.  To  know  is  to  understand  the 
nature  and  relationships  of  things.  Men  may  increase  in  knowledge  as  to  the  letter 
of  God's  word,  as  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  of  old  did — they  may  have  a  "form  of 
knowledge,  and  of  truth  in  the  law  " ;  but  if  they  have  not  the  light  of  life,  which 
is  the  key  to  all  learning,  in  their  own  souls,  they  are  still  walking  in  darkness,  and 
know  not  whither  they  are  going.  All  such  are  enlarging  their  information,  but 
not  extending  their  true  understanding.  They  are  building  up  pyi'amids  of  learning 
•which  may  be  only  pyramids  of  falsehood.  They  are  "  ever  learning,  and  never 
able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  But  "  what  God  has  hid  from  the 
wise  and  prudent  He  has  revealed  unto  babes."  Jesus  makes  this  great  declaration 
— "  No  man  knoweth  the  Father  but  through  the  Son  "  ;  and  hence  for  every  true 
idea  of  God  we  possess,  we  are  indebted  to  Christ  Jesus.  He  said  unto  Philip,  "He 
that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Therefore,  when  we  know  Jesus  Christ, 
we  know  God,  and  not  tiU  then.  But  in  order  to  know  Christ,  we  must  truly  see 
Him,  and  to  see  Him  we  must  sustain  a  right  relation  to  Him.  How  then  are  we 
brought  into  a  right  relation  to  the  Son  of  God  ?  It  is  by  His  own  anointing.  "  Ye 
have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  The  Holy  One  from  whom  the  unction 
Cometh  is  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  unction  itself — which  is  not  the  act  of  anointing, 
but  the  oil  or  ointment  used  in  anointing — is  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
heart.  Let  us  gather  out  of  this  subject  a  few  general  principles  or  inferences.  First, 
with  regard  to  the  nature  of  knowledge ;  and  second,  with  regard  to  the  line  of 
duty.  I.  With  regard  to  the  nature  of  knowledge.  Absolute  knowledge  is  the 
comprehension  of  existence.  It  is  the  circle  which  embraces  all  things.  Relative 
knowledge  consists  in  sustaining  the  right  point  of  view,  which  is  to  stand  in  the 
centre  of  the  circle.  God  absolutely  comprehends  aU  things.  Man  understands  all 
things,  when  he  stands  in  the  absolute  centre — when  he  is  in  God  and  God  in  him. 
Knowledge  implies  the  three  ultimate  ideas  of  the  universe — being,  existence,  and 
thought.  Being  is  that  which  lies  within  or  beneath — the  invisible  ground  of 
existence.  It  is  the  spiritual  material,  or  uncreated  substance  from  which  thought 
proceeds,  and  out  of  which  existence  stands.  Existence  is  that  which  stands  out, 
as  the  etymology  of  the  word  shows.  It  stands  out  of  being,  which  is  its  ground, 
and  from  which  it  is  created  or  developed  by  thought.  Being,  in  itself  considered, 
is  the  absolute  nothing  :  that  is,  being,  in  itself,  cannot  be  thought.  Thought  is  the 
process  or  energising  power  by  which  being  comes  forth  from  itself  into  existence. 
It  is  the  method  by  which  being,  which  is  essentially  invisible,  translates  itself  into 
existence,  which  is  essentially  visible.  A  thing  is  that  which  can  be  thought.  "  All 
things,"  is  aU  that  can  be  thought.  It  is  the  believer's  destiny,  then,  in  the  light  of 
God,  to  think  out  the  universe.  "  To  know  even  as  He  is  known  ! "  II.  With 
regard  to  duty.  1.  Notice,  here,  the  identity  of  knowledge  and  holiness.  This  is 
Bet  before  us  in  other  Scriptures  besides  the  text  (Prov.  xxviii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  15 ; 
1  John  ii.  27;  iii.  2,  3  ;  Matt.  v.  8).  Knowledge  being  the  perfect  reflection  in  the 
mind  of  man  of  the  thought  of  God,  it  is  evident  that  the  mind  must  be  as  a  per- 
fectly polished  mirror,  or  a  perfectly  pure  lake,  in  order  to  receive  and  give  the 
perfect  image.  2.  Notice,  further,  the  identity  of  thought  and  sanctification.  The 
process  of  sanctification  is  the  same  as  that  of  thought.  It  is  first  negative,  or  a 
separation.  It  is  a  coming  out  of  Egypt,  and  a  cleansing  "  from  all  filthiness  of 
the  flesh  and  spirit."  But  it  is  also  positive,  or  a  union — a  going  into  the  Holy 
Land.  The  drawing  away  from  sin  implies  a  drawing  nearer  to  God.  3.  Notice, 
again,  the  identity  of  ignorance  and  sin.  They  are  one  in  being  confusion.  Ignor- 
ance is  blindness  to  the  distinctions  of  things,  or  the  confounding  of  what  ought  to 
be  clearly  separated  in  thought.  Sin  is  the  same  in  act  or  life.  It  is  the  confound- 
ing of  what  ought  to  be  kept  apart.  It  thus  produces  at  once  a  false  separation, 
and  a  false  union.  Now,  the  Word  of  God,  which  is  the  key  to  the  whole  universe, 
and  the  basis  of  all  science,  has  been  given  to  affect  at  once  the  thought  and  life  of 
man — to  make  him  at  once  think  correctly  and  live  purely.  These  cannot  be 
eeparated.  A  man  thinks  correctly  just  to  the  extent  of  his  being  holy.  {F.  Ferguson, 
D.D.)  Knoirlcdjic  hy  Divine  unction : — I.  Jesus  Chuist  is  the  Holy  One  from 
WHOM  THE  UNCTION  COMES.     It  is  Very  remarkable  that  on  several  occasions,  in  His 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  155 

life  as  spent  among  men,  He  seemed  to  be  the  sinful  one.  He  was  made  in  the 
likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  but  it  was  in  the  likeness  only.  1.  This  truth  appears,  first, 
when  He  was  circumcised.  2.  When  He  was  presented  in  the  temple,  the  Virgin 
Mary  brought  Him  in  her  arms,  and  Joseph  attended  with  the  two  turtle  doves. 
This  ceremony  was  for  the  sinful,  who  had  need  of  cleansing,  and  was  according 
to  the  law  the  means  of  their  purification.  3.  When  He  came  to  be  baptized  of 
John  in  the  Jordan,  John  said,  "  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  Thee,  and  comest 
Thou  to  me  ?  "  Jesus  said,  "  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now ;  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to 
fulfil  all  righteousness."  4.  He  appeared  in  this  likeness,  when  He  was  about  to 
be  crucified ;  when  Barabbas,  a  man  who  had  committed  murder,  and  was  guilty  of 
insurrection  in  the  city,  was  chosen  to  be  set  at  liberty,  in  preference  to  Christ.  Christ 
is  the  Holy  One.  See  what  testimony  was  borne  to  Him.  The  devils  said,  "  We 
know  Thee  who  Thou  art,  the  Holy  One  of  God."  The  centurion  said,  "  Truly 
this  was  the  Son  of  God."  Christ  was  carried  to  the  grave  as  the  Holy  One.  And 
because  He  was  the  Holy  One  He  saw  no  corruption.  As  the  Holy  One  He  rose 
from  the  dead,  and  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power.  H.  The  unction 
IS  THE  Holy  Ghost.  I  suppose  the  reference  to  be  to  the  sacred  oil  of  anointing 
which  was  prepared  in  a  special  manner  by  God's  appointment.  In  connection  with 
this  on  there  was  another  special  and  peculiar  perfume  for  the  altar  of  incense. 
Here,  we  suppose,  is  a  new  type  of  Christ  and  His  mediation.  That  pure  incense, 
burnt  before  God,  represented  Christ's  intercession  for  His  Church,  and  the  com- 
placency with  which  it  is  regarded  by  the  Father.  Before  the  Holy  One  gives  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  this  particular  form  other  works  are  effected  by  Him.  There  must 
be  something  preparatory  to  His  communications.  You  must  be  washed.  Then 
you  must  be  sprinkled  with  blood :  "  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remis- 
sion." By  water  and  blood  we  are  first  cleansed ;  then  comes  the  unction.  1.  It 
marks  out  and  defines  the  objects  of  Divine  choice.  The  Church  is  a  chosen  gene- 
ration, a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people ;  so  every  member  is  elect  according  to 
the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father.  As  surely  as  you  receive  the  unction,  and 
are  touched  by  the  Divine  power,  you  are  a  child  of  God,  marked  out  for  His  own 
in  Christ  Jesus.  You  belong  to  the  society  and  fellowship  of  the  anointed  ones. 
2.  The  unction  denotes  separation  from  the  common  mass  and  multitude.  So 
Aaron  and  his  sons  were  separated  from  all  the  people  of  Israel.  And  through  this 
unction  we  are  separated — sanctified  by  Christ — called  out  of  the  world.  3.  The 
third  thing  denoted  by  this  unction  is  qualification  for  office.  We  are  revived  and 
illumined  by  the  unction.  The  unction  qualifies  for  holy  exploits  and  for  elevated 
duty.  4.  The  comparison  denotes  the  consummation  of  heavenly  joy.  Every 
morning,  as  you  have  need,  you  are  to  seek  fresh  oil ;  fresh,  like  the  virgin  beams 
of  the  morning  light ;  fresh  oU,  like  the  flowers  of  the  early  spring ;  fresh  oil,  like 
the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  newly  spilt,  and  presented  before  God  upon  the  altar. 
Fresh  influence,  help,  and  succour,  is  to  be  sought  to  the  last  hour  of  our  life  from 
the  Holy  One  of  God.  5.  We  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  to  establish  and  to  preserve 
us.  Of  some  the  Apostle  John  affirms,  "  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not 
of  us."  In  contrast  to  this,  where  the  unction  comes,  it  is  abiding.  6.  Finally,  the 
unction  comes  to  make  you  useful.  It  will  be  like  an  odour  that  is  not  to  be  hidden : 
it  fills  all  the  room.  You  will  be  a  prophet  to  teach,  shedding  light  by  your  example. 
You  will  be  a  priest,  to  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise.  You  will  be  a  king,  having  rule 
over  your  own  spirit.  III.  As  we  have  the  unction  from  the  Holt  One,  we  know 
ALL  THINGS.  There  is  a  self-evidencing  power  in  truth  by  which  we  know  aU  these 
blessed  subjects  of  Divine  revelation.  We  know  that  we  are  of  God  by  His  Spirit 
which  is  in  us.  If  I  feel  in  my  mind  the  infiuence  of  Christ,  producing  penitence 
and  love,  and  desires  after  holiness  and  heaven,  I  may  say,  It  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
(Jas.  Straiten.)  An  unction  from  the  Holy  One : — 1.  First,  it  is  observable  that 
the  text  contains  an  affirmation  represented  to  be  peculiarly  descriptive  of  genuine 
believers.  2.  It  is  more  important,  however,  to  observe  that  the  text  accounts  for 
this  peculiarity  of  genuine  believers,  and  teaches  us  both  what  it  is  and  whence  it 
arises.  "But  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  3.  We  now  proceed  to 
that  which  is  most  prominent  in  the  text,  the  result  of  the  "  unction  of  the  Holy 
One  "  in  the  experience  and  life  of  the  believer—"  Ye  know  all  things."  It  is  with 
great  appropriateness  this  effect  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  is  introduced  here. 
It  is  as  the  best  and  only  safeguard  against  error  and  those  who  seek  to  promote  it. 
The  believer  is  so  under  the  infiuence  of  the  Spirit,  that  error  does  not  find  ready 
entrance  to  his  mind.  We  are  all  acquainted  with  the  use  and  exercise  of  instinct 
in  the  lower  creation.  They  are  placed  in  a  luxuriant  herbage,  part  of  which  would 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

be  to  them  poison  and  death,  and  other  portions  nutritious  and  necessary  food.  They 
are  not  much  in  danger  of  mistaking  the  one  for  the  other.  However  closely  they 
may  resemble  one  another,  they  can  tell  which  they  are  to  use  and  which  they  are 
to  shun.  Men,  with  all  their  sagacity,  may  err,  but  the  untaught  quadruped  seldom 
hesitates  or  goes  astray.  His  Creator  has  taught  him,  and  in  this  department  of 
His  works  he  knows  all  things  that  he  needs  to  know.  If  we  go  to  the  winged 
creation,  they  are  instructed,  not  merely  with  what  they  are  to  regale  themselves, 
but  they  know  to  perfection  how  to  protect  themselves  and  their  offspring  from  the 
inclement  season.  Of  all  these  creatures  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it  may  be  truly 
said,  "  they  know  all  things."  There  is,  however,  another  and  a  higher  illustration 
to  be  found  among  men  themselves.  As  there  is  instinct  in  the  inferior  creation, 
there  is  what  may  be  called  taste  in  the  intellectual  world.  It  is  very  diversified  in 
different  persons.  Some  have  a  powerful  propensity  for  certain  objects  or  engage- 
ments which  are  just  as  much  disrelished  by  others.  Take,  for  example,  the  fine 
arts,  or  any  of  the  sciences.  One  is  enamoured  with  them  from  his  youth,  and 
another  is  indifferent  to  them,  while  neither  can  tell  why  it  is  so.  But  mark  the 
readiness  with  which  the  former  becomes  a  proficient  in  that  which  pleases  him, 
and  compare  it  with  the  difficulty  which  the  latter  finds  it  impossible  to  overcome. 
The  one  readily  knows  all  things  appertaining  to  his  favourite  study,  and  the  other 
is  only  confounded  and  disheartened  by  all  his  attempts.  Thus  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  it  may  be  said  of  the  natural  taste  with  which  God  is  pleased  to  endow  us,  it 
readily  knows  all  things  appertaining  to  the  object  of  its  interest  and  delight.  There 
is  stUl  another  illustration  of  the  same  propensity  of  the  human  mind.  Observe  the 
effect  of  experience.  In  the  various  forms  of  handicraft  or  other  engagements, 
whether  mental  or  manual,  the  power  of  habit  is  remarkable.  Whatever  relates  to 
the  accustomed  exercise  is  perceived  and  understood  at  once.  Practice,  it  is  said, 
makes  perfect.  Now  let  these  illustrations  be  applied  to  the  subject  under  con- 
sideration. The  Holy  Spirit  visits  the  soul  with  His  "  unction."  By  His  influence 
the  mind  is  enlightened  to  apprehend  the  truth,  the  heart  is  sanctified  through  the 
belief  of  it,  and  the  life  is  spent  under  the  power  of  it.  What  is  the  consequence  ? 
The  soul  participates  in  the  benefits  of  its  own  decided  tastes  and  cherished  habits. 
A  sanctified  instinct  may  be  said  to  be  formed  in  it  by  which  it  chooses  what  is  good 
and  refuses  the  evil.  It  does  not  need  in  every  case  to  pause,  and  reason,  and  con- 
sider. Without  any  such  process,  it  feels  instinctively  what  is  the  course  to  be 
either  pursued  or  shunned.  This  heavenly  taste  is  usually  the  best  casuist.  It  is 
the  product  of  an  enlightened  conscience.  And  the  expression  is  not  too  strong 
when  it  is  said  of  those  who  yield  themselves  to  its  habitual  influence,  "  Ye  have 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things."  {Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
Unction  from  the  Holy  One : — I.  The  unction  is  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
11.  That  unction  is  promised  to  evert  believer  (John  iii.  5,  6  ;  Acts  ii.  38;  viii. 
15 ;  xix.  2 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22 ;  v.  5 ;  Eph.  i.  13,  14 ;  iv.  30  ;  also  Eom.  viii.  15 ;  1  Cor. 
ii.  12  ;  xii.  13  ;  Gal.  iii.  2,  3,  &c.).  HI.  It  is  imparted  to  us  by  various  channels. 
1.  Baptism  is  a  channel  whereby  the  "unction"  is  conveyed  (John  iii.  5;  Acts  ii. 
38 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  13  ;  Tit.  iii.  5,  6).  2.  Confirmation  is  a  means  of  fresh  and  fuller 
unction  (Acts  viii.  17,  18 ;  xix.  6,  by  comparison  with  1  Tim.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  i.  6). 
3.  The  holy  communion  renews  this  unction.  4.  The  ministry  of  the  Word  imparis 
this  unction  (Gal.  iii.  2 ;  Acts  x.  44 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4,  13 ;  iii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  3,  6,  8,  9). 
5.  None  of  these  means  are  efiicacious  apart  from  prayer  (Acts  ii.  42  ;  iv.  29  ;  vi.  4 ; 
ix.  16  ;  1  Cor.  x.  16 ;  Eph.  vi.  18,  19  ;  Col.  iv.  3,  4 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  1).  IV.  The  gift 
18  INWARD,  AND  NOT  OUTWARD.  1.  It  is  Hot  outward.  2.  The  outward  is  not  altogether 
excluded.  3.  The  decision  comes  from  within.  The  ultimate  court  of  appeal  for 
each  one  of  us  is  his  own  conscience.  V.  The  unction  consecrates  us  to  be — 
1.  Prophets.  2.  Priests.  3.  Kings  (Kev.  v.  10  ;  xx.  6 ;  xxii.  5).  VI.  The  ointment 
IS  FRAGRANT  (Exod.  XXX.  22-33).  1.  With  the  fragrance  of  sacrifice  to  God  (2  Cor. 
ii.  15,  16;  Phil.  iv.  18).     2.  With  the  fragrance  of  a  holy  life.     (J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.) 

Vers.  21-24.  I  have  not  written  unto  you  because  ye  know  not  the  truth,  but 
because  ye  know  it. — Knowledge  favourable  to  further  teaching : — I.  Why  the 
APOSTLE  HAD  WRITTEN  (vcr.  21).  It  does  not  follow  that  he  would  not  have  written 
to  those  who  were  either  ignorant  of  the  truth  or  opposed  to  it.  To  every  sinner  he 
would  address  the  gospel  of  salvation,  and  entreat  him  to  become  a  possessor  of  its 
benefits.  Indeed,  he  did  so  in  other  writings.  On  the  present  occasion,  however, 
he  wrote  to  them  that  knew  the  truth.  He  had  special  reasons  for  writing  to  them 
particularly.    No  doubt  one  reason  was  the  extreme  jealousy  of  the  apostle  lest  any 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  157 

of  those  who  knew  the  truth  should  act  inconsistently  with  it.  In  another  epistle 
he  discovers  the  spirit  that  animated  him  in  this  respect  (2  John  4.)  How  it  must 
have  distressed  him  to  have  found  some  not  walking  in  the  truth.  He  therefore 
vnrote  to  instruct,  and  warn,  and  encourage  them  that  they  might  walk  worthy  of 
their  high  vocation.  Nor  can  it  be  supposed  this  was  not  needed.  In  the  most 
enlightened  there  is  still  much  ignorance.  In  the  most  determined  fliere  is  still 
irresolution.  In  the  most  devoted  there  is  still  deficiency.  But  his  great  reason 
appears  'to  have  been  his  hope  of  success  in  writing  to  such.  He  declared  the 
truth  to  them,  encouraged  by  the  belief  that  there  would  be  found  in  them  a  readi- 
ness of  mind  to  receive  it.  In  this  assumption  of  the  apostle  there  is  a  practical 
lesson  of  great  value.  We  are  taught  that  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  truth 
is  chiefly  dependent  on  the  disposition  of  the  heart  towards  it.  It  is  the 
perversity  of  the  wiU  that  often  blinds  the  understanding.  Let  that  be  rightly 
disposed,  and  we  are  apt  to  see  clearly.  11.  What,  then,  did  he  write  ? 
The  reply  is  in  the  next  two  verses.  It  is  observable  that,  in  treating  of 
truth  and  error,  the  whole  subject  of  the  apostle  is  concerning  Jesus  Christ. 
He  assumes  that  if  our  views  of  Him  are  correct,  so  will  be  our  apprehension 
of  the  whole  circle  of  truth.  He  therefore  goes  largely  into  the  subject.  He 
presents  the  Saviour  in  various  views  of  supreme  importance,  in  which  it  is  vital  to 
true  godliness  that  we  shall  perceive  the  truth  and  not  fall  into  error.  1.  The 
first  is  adverted  to  in  the  opening  of  verse  22.  "  Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denieth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  "  No  doubt  the  general  sentiment  here  is  the  rejection  of 
the  claims  of  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  Messiah  promised  in  the  scriptures  of  the  Old 
Testament.  This  was  the  sin  of  the  Jewish  nation.  He  was  the  light,  but  they 
could  not  see  it,  because  their  eyes  were  blinded.  This  view,  however,  does  not 
express  the  full  doctrine  of  the  apostle.  To  receive  or  reject  Jesus  as  the  Christ 
has  respect  to  all  His  offices,  and  consequently  to  all  the  blessings  which  we  may 
obtain  or  forfeit  by  embracing  or  refusing  Him  in  them.  2.  In  the  same  verse  the 
apostle  gives  another  description,  and  says,  "  He  is  antichrist  that  denies  the 
Pather  and  the  Son."  This  caimot  mean  a  denial  of  the  existence  of  the  Father 
and  the  Son  as  two  distinct  beings,  the  one  dwelling  in  heaven,  and  the  other  upon 
the  earth.  The  reference  is  manifestly  to  some  union  between  them  which  some 
might  be  disposed  or  tempted  to  deny.  It  is  that  in  which  Christ  is  called  God's 
"  own  Son,"  His  "  only-begotten  and  well-beloved  Son."  In  this  relation  the  Son 
is  the  equal  of  the  Father.  Let  us  give  Him  the  glory  that  is  due  by  hearkening  to  His 
invitation,  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth  ;  for  I  am  God, 
and  beside  Me  there  is  no  Saviour."  3.  The  apostle  gives  one  other  view  of  anti- 
christ in  verse  23,  "  Whosoever  denieth  the  Son,"  &c.  There  are  two  deeply 
important  sentiments  in  these  words,  which  can  only  be  noticed.  The  one  is  that 
no  one  can  have  just  views  of  God  unless  He  is  known  as  He  is  revealed  in  the  Son 
(Matt.  xi.  27).  The  other  sentiment  is  the  result  of  the  first.  He  only  who  knows 
God  in  His  Son  can  have  fellowship  with  Him.  HI.  This  wiU  more  fuUy  appear 
while  we  notice  the  object  of  the  apostle  ik  writing  as  he  had  done.  It  is 
expressed  in  the  24th  verse.  The  three  terms,  "  abide,"  "  remain,"  "  continue," 
are  the  same  in  the  original.  The  repetition  is  sufficient  to  show  the  extreme 
importance  attached  to  the  thought  by  the  apostle.  What,  then,  is  it?  It  is 
suggested  by  a  phrase  which  he  uses  again  and  again  throughout  the  epistle,  *'The 
truth  is  not  in  us."  In  order  that  the  truth  may  have  its  due  effect,  it  must  be 
in  us,  not  as  a  speculation  in  the  head,  but  a  mighty  practical  principle  in  the 
heart.  It  must  be  in  us  as  food  is  in  the  man  whom  it  nourishes.  But  it  is  not 
merely  the  truth,  as  a  system,  that  must  thus  dwell  in  us.  It  is  as  the  casket  that 
contains  the  jewel ;  and  that  jewel  is  Christ.  {Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  guileless 
spirit,  amid  antichristian  denial  of  the  Son,  acknowledging  the  Son  so  as  to  have  the 
Father  also : — I.  How  is  a  denial  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  equivalent  to  a 
DENIAL  op  the  Son  ?  1.  The  official  designation,  Christ,  or  Messiah,  or  Anointed, 
marks  not  only  a  certain  relation  to  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  but  also  and  still  more  a 
certain  relation  to  God,  whose  Christ  He  is.  2.  As  the  Son  He  stands  in  a  distinct 
and  definite  relation  to  the  Father.  He  must  be  owned  in  that  relation  if  He  is  to 
be  owned  at  all ;  otherwise  He  is  to  aU  intents  and  purposes  denied.  11.  How  is  it 
THAT  TO  DENT  THE  SoN  IS  TO  DENT  THE  Fatheb,  SO  that  "  whosocver  dcuieth  the  Son 
the  same  hath  not  the  Father ;  but  he  tSiat  acknowledgeth  the  Son  hath  the  Father 
also  "  ?  1.  In  the  exercise  of  His  absolute  sovereignty  God  is  entitled  to  say  upon 
■what  terms  and  in  what  way  any  of  His  creatures  shall  have  Him,  that  is,  aa 
theirs ;  have  Him  so  as  to  have  an  interest  in  Him,  and  a  bond  of  union  with  Him. 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

He  may  set  forth  any  one  He  pleases,  and  say,  If  you  deny  Him  you  cannot  have 
Me.  in  this  case,  however.  He  sets  forth  His  Son,  and  therefore  the  appointment 
must  be  allowed  to  be  in  the  highest  degree  reasonable  and  fair.  The  disowning  of 
the  Son  cannot  but  be  an  offence  to  the  Father  ;  deeply  wounding  and  grieving  His 
heart.  2.  "  But  he  that  acknowledgeth  the  Son  hath  the  Father  also."  He  hath 
the  Father  ;  how  surely,  how  fully,  may  partly  appear,  if  we  consider,  not  only 
what  Jesus  is  to  us,  as  our  anointed  Saviour,  but  also  what  He  is  to  the  Father  as 
His  beloved  Son.  All  through  His  humiliation,  how  has  He  the  Father  ?  The 
Father's  love  He  has ;  His  love  of  boundless  complacency,  approval,  delight.  He 
has  the  Father's  gracious  presence  with  Him  always.  So  He,  as  the  Son,  had  the 
Father  when  He  was  as  you  are.  So  he  would  have  you,  acknowledging  Him,  to 
have  the  Father  also.  He  shows  you  what  it  is  to  have  the  Father  in  the  state  in 
which  you  now  are ;  amid  the  trials  of  earth,  the  enmity  of  the  world,  the  very 
pains  of  hell.  He  shows  you  how  even  here  you  can  have  the  Father  as,  in  a  work 
and  warfare  infinitely  harder  than  yours,  He  had  the  Father ;  how  you,  in  all  your 
trial  and  tribulation,  can  rest  in  the  consciousness  of  the  Father's  favour ;  and 
rejoice  in  the  doing  of  the  Father's  will ;  and  resign  yourself  contentedly  to  the 
Father's  disposal.  [R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Wlio  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denietli 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ? — Deniers  of  Christ: — 1.  Those  who  deny  His  eternal 
existence  and  Godhead,  and  the  union  of  the  Divine  and  human  natures  in 
His  one  person.  2.  Those  who  deny  the  reaMty  of  His  human  nature.  3.  Those 
who  deny  Him  as  Priest,  and  reject  as  irrational  His  expiatory  sacrifice.  4.  Those 
who  deny  Him  as  King  and  Judge,  who  scoff  at  His  personal  advent  and  reign  on 
earth  (2  Pet.  iii.),  or  who  ridicule  His  solemn  warnings  as  to  the  punishment  of  the 
wicked.  (J.  T.  Demarest,  D.D.)  Antichrist : — We  have  here  two  subjects  of 
thought.  I.  The  greatest  Beings  in  the  universe.  1.  The  "  Father."  Who  is  He? 
The  cause,  the  means,  the  end  of  all  things  in  the  universe  but  sin.  2.  The 
"  Son."  Who  is  the  Son  ?  His  express  Image,  His  Divine  Equal,  the  one  grand 
object  of  His  love.  Before  these  two  Beings,  all  systems,  all  hierarchies,  all 
potentates,  kingdoms,  principalities,  are  less  than  a  spark  to  the  sun,  a  drop  to  the 
ocean.  Another  subject  of  thought  is — II.  The  greatest  cniiiE  in  the  universe. 
What  is  it?  1.  Practical  Anti-theism.  "  Denieth  the  Father."  Millions  confess 
the  Father,  who  practically  deny  Him.  2.  Practical  anti-Christism.  "  Who  is  a 
liar  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  "  Practically,  to  deny  Christ  as 
the  true  Messiah,  to  live  as  if  He  never  existed,  is  anti-theism  in  another  form. 
This  is  the  crime  of  crimes.  Living  as  if  no  God  the  Father,  no  Christ  the  Son 
ever  existed.  Conclusion.  1.  Antichrist  is  confined  to  no  one  Church.  2.  Anti- 
christ embraces  aU  sin.  Every  man  that  does  not  love  the  Father  supremely,  and 
accept  the  Son  lovingly  and  loyally,  is  Antichrist.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Son 
and  the  Father  : — These  words  strike  at  the  root  of  a  prevailing  error.  They  warn 
us  of  the  peril  which  we  run  by  disparaging  any  of  the  central  truths  of  the 
Christian  Gospel — the  loss  which  we  incur  if  we  surrender  them.  Deny  that  Christ 
is  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  and  we  lose  hold  of  God  Himself  as  our  Father.  Before 
looking  at  this  startling  sentence  a  little  more  closely,  it  is  worth  while  to  consider 
the  fact  that  only  where  the  Divine  Sonship  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  been 
beUeved,  have  men  thought  of  God  with  the  joy  and  trust  of  children.  We  may 
dismiss  the  great  pagan  religions.  But  take  the  two  great  monotheistic  religions^ 
Judaism  and  Mohammedanism — and  compare  them  with  the  Christian  faith. 
Judaism,  of  course,  knew  nothing  of  the  incarnation.  There  are  certain  elements 
in  the  Jewish  faith  which,  as  we  see,  prepared  the  life  of  the  race  for  this  consum- 
mate glory ;  but  that  God  could  ever  actually  become  man  could  hardly,  even  in 
moments  of  clearest  vision,  have  been  made  real  to  Jewish  prophets  or  saints.  And 
hence,  wonderful  and  varied  as  is  the  rehgious  life  expressed  in  the  Psalms  and 
prophecies,  it  is  not  a  religious  life  which  has  its  roots  in  the  belief  that  God  is 
in  any  true  and  deep  sense  the  Father  of  men.  Take  Mohammedanism;  this 
great  faith  which  still  exerts  authority  over  a  hundred  or  a  hundred  and  fifty 
millions  of  men,  and  which  still  appears  to  have  the  power  to  inspire  that  heroio 
courage  which  a  thousand  years  ago  made  the  Saracens  masters  of  some  of  the 
fairest  regions  of  Europe,  Africa,  and  Asia — Mohammedanism  denies  the  Incar- 
nation, and  therefore  denies  the  eternal  Sonship  of  Christ,  and  affirms  the  perfect 
simplicity  of  the  Divine  nature.  As  I  have  said,  it  is  a  great  faith.  It  exalts  the 
majesty  of  God  ;  God  is  supreme ;  His  will  is  irresistible ;  neither  earth  nor  hell 
can  stay  His  hand.  The  God  of  Mohammedanism  is  a  God  to  fear;  a  God  to 
obey  ;  a  God  to  live  for ;  a  God  to  die  for  ;  but  He  is  not  a  Father ;  and  the  devout 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  JOHN.  159 

Mohammedan  is  a  servant  of  God — a  slave,  not  a  child.  And  in  the  history  of  the 
Christian  Church  I  find  that  wherever  faith  in  the  Divine  Sonship  of  Christ 
declines,  there  soon  declines  with  it,  as  a  rule,  the  joy  and  exultation  that  come 
from  the  vision  of  the  infinite  love  of  God,  and  from  the  consciousness  of  our  own 
kinship  with  Him.  A  flower  severed  from  its  root  will  retain  its  colour  and  its 
perfume  for  a  time  ;  but  it  must  perish  sooner  or  later.  A  real  faith  in  the  Divine 
Fatherhood  may  survive  for  a  time  after  faith  in  the  Divine  Sonship  of  Christ  has 
died ;  but  sooner  or  later,  whosoever  denieth  the  Son,  discovers  that  in  losing  the 
Son  he  has  lost  the  Father  also.  We  may  find  fresh  light  on  this  subject  if  we  look 
at  the  words  which  immediately  precede  the  text — words  which  carry  us  back  to 
speculations  about  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  have  long  vanished.  Among  the 
earliest  forms  of  heresy  was  one  which  maintained  that  Jesus — Jesus,  the  son  of 
Mary — was  a  man  and  nothing  more  ;  but  that  before  His  public  ministry  began,  a 
great  and  mighty  emanation  from  the  Eternal  descended  upon  Him.  This 
emanation  was  called  "  The  Christ."  It  was  in  the  power  of  the  Divine  Christ, 
according  to  this  theory,  that  Jesus  did  all  His  wonderful  works ;  and  it  was  the 
illumination  of  the  Divine  Christ  that  enabled  Him  to  speak  all  His  wonderful 
words.  "The  Christ  "  took  possession  of  Jesus  when  Jesus  had  reached  manhood; 
but  Jesus  Himself,  according  to  this  doctrine,  was  not  Divine.  "Who  is  the  liar?  " 
asks  John,  "  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  " — that  is  who,  being 
asked  to  confess  it,  refuses.  John  meant  by  a  liar  a  man  whose  whole  conception 
of  God,  and  the  world,  and  the  human  race  was  false  ;  whose  whole  theory  of  life 
therefore  rested  on  a  false  foundation,  was  rooted  in  falsehood.  It  was  not  merely 
the  man's  words  that  were  untrue  to  his  thought,  but  his  thought  was  untrue  to  the 
fact,  did  not  correspond  to  the  reality  of  things.  The  falsehood  was  a  grave  one. 
It  did  not  touch  the  mere  details  of  the  order  of  the  world,  but  the  fundamental 
relations  of  man  and  of  the  whole  world  to  God.  The  heresy  which  denied  that 
Jesus  was  the  Christ  was  therefore  fatal  to  all  truth.  The  ancient  Gnostic  heresy 
has  passed  away,  but  the  false  conception  of  God  and  the  world,  which  was  the 
root  of  it,  still  survives.  The  distance  between  the  Eternal  and  man  seems  so 
immense  that  it  seems  impossible  that  the  Eternal  Son  of  God  ever  became  man, 
and  that  He  remains  man.  In  other  words,  human  unbelief  severs  the  human  from 
the  Divine.  But  when  once  we  recognise  in  Christ  the  Divine  glory,  we  see  that 
God,  instead  of  being  remote  from  us,  is  near,  that  the  great  glories  of  the  Divine 
nature  are  not  omnipotence  and  omniscience,  but  righteousness,  love,  pity,  grace. 
These  glories  we  may  share  with  the  Eternal.  In  our  own  moral  freedom  we 
discover  that  which  corresponds  to  the  Divine  sovereignty  over  nature  ;  in  our 
moral  perfection  that  which  may  be  the  expression  of  the  ethical  Ufe  of  God.  We 
listen  to  Christ,  we  watch  Him,  we  discover  that  He  is  God,  and  yet  Son  of  God. 
He  was  eternally  with  the  Father  ;  He  has  come  to  share  the  conditions  of  our 
earthly  life.  This  is  a  new  discovery  concerning  God  Himself,  and  not  merely 
concerning  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  discovery  that  God  has  always  been  the 
Father ;  that  the  Eternal  Son,  sharing  His  life,  sharing  His  glory,  is  eteriyilly  one 
with  Him,  and  yet  eternally  separate  from  Him,  and  has  eternally  rejoiced  in  His 
love.  This  Eternal  Son  has  shared  our  life  that  we  may  share  His  life,  and  might 
be  really  and  truly  sons  of  God.  For  this  we  were  made,  and  only  as  this  is 
achieved  in  us  do  we  fulfil  the  thought  and  purpose  of  God.  And  now,  dismissing 
these  high  discussions,  and  returning  to  the  practical  aspects  of  this  subject,  let  me 
say  something  to  those  of  you  who,  while  you  speak  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood, 
are  very  conscious,  when  you  come  to  think  of  it,  and  to  deal  with  yourselves 
fairly,  that  it  gives  you  Uttle  peace,  little  courage,  little  joy,  little  power ;  that  it  is 
no  great  restraint  on  sin,  no  powerful  support  to  righteousness ;  that  it  is  a  thing 
to  argue  about  rather  than  to  Uve  upon.  You  do  not  exactly  deny — but  the  Sonship 
of  Christ,  His  eternal  Sonship,  is  not  real  to  you  ;  the  wonder  and  the  glory  of  it  do 
not  possess  and  awe  you.  Is  that  the  reason  you  have  never  entered  fully  into  the 
consciousness  of  sonship  ?  Try  to  dwell  on  the  great  fact  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
Chi-ist,  the  eternal  Word,  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  became  flesh.  Eemember  that 
through  sixty  Christian  generations  that  truth,  with  the  correlative  truths,  has  been 
the  substance  of  the  very  hfe  of  Christian  people  ;  that  in  the  power  of  it  they 
have  trusted  God,  and  have  done  the  will  of  God.  {R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  Whoso- 
ever denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father. — The  antagonism  between 
truth  and  falsehood  : — I.  All  ekkor  is  deadly.  1.  It  were  a  ludicrous  absurdity  to 
say  that  a  wrong  faith  can  save  a  man.  Either,  then,  a  right  faith  is  necessary,  or 
no  fai.h  at  all  is  (John  iii.  15,  16;  vi.  40;  xi.  25,  &c. ;  Acts  xx.  21;  Horn.  i.  17; 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

iii.  30  ;  Gal.  v.  6 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13  ;  Heb.  xi.  6).  2.  A  wrong  faith  must  necessarUy 
produce  a  wrong  practice.  We  may  see  this  in  the  affairs  of  this  world.  3.  Ten- 
dencies do  not  always  produce  their  full  results.  A  wrong  faith  on  some  points  has 
been  in  some  degree  compensated  for  by  a  right  faith  on  others.  4.  It  is  a  matter 
of  importance  to  believe  the  truth.  All  the  misery  and  distress  in  the  world  is  due 
to  wrong  behefs.  5.  How  is  a  right  faith  to  be  attained  ?  In  answer  to  this  we 
must  (a)  dismiss  the  idea  that  any  man,  while  in  the  flesh,  can  possibly  attain  to 
infaUible  certainty  on  all  points  whatsoever.  For  (b)  our  condition  here  is  pro- 
gressive. II.  All  error  is  based  upon  the  denial  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ. 
1.  Eevelation  is  necessary.  For  otherwise  we  do  not  know  (1)  whether  there  be  a 
God,  (2)  whether  man  is  immortal  or  not,  (3)  in  what  the  foundation  of  morals 
consists.  2.  The  only  revelation  is  that  made  by  Jesus  Christ.  3.  The  essential 
feature  of  revelation  is  that  it  was  made  by  one  Anointed,  i.e.,  commissioned  to 
declare  God's  will.  Thus  we  are  forbidden,  on  any  point  on  which  God's  will  is 
clearly  declared,  to  question  it.  4.  How,  then,  do  unbelievers  in  Christ  lead  moral 
and  admirable  lives  ?  They  can  do  so  only  so  far  as  they  beUeve  what  Christ  tells 
them.  6.  Continuance  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father  the  only  possible  means  of 
salvation.  The  denial  of  this  truth  leads  directly  to  the  destruction  of  all  moral 
principle  whatever.  The  moral  hves  of  unbelievers  are  due  to  their  acceptance  of 
the  moral  principles  of  their  age.  These  moral  principles  are  Christian  principles. 
But  Christian  moral  law  without  its  Lawgiver  is  a  superstructure  without  a 
foundation.  Thus  continuance  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father  is  the  only  means 
whereby  (1)  error,  the  source  of  all  evil,  can  be  gradually  dispelled,  and  (2)  truth, 
the  source  of  aU  holiness  and  goodness,  enabled  to  take  full  possession  of  the 
heart.  (J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.)  Our  estimate  of  Christ  the  measure  of  God's  estimate 
of  us  : — ^I  have  seen  a  perfect  stranger  heartily  welcomed  in  an  English  home  and 
treated  with  a  deference,  a  tenderness,  and  a  generous  hospitality  that  did  one  good 
to  witness,  and  I  understood  it  all  when  informed  that  that  stranger,  though  never 
seen  before,  had  at  one  time  shown  kindness  to  a  wandering,  long-absent  son  in  a 
certain  town  in  the  distant  Australias.  The  parents  governed  their  estimate  of  the 
stranger  by  this  kindly  treatment  of  their  boy.  And  does  not  our  Heavenly 
Father  to  some  extent  deal  similarly  with  us  ?  He  views  and  estimates  us  according 
to  our  treatment  of  His  beloved  Son.  If  our  estimate  of  Jesus  is  vague,  or 
erroneous,  or  wilfully  depreciatory,  we  suffer  to  that  extent  in  the  Divine 
estimation. 

Vers.  24,  25.  If  that  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning  shall  remain  In 
you,  ye  also  shall  continue  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Father. — The  guileless  spirit 
abiding  through  the  Word  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father,  so  as  to  receive  the  promise  of 
eternal  life  : — I.  "  Let  that  therefore  which  te  have  heard  from  the  beginning 
abide  in  you."  The  phrase  "  from  the  beginning  "  must  here  refer  to  the  first 
preaching  of  the  gospel.  Let  all  of  Christ  you  have  ever  known,  seen,  heard, 
handled,  tasted,  "  abide  in  you."  Let  all  you  have  learned  of  Christ — as  being  with 
the  Father,  from  everlasting,  in  His  bosom — as  coming  forth  from  the  Father  to 
reveal  and  reconcile — as  purging  your  sin  with  blood,  and  bringing  you  to  be  all  to 
the  Father  that  He  is  Himself  to  the  Father— let  it  all  "  abide  hx  you  " ;  always, 
everywhere.  II.  So  "  te  also  shall  abide  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father."  First, 
"  Ye  shall  abide  in  the  Son."  What  the  Lord  elsewhere  enjoins  as  in  itself  a  duty, 
"  Abide  in  Me  "  (John  xv.  4),  the  apostle  describes  as  the  consequence  of  another 
duty  being  rightly  discharged.  We  abide  in  the  Son,  as  we  may  be  said  to  abide  in 
any  one  when  his  words  abide  in  us — or  when  that  which  we  have  heard  of  him,  or 
from  him,  from  the  beginning,  abides  in  us ;  when  we  understand  and  know  him  by 
what  he  says  and  what  we  hear ;  when  what  we  thus  understand  and  know  of  him 
takes  hold  of  us,  carries  our  conviction,  commands  our  confidence  and  love,  fastens 
and  rivets  itself  in  our  mind  and  heart,  and  so  abides  in  us.  Thus  we  abide  in  the 
Son  precisely  as  we  abide  in  a  friend  whom  we  know,  and  trust,  and  love.  Let  us 
turn  all  that  we  learn  into  the  materials  of  that  personal  communing  of  Him  with 
us  and  us  with  Him,  which  is  indeed  the  essence  of  our  abiding  in  the  Son.  All  the 
rather  let  us  do  so  because,  secondly,  this  abiding  in  the  Son  is  abiding  in  the 
Father  ;  for  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one.  Into  all  that  the  Son  is  to  the  Father, 
in  these  and  other  similar  views  of  His  mediatorial  character  and  ministry  as  the 
Son,  we  enter  when  we  abide  in  the  Son.  And  so  we  come  to  be  to  the  Father  all 
that  the  Son  is  to  the  Father.  We  abide  in  the  Father  as  the  Son  abides  in  the 
Father.     So  we  abide  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father.    And  still  all  this  depends  on 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  JOHN.  161 

our  letting  "  that  which  we  have  heard  from  the  beginning  abide  in  us."  It  depends 
on  that  faith  which  cometh  by  hearing,  as  hearing  cometh  by  the  Word  of  God. 
in.  Of  all  this  "the  fruit  is  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life." 
For  "  this  is  the  promise  that  He  hath  promised  us,  even  eternal  life."  The 
meaning  here  may  be  that  "  the  promise  of  eternal  life  "  is  superadded  to  the 
privilege  or  condition  of  our  "  abiding  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father,"  that  it  is 
something  over  and  above  that  held  out  to  us  in  prospect ;  or  it  may  be  that  our 
"abiding  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father  "is  itself  the  very  "life  eternal"  that  is 
promised.  The  difference  is  not  material ;  the  two  thoughts,  or  rather  the  two 
modifications  of  the  same  thought,  run  into  one.  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Chris- 
tian doctrine,  duty,  privilege,  and  Jwpe  : — I.  Christian  doctrine.  It  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son.  Christianity,  while  it  by  no  means  robs  the  eternal 
Father  of  His  honour,  at  the  same  time  promulgates  the  Saviour's  declaration,  that 
it  is  the  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  all  men  should  do  honour  to  the  Son  even  as 
they  do  honour  to  the  Father.  It  is  a  dispensation  of  which  Christ  is  the  head,  is 
the  chief  subject,  is  the  principal  Person,  to  whom  all  eyes  are  to  be  directed  ;  while 
all  honour,  and  glory,  and  majesty,  and  worship,  and  thanksgiving  are  poured  out 
upon  the  Father  in  all  ages,  at  the  foot  of  the  mediatorial  throne.  II.  The  duty 
and  privilege  of  the  Church.  What  is  the  duty?  "Let  them  abide  in  you." 
And  what  the  privilege?  "If  that  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning 
shall  remain  in  you,  ye  also  shall  continue  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Father."  Let  it 
"  abide  in  you  "  :  but  it  must  first  obtain  admission.  Ah !  and  not  only  so,  it  must 
take  its  mighty  grasp  of  the  heart.  And  so  it  does  wherever  it  comes  in  truth ;  it 
enters  there  to  have  its  own  way,  first,  to  resist  sin,  then  to  imprison  sin,  and 
ultimately,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  cast  it  out.  III.  The  Christian  hope.  "  This 
is  the  promise,  even  eternal  life."  We  are  not  content  to  hve  here  always.  No ; 
we  know  there  is  a  better  land,  a  land  of  peace,  of  purity,  and  perfect  bliss, 
(r.  Mortimer,  B.D.)  Vital  godliness  : — There  is  a  peculiar  importance  attached 
to  these  three  little  ins.  There  is  a  blessed  union,  a  holy  identity,  an  inseparable 
oneness  between  the  persons  and  experience  of  real  Christians  and  the  persons  and 
perfections  of  aU  the  glorious  Trinity  in  unity.  Doctrinal  godliness  is  union  with 
Deity;  experimental  godliness  is  the  enjoyment  of  Deity  ;  practical  godliness  is  the 
glorifying  of  Deity.  I.  The  antiquity  of  our  religion.  "  That  which  ye  have 
heard  from  the  beginning."  What  "  beginning "  ?  The  beginning  of  the  gospel? 
I  grant  that,  if  you  wish ;  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  But  go  a 
little  further  back ;  the  beginning  of  the  prophetic  vision — the  beginning  of  the 
Mosaic  economy — the  beginning  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant — the  beginning  of  the 
creation — go  back  as  early  as  you  wiU,  and  we  will  bear  testimony  that  our  faith  is 
the  faith  of  the  ancients.  If  not,  we  wiU  abandon  it.  Mark  that  beautiful  account 
of  the  patriarchal  faith  recorded  in  the  seventeenth  of  Genesis,  and  compare  it 
with  what  is  recorded  by  Paul  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  and  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  inquire  whether  they  are  not  precisely 
the  same  faith,  taught  to  both  of  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  was  this  ancient 
system  ?  Our  Lord  tells  us  in  plain  terms,  that  "  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  His  day, 
and  he  saw  it  and  was  glad."  Well,  then,  Abraham's  religion,  Abraham's  faith, 
"that  which  was  from  the  beginning,"  simply  consisted  in  seeing  everything  in 
Christ,  beholding  all  he  wanted  in  Christ,  the  Substitute,  the  Surety,  the  Daysman, 
the  Sponsor  of  His  whole  Church.  But  we  go  further  back  than  we  have  hitherto 
gone.  "  Where  then  ?  "  say  you  ?  Up  to  the  eternal  councils  of  peace.  I  mean  to 
say  that  all  the  religion  worth  having  originated  in  heaven  ;  it  is  the  offspring  of 
Deity.  All  that  pertains  to  real  godliness  originates  with  God.  Now  here  are 
certainties ;  here  are  securities.  These  are  old-fashioned  truths.  Old-fashioned 
guineas,  you  know,  are  almost  obsolete  ;  but  when  we  find  them,  we  know  they  are 
valuable.  Blessed  be  God,  these  truths  are  of  sterling  value  and  infinite  importance  ; 
"  that  which  we  have  heard  from  the  beginning  "  our  souls  delight  to  dwell  upon. 
II.  The  living  participation  of  this  old-fashioned  religion.  "  If  it  shall  remain 
in  you."  It  must  be  "in  you"  in  order  to  "remain"  there.  So  that  here  is  a 
religion  put  in  a  man,  and  of  such  a  nature,  and  of  such  value,  that  it  remains — 
abides,  continues.  What,  then,  is  it  ?  It  is  nothing  less  than  a  communication 
made  from  the  throne  of  God,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  the  sinner's  heart.  I  should 
never  be  the  better  for  what  God  my  Father  has  given  and  God  my  Saviour  has 
done,  but  for  God  the  Holy  Spirit's  communications  to  my  soul.  Every  act  of 
quickening  is  from  His  power ;  every  whisper  of  love  is  by  His  voice.  It  is  nothing 
less  than  the  indwelling,  the  witnessing,  the  comforting,  the  instruction,  the  anointing 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

of  the  Holy  Ghost,  resting  upon  the  soul  of  man,  that  imparts  one  spiritual  motion. 
I  pass  on  to  the  term  "  remain  "  :  "  If  that  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning 
shall  remain  in  you."  "  The  Spirit  of  truth,  whom  ye  know ;  for  He  dwelleth  with 
you,  and  shall  be  in  you."  "  The  Father  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that  He 
may  abide  with  you  for  ever."  He  never  gives  up  His  charge ;  He  never  forsakes 
His  residence ;  He  never  abandons  His  work.  It  is  a  "  remaining  "  religion.  Now 
for  the  words — "remain  in  you."  Blessed  be  God,  then  there  is  no  possibility  of 
alteration.  What  is  round  about  me,  I  cannot  secure.  But  what  is  within  me, 
secures  me.  It  "  remains  "  within  :  a  vital  principle,  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul. 
It  is  "  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory"  ;  and  the  world  and  the  devil  must  conquer 
Christ  before  they  can  turn  Him  out.  Therefore  He  "  remains  " — "  remains  in  you." 
III.  Wherever  this  "remaining,"  abiding,  unconquerable,  unchanging  religion 

DWELLS  IN  THE  SOUL,  A  LASTING  UNION  BETWEEN  JeHOVAH  AND  THAT  SOUL  IS  DEMON- 
STRATED. "  Continue  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father  !  "  An  inheritor  of  all  the  Son's 
merit  and  of  all  the  Father's  love;  "an  heir  of  God,  a  joint  heir  with  Christ"; 
interested  in  all  that  Christ  did  and  suffered,  and  interested  in  all  that  paternal  love 
planned,  ordained,  and  predestinated.  The  warrior  may  boast  of  his  fame,  the 
statesmen  may  carry  their  projects,  the  merchants  may  secure  their  fortunes,  the 
pleasure-taker  may  revel  in  his  wickedness,  worldlings  of  all  sorts  may  have  their 
gods ;  but  give  me  mine.  An  interest  in  all  that  covenant  love  has  bestowed,  and 
all  that  covenant  blood  has  bought,  and  all  that  covenant  grace  can  impart.  "  But," 
say  you,  "  how  am  I  to  know  this  ?  "  I  am  to  know  it  by  something  "  remaining 
in  me  "  ;  I  am  to  know  it  by  having  a  covenant  gift ;  I  am  to  know  it  by  having  an 
old-fashioned  religion  remaining  in  my  soul  that  the  devil  and  earth  and  sin  cannot 
turn  out.  And,  therefore,  if  thou  hast  the  earnest,  the  pledge  given  by  Jehovah,  the 
Spirit's  work  in  thy  soul,  thou  hast  all  that  constitutes  assurance  of  interest  "  in  the 
Son  and  in  the  Father."  "  If  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs 
with  Christ."     (J.  Irons.) 

Yer.  25.  And  this  is  the  promise  that  He  hath  promised  us,  even  eternal  life. — 

Eternal  life ; — I,  Consider  the  blessing  promised — "eternal  life."  Life  is  used 
as  the  illustration,  because  of  all  blessings  it  is  the  most  desired,  and  eternal  is 
appended  to  it,  because  that  is  the  highest  and  best  form  of  life.  1.  The  first  great 
element  in  eternal  life  is  freedom  from  condemnation.  So  taught  our  Saviour 
Himself  (John  v.  24).  2.  Another  element  of  eternal  life  is  the  renewal  of  the  heart 
in  righteousness  by  the  grace  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  There  is  a  double  death  of  the 
sinner  in  this  present  life,  and  there  is  a  double  life  corresponding  to  it.  He  is  dead 
under  the  sentence  of  the  law,  and  also  under  the  power  of  sin.  The  former  is 
removed  when  he  is  forgiven,  the  latter  when  he  is  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind. 
3.  It  is  in  eternity,  however,  it  shall  be  consummated.  The  principles  by  which  it 
is  now  produced  and  maintained  shall  then  be  perfected.  U.  What  is  implied  in 
ITS  BEING  represented  AS  A  PROMISE  ?  1.  If  eternal  life  be  a  promise,  this  implies 
that  it  is  a  free  gift.  2.  While  a  promise  supposes  a  free  gift  on  the  part  of  God,  it 
implies  its  acceptance  on  our  part.  If  it  be  not  accepted  it  can  never  be  enjoyed. 
8.  If  eternal  Ufe  be  the  promise  of  God  it  is  sure.  "  He  is  not  a  man  that  He  should 
lie,"  &c.  4.  Finally,  since  eternal  life  is  the  promise  of  God,  it  ought  to  exercise  a 
powerful  influence  over  us,  in  engaging  us  wholly  for  Him  who  has  so  provided  for 
us.  (Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  promise  of  eternal  life : — I.  God's  promise  or 
SALVATION  is  the  expression  of  His  heart  of  love  to  the  needy  and  to  the  lost.  This 
is  God's  promise,  even  eternal  life.  H.  The  Promiser.  1.  First,  we  must  think  of 
God's  purpose  in  the  promise.  He  had  a  purpose  in  making  the  promise.  2.  Then 
we  must  think  of  the  Word  of  God,  in  which  the  promise  is  revealed  as  well  as 
recorded  ;  and  the  promise  being  in  God's  Word,  will  never  be  repealed.  3.  Then 
we  must  think  of  Christ,  in  whom  all  the  promises  of  God  are  "  Yea,  and  in  Him 
Amen."  God  says,  "  My  covenant  shall  stand  fast  with  Him."  There  is  no  change 
in  all  this.  4.  And  then  there  is  another  point  we  have  to  think  about,  and  that  is 
the  believer's  faith  in  order  to  realise  the  promise ;  and  this  is  often  very  weak,  and 
often  fails.  IH.  The  persons  to  whom  the  promise  is  made.  "  This  is  the  promise 
which  He  hath  promised  us."  The  "  us"  here  means  those  who  "  had  an  unction 
from  the  Holy  One,"  and  knew  the  truth,  as  distinguished  from  those  who  held  the 
various  errors  the  apostle  had  been  speaking  of.  It  refers  to  all  the  children  of  God, 
Christ's  Holy  Church  throughout  the  world ;  for,  as  the  work  was  done  for  them,  so 
the  promise  by  which  that  work  was  made  theirs  is  addressed  to  them.  (J.  W, 
Reeve,  M.A.) 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  163 

Vers.  26-28.  These  things  have  I  written  unto  you  concerning  them  that  seduce 
you. — I.  The  danger  (ver.  26).     The  term  employed  is  most  significant  of  danger — 
"  seduce  you."     Those  to  whom  he  refers  would  come  to  the  disciples  not  as  open 
enemies,  but  as  professed  friends.     The  history  of  the  Church  furnishes  a  melan- 
choly illustration  and  confh'mation  of  these  remarks.      Satan  appears  sometimes 
under  the  guise  of  an  angel  of  light.      Assaults  are  again  made  on  the  passions  and 
the  appetites  and  the  peculiar  propensities  of  men,  so  as  to  entice  them  from  the 
paths  of  purity  and  propriety  into  forbidden  courses.     11.  Such  being  the  danger  of 
disciples,  the  apostle  next  instructs  them  whekein  theib  safety  lies  (ver.  27).      1. 
The  security  of  the  believer  is  at  once  ascribed  to  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     No 
being  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can  keep  the  soul.      Our  own  strength  is  weakness,  and 
our  wisdom  folly.      2.  The  very  promise  of  the  Spirit  is  made  in  the  text,  which 
encourages  us  to  confide  in  Him.     He  "  abideth  in  you."     There  He  is  with  His 
unerring  wisdom  to  guide  in  every  movement.    3.  Observe  next  how  independent  He 
is  said  to  render  the  man  in  whom  He  abideth.      "  Ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach 
you ;  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things."    This  certainly  does  not  mean 
that  he  is  made  presumptuous  and  rmwilling  to  be  taught  by  others,  as  though  he 
needed  not  their  help.     He  is  engaged  in  teaching  the  very  persons  whom  he  con- 
gratulates as  independent  of  human  teaching.     Nor  is  there  any  inconsistency 
between  his  views  and  his  practice.     He  taught  the  disciples,  and  they  were  grateful 
for  his  instructions,  and  were  much  edified  by  them.     Yet,  supposing  him  to  be 
withdrawn  from  them,  it  did  not  follow  that  they  must  remain  in  ignorance.      The 
Spirit  could  teach  by  him  or  without  htm.     Even  an  apostle  could  not  open  the 
mind  to  apprehend  a  single  truth  unless  the  Spirit  employed  and  blessed  him.     4. 
It  is,  therefore,  declared  that  he  is  safe.     "  Ye  shall  abide  in  Him."     Seeing  the 
Spirit  abides  in  him,  he  shall  abide  in  Christ.      HI.  This  leads  us  to  consider  the 
apostle's  view  of  the  believer's  duty  (ver.  28).    It  does  not  follow  that  because  the 
Spirit  abides  in  us,  and  maintains  His  own  work,  we  are  set  free  from  any  responsi- 
bility.   Bather,  it  is  the  very  reverse.     Since  the  Spirit  dwells  in  us,  we  are  the  more 
called  upon  to  be  diligent  and  faithful.     We  are  left  without  excuse,  seeing  we  are 
under  the  power  of  Him  who  is  infinitely  wise,  and  powerful  to  direct  and  sustain 
us.     1.  In  order  to  preserve  the  health  of  the  body  we  use  the  utmost  diligence  to 
procure  necessary  food,  and  so  should  we  do  for  the  soul.      2.  As  we  freely  use  the 
food  we  have  secured  for  the  body,  so  let  us  do  with  our  spiritual  food.     3.  As 
when  we  have  partaken  of  the  food  which  our  industry  has  provided,  we  employ  our 
strength  in  the  active  duties  of  our  calling,  so  let  us  be  diligent  and  active  in  serving 
God.      IV.  The  reasons  assigned  and  the  motives  urged.      *'  That  when  He  shall 
appear  we  may  have  confidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming." 
The  fact  is  assumed  that  Christ  shall  appear,  and  two  most  solemn  reflections  are 
founded  on  it.     Christ  will  appear.    This  is  the  plain  and  repeated  testimony  of  the 
Divine  Word.    Well  may  we  cry,  "Who  shall  stand  when  He  appeareth?"    The 
two  cases  described  in  the  words  before  us  reveal  how  it  shall  be  in  the  solemn  hour. 
1.  Some  shall  have  confidence.      They  believed  in  Him.      They  continued  in  Him. 
They  see  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and,  raised  from  the  grave,  they  go  to  meet  Him  with 
gla^ess.      Of  all  beings  He  is  the  very  one  they  are  most  desirous  to  behold.     2. 
How  awful  it  will  be  to  be  ashamed  in  that  day !     Ashamed  of  unbelief  1    Ashamed 
of  sin  I    Ashamed  of  ourselves !    Ashamed   of  slighted  opportunities,  neglected 
privileges,  and  lost  souls  1     (Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)        But  the  anointing  which  ye 
have  received  of  TTim  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you. — 
The  guileless  spirit,  through  the  abiding  Messianic  unction  and  illumination  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  abiding  in  Christ,  so  as  to  have  confidence  at  His  coming  : — I.    The 
provision  made  for  our  abidino  in  Him  is  the  "  anointing  which  we  receive  of  Him 
abiding  in  us."    1.  It  is  in  us ;  it  is  an  inward  anointing.    Not  with  oil  on  the  head, 
but  with  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart,  we  are  anointed ;    as  He  from  whom  we 
receive  the  anointing  was  Himself  anointed.     2.  This  anointing  is  permanent — "  it 
abideth  in  you."    It  is  not  a  fitful  emotion  or  wayward  impulse,  a  rapture  of  excite- 
ment, alternating  perhaps  with  deep  depression.      It  partakes  more  of  the  nature  of 
a  calm,  constant,  settled  conviction.      There  may  be  more  or  less  of  the  vivid  sense 
of  this  anointing,  at  different  seasons  and  in  different  circumstances;  the  signs  of  it 
may  be  more  or  less  clearly  discernible,  and  the  hold  we  have  of  it  in  our  conscious- 
ness may  be  more  or  less  strong.    But  it  '♦  abideth  in  us,"  keeping  God  and  eternity 
stiU  before  us  as  realities,  in  our  sorest  trials  and  darkest  hours,  causing  us,  as  we 
fall  back  upon  it,  like  David  in  his  recovery  from  doubting  despondency,  to  exclaim 

(Psa.  Ixxvii.  10).     3,  This  anointing  is  sufficient  in  and  of  itself  ;  its  teaching  needs 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

no  corroboration  from  any  one  ;  it  has  a  Divine  self-evidencing  power  of  its  own  that 
makes  him  who  receives  it  independent  of  human  testimony :  "  ye  need  not  that  any 
man  teach  you."  4.  The  teaching  of  this  anointing  is  complete  and  thorough,  all- 
embracing,  all-comprehensive  ;  "  it  teacheth  you  of  all  things."  It  is  not  partial  or 
one-sided,  as  human  teaching  on  Divine  subjects  is  apt  to  be,  but  full-orbed,  well 
rounded,  like  a  perfect  circle.  It  needs  the  Divine  anointing  of  which  we  speak  to 
teach,  to  unfold,  to  exhaust,  all  that  is  in  the  song  of  the  angels,  "  Glory  to  God  in 
the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men."  6.  Finally,  this  anointing 
"  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie."  It  carries  with  it,  and  in  it,  an  assurance  not  to  be  called 
in  question  or  shaken — an  assurance,  one  may  say,  infallibly  sure.  II.  The  motive 
URGED  FOB  TOUR  ABIDING  IN  Christ  is  the  hopc  or  prospect  of  "  His  appearing,"  "  His 
coming."  It  is  urged  very  earnestly  and  affectionately.  John  might  have  kept  to 
the  mode  of  address  which  he  has  been  using,  and  to  which  in  the  next  verse  he 
returns ;  as  an  apostle  exhorting  his  disciples,  a  teacher  instructing  his  scholars, 
speaking  authoritatively  or  ex  cathedra.  But  when  the  end  of  aU  comes  in  view  he 
cannot  separate  himself  from  them.  We  are  to  be  together  with  the  Lord,  you  and 
we — you  disciples  and  we  apostles ;  you  scholars  and  we  teachers.  And  for  this  end 
we  would  have  you  to  abide  in  Him,  that  we  may  have  confidence  together  when  He 
appears.  Let  me  be  ever  asking  myself,  at  every  moment.  If  He  were  to  appear  now, 
would  I  have  confidence  ?  If  He  were  to  come  into  my  house,  my  room,  and  show 
Himself,  and  speak  to  me  face  to  face,  would  I  have  confidence  ?  Could  I  meet  His 
look  of  love  without  embarrassment  ?  Only  if  He  found  me  "  abiding  in  Him  "  ; 
doing  whatever  I  might  be  doing  "  in  His  name,  giving  thanks  unto  God  even  the 
Father  by  Him  ".;  only  if  He  found  me  keeping  Him  in  my  heart.  (R.  S.  Candlish, 
D.D.)  The  anointing  by  Christ : — I.  This  anointing  is  a  gift.  It  is  "  the 
anointing  which  ye  have  received."  It  is  contrasted  in  the  context  with  the 
transient  possessions  of  worldly  men.  To  these,  what  seems  to  be  solid  melts  into 
air  ;  what  seems  to  be  permanent  vanishes  away.  II.  This  anointing  is  a  heart- 
cleansing  GIFT.  Those  who  have  it  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body  through  the 
Spirit  (Eom.  viii.  13),  and  purify  themselves  even  as  Christ  is  pure  (chap.  iii.  3). 
Not  through  any  natural  power  of  willing  and  working,  but  through  the  Spu'it,  they 
are  able  to  do  these  things.  III.  This  anointing  is  a  heart-enlarging  gift.  A 
man's  caUing  and  election  once  made  sure  to  his  own  mind,  the  sphere  of  his  studies 
becomes  enlarged.  It  is  not  written.  One  thing  have  I  desired  of  the  Lord  that  I 
may  be  saved,  but  (Psa.  xxvii.  4).  IV.  This  anointing  is  a  heart-cheering  gift. 
It  is  the  oil  of  gladness  (Psa.  xlv.  7),  the  oil  of  joy  (Isa.  Ixi.  3),  the  source  of  joy 
unspeakable,  never-ending,  and  glorious  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  V.  This  anointing  was  a 
gift  Divinely  given  to  Christ.  As  to  His  human  nature  He  was  richly  endued. 
The  Spirit  of  God  rested  upon  Him  (Isa.  xi.  2  ;  John  i.  32,  33).  He  was  therewith 
anointed  above  his  fellows  (Psa.  xlv.  7.)  VI.  This  anointing  is  a  gift  Divinely 
given  to  His  people.  It  is  "  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received  of  Him  " — not 
only  as  a  proof  that  they  are  chosen  in  Him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but 
also  as  their  instructor  and  guide  (Eph.  i.  4  ;  1  Pet.  i.  2).  VII.  This  anointing  is 
A  distinguishing  gift.  It  "  is  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received."  As  the  anointing 
under  the  law,  which  is  no  doubt  alluded  to  in  the  text,  was  of  a  sweet  savour, 
so  we,  as  many  as  are  anointed  with  His  Spirit,  are  thereby  made  a  sweet  savour  of 
Christ  (2  Cor.  ii.  15).  As  that  anointing  oil  was  sprinkled  upon  Aaron  and  his  sons 
(who  represent  the  Church,  as  pointedly  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the  congrega- 
tion), so  Christ  sends  the  comforter  to  His  disciples,  whom  He  pointedly  distin- 
guishes from  the  world  (John  xiv.  16, 17).  As  the  anointing  oil  was  forbidden  to  be 
poured  upon  the  flesh  of  man  (Exod.  xxx.  25-33),  so  the  Holy  Ghost  cannot  be 
received  by  the  world,  which,  in  the  present  dispensation,  "  seeth  Him  not,  neither 
knoweth  Him."  VIII.  This  anointing  is  a  permanent  gift.  It  is  "  the  anointing 
which  abideth  in  you."  It  is  permanent  as  opposed  to  those  proffers  of  grace,  so 
called,  which,  depending  on  the  volition  of  the  creature,  are  worse  than  precarious. 
This  distinctive  mark  cannot  suffer  abrasure  or  be  blown  away.  Its  permanence  is 
chiefly  shown  by  the  vitality  of  our  union  to  Christ  (John  xv.  5),  by  the  reality  of 
our  participation  in  the  Divine  nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4),  by  the  eternity  of  the  Ufe  of 
which  the  Spirit  is  the  demonstrator  and  source  (chap.  v.  11),  and  by  the  stability 
of  the  covenant  under  which  that  life  is  promised  (chap.  ii.  25).  IX.  This 
anointing  is  a  truthful  gift.  It  is  truth.  It  is  truthful  as  opposed  to  those  false 
misgivings,  whether  from  the  flesh  or  the  devil,  which  frequently  trouble  the 
Christian.  It  is  truthful,  also,  as  opposed  to  the  shadows  of  the  law.  It  is  truthful, 
also,  as  opposed  to  the  lies  and  hypocrisy  of  false  professors.      X.  This  anointing  is 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  JOHN.  165 

A  SUFFICIENT  GIFT.  Giving  sufficiency  to  that  spiritual  judgment,  that  noble  and 
inestimable  endowment,  which  alone  can  distinguish  truth  from  error.  {The 
Evangelical  Preacher.)  "  Teacheth  "  ; — That  was  a  true  word  spoken  of  the 
prophet  (Isa.  liv.  23).  It  is  certain  that  the  amount  of  peace  which  we  enjoy  will 
be  largely  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  teaching  which  we  receive,  and  appro- 
priate, at  the  hands  of  the  Lord.  As  the  many  objects  of  fear  which,  in  the  mind  of 
the  savage,  people  all  lonely  places,  disappear  when  he  is  instructed  in  truer  science, 
_  so  do  doubts  and  misgivings  vanish  as  the  soul  comes  to  understand  its  true  standing 
*  in  Jesus.  It  is  very  beautiful  to  remark  the  direct  teaching  agency  of  the  Lord  in 
this  passage,  and  to  remember  that  it  is  vouchsafed  to  all  His  children.  He  takes 
equal  care  over  each.  He  perhaps  takes  most  care  over  the  stupid  ones,  putting  the 
lesson  in  successive  modifications,  that  it  may  be  brought  down  to  their  capacity.  It 
is  His  chosen  business  to  make  you  know  His  will,  and  if  He  cannot  do  it  in  one  way, 
He  will  in  another.  But  as  the  Psalmist  very  fitly  says,  we  are  oftenest  taught  by 
chastening  (Psa.  xciv.  12).  If  you  have  been  praying  to  know  more  of  Christ,  do  not 
be  surprised  if  He  takes  you  aside  into  a  desert  place,  or  leads  you  into  a  furnace  of 
pain.  1.  Christ  teaches  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  unmistakable  that  He  is  referred 
to  in  the  reference  to  the  anointing  which  we  have  received.  The  Holy  Spirit  is,  so 
to  speak,  the  medium  by  which  Jesus  dwells  in  the  surrendered  heart,  and  operates 
through  it  and  in  it.  2.  This  teaching  is  inward.  There  are  doubtless  many  lessons 
taught  by  Providence.  But,  after  all,  the  meaning  of  outward  events  is  a  riddle, 
until  He  opens  "  the  dark  saying  on  the  harp."  And  the  teaching  is  therefore  so 
quiet,  so  unobtrusive,  so  hidden,  that  many  an  earnest  seeker  may  think  that  nothing 
is  being  taught  or  acquired,  as  the  months  go  on.  But  we  cannot  gauge  the  true 
amounts  of  progress  which  we  are  making  from  year  to  year — the  teaching  is  so 
thoroughly  a  secret  matter  between  God  and  the  Spirit.  But  when  some  great  crisis 
supervenes,  some  trial,  some  duty,  and  the  spirit  puts  forth  powers  of  which  it  had 
seemed  incapable,  there  is  a  swift  discovery  of  the  results,  which  had  been  slowly 
accruing  during  previous  years.  3.  The  main  end  of  this  teaching  is  to  secure  our 
abiding  in  Christ.  "  Even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  Him."  All 
Christian  progress  begins,  continues,  and  has  its  fruition  here.  Severed  from  Jesus 
we  can  do  nothing.  Abiding  in  Jesus  we  partake  of  "  the  root  and  fatness  "  of  His 
glorious  life.    All  His  fulness  slowly  enters  into  us.     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  28,  29.  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  Him;  that,  when  He  shall 
appear,  we  may  have  confidence. — Abiding  in  Christ  the  ground  of  confidence  in  the 
day  of  His  appearing  : — I.  The  event  referred  to,  for  which  preparation  is  to 
BE  MADE,  IS  THE  COMING  OF  Christ — that  we  may  have  confidence,  and  not  be 
ashamed  before  Him,  at  His  coming.  II.  The  duty  here  enjoined,  that  of  abid- 
ing IN  Christ.  What  is  it  to  abide  in  Christ  ?  To  speak  of  one  as  abiding  in  Christ 
implies  that  he  is  already  in  Him  ;  if  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature. 
And  surely  in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  we  shall  need  something  to  rest 
upon  as  a  ground  of  confidence  firmer  and  more  abiding  than  anything  the  world 
can  afford  us.  1.  Abiding  in  Christ  we  shall  have  no  fear  of  condemnation  in  the 
day  of  His  final  coming.  For  we  are  assured  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them 
■who  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Abiding  in  Christ  you  may  feel  assured,  when  sum- 
moned into  His  presence  at  the  last  day,  that  you  have  a  friend  in  your  judge,  an 
advocate  and  intercessor  ;  and  having  chosen  Him  as  your  Saviour,  you  can  securely 
leave  your  cause  in  His  hand,  in  firm  confidence  that  all  will  be  weU  with  you  for 
ever.  3.  Abiding  in  Christ,  His  promise  is  given,  His  truth  pledged,  that  all  your 
dearest  interests  are  safe  for  eternity.  III.  Reasons  or  motives  which  enforce  the 
DUTY  of  abiding  in  Christ,  and  so  having  confidence  when  He  shall  appear.  1.  Let 
it  be  impressed  on  your  mind  that  His  coming  to  judge  the  world  is  an  absolute 
certainty.  2.  To  enforce  still  further  the  duty  we  are  considering,  let  me  remind 
you  again  of  the  august  and  solemn  scenes  connected  with  the  coming  of  Christ 
to  judge  the  world.  3.  Christ  is  presented  in  His  gospel  as  an  all-sufficient 
Saviour ;  and  abiding  in  Him,  you  may  rest  assured  that  you  will  be  able  to  witness 
the  scenes  of  the  last  day  with  perfect  peace.  4.  Security  amid  those  scenes  can  be 
derived  from  no  other  source.  (J.  Haices,  D.D.)  Preparation  for  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  : — I.  First  observe  to  what  he  urges  them — "  Abide  in  Him."  By  this  he 
meant  one  thing ;  but  that  thing  is  so  comprehensive  that  we  may  better  understand 
it  by  viewing  it  from  many  sides.  1.  He  meant  fidelity  to  the  truth  taught  by  our 
Lord.  Abide  in  the  truth  which  you  received  from  the  beginning;  for  in  your 
earliest  days  it  wrought  salvation  in  you.     The  foundation  of  your  faith  is  not  a 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

changeable  doctrine ;  you  rest  on  a  sure  word  of  testimony.  Truth  is,  in  its  very 
nature,  fixed  and  unalterable.  You  know  more  about  it  than  you  did  ;  but  the  thing 
itself  is  still  the  same,  and  must  be  the  same.  Take  care  that  you  abide  in  it.  You 
will  find  it  difficult  to  do  so,  for  there  is  an  element  of  changeableness  about  your- 
self ;  this  you  must  overcome  by  grace.  You  will  find  many  elements  of  seduction 
in  the  outside  world.  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words,  though  there  are 
many  abroad  in  these  days  who  "  would  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very  elect." 
Abide  in  Jesus,  by  letting  His  words  abide  in  you.  2.  Next,  he  means  "  abide  in 
Him"  as  to  the  uniformity  of  your  trust.  When  you  first  enjoyed  a  hope,  you 
rested  upon  Christ  alone.  Depend  to-day  as  simply  as  you  depended  then.  If  you 
have  some  idea  that  you  are  hastening  towards  perfection,  take  care  that  you  do  not 
indulge  a  vain  conceit  of  yourself ;  but  even  if  it  be  true,  still  mix  not  your  perfec- 
tion with  His  perfection,  nor  your  advance  in  grace  with  the  foundation  which  He 
has  laid  for  you  in  His  blood  and  righteousness.  "Abide  in  Him."  3.  Moreover, 
abide  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  making  Him  the  constant  object  of  your  life.  As 
you  live  by  Christ,  so  live  for  Christ.  If  you  are  in  health,  live  for  Christ  earnestly ; 
if  you  are  bound  to  a  sick-bed,  live  for  Christ  patiently.  4.  Surely,  we  should  also 
understand  by  "  abide  in  Him,"  that  we  are  to  persevere  in  our  obedience  to  our 
Lord.  "  If  ye  know  that  He  is  righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one  that  doeth  righteous- 
ness is  born  of  Him."  What  your  Lord  bids  you,  continue  to  do.  Be  precise  and 
prompt  in  your  execution  of  His  commands.  5.  Continue  in  spiritual  union  with 
your  Lord.  All  the  life  you  have  is  life  derived  from  Him ;  seek  no  other.  You 
are  not  a  Christian  except  as  Jesus  is  the  Christ  of  God  to  you  ;  you  are  not  ahve 
unto  God,  except  as  you  are  one  with  the  risen  Lord.  6.  "  Abide  in  Him,"  in  the 
sense  of  being  at  home  in  Him.  Do  not  go  to  Jesus  one  day,  and  to  the  world 
another  day  ;  do  not  be  a  lodger  with  Him,  but  abide  in  Him.  What  a  comfort  to 
have  our  Lord  Himself  to  be  our  chosen  dwelling-place  in  time  and  in  eternity  1 
Why  does  the  apostle  urge  us  to  abide  in  Christ  ?  Is  there  any  likelihood  of  our 
going  away  ?  Yes,  for  in  this  very  chapter  he  mentions  apostates,  who  from 
disciples  had  degenerated  into  antichrists,  of  whom  he  says,  "  They  went  out  from 
us,  but  they  were  not  of  us  ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us  they  would,  no  doubt,  have 
continued  with  us."  "  Abide  in  Him,"  then,  and  do  not  turn  aside  unto  crooked 
ways,  as  many  professors  have  done.  II.  Secondly,  notice  under  what  character 
John  addresses  these  believers.  He  says,  "  And  now,  little  children."  1.  This 
indicates  the  apostle's  love  to  them.  He  could  not  wish  them  a  greater  blessing  out 
of  the  depth  of  his  heart's  affection,  than  that  they  should  faithfully  abide  in  Christ. 
2.  Next,  by  this  he  suggests  their  near  and  dear  relation  to  their  Father  in  heaven. 
Because  you  are  little  children,  you  are  not  of  travelling  years,  therefore  stay  at 
home  and  abide  in  your  Lord.  3.  Does  he  not  hint  at  their  feebleness  ?  Even  if 
you  were  grown  and  strong,  you  would  not  be  wise  to  gather  all  together  and  wander 
away  into  the  far  country ;  but  as  you  are  so  young,  so  dependent,  so  feeble,  it  is 
essential  that  you  abide  in  Him.  Is  He  not  your  life,  your  all  ?  4.  Does  not  the 
apostle  also  gently  hint  at  their  fickleness  ?  You  are  very  changeable,  like  little 
babes.  You  are  apt  to  be  hot  and  cold  in  half  an  hour.  Surrender  yourself  to  Him 
by  an  everlasting  covenant  never  to  be  cancelled.  Be  His  for  ever  and  ever.  5.  Did 
not  this  remind  them  of  their  daily  dependence  upon  the  Lord's  care,  as  little 
children  depend  on  their  parents  ?    IH.  We  shall  consider  by  what  motive  John 

EXHORTS  US  TO  THIS  PLEASANT  AND   NECESSARY   DUTY   OF    ABIDING    IN    ChRIST.       Look   at 

that  little  word :  it  runs  thus,  "  that  we  may  have  confidence."  The  beloved  John 
needed  to  have  confidence  at  the  appearing  of  the  Lord,  and  confidence  fetched  from 
the  same  source  as  that  to  which  he  directed  his  little  children.  How  wisely,  and 
yet  how  sweetly,  he  puts  himself  upon  our  level  in  this  matter  !  1.  Notice,  further, 
that  the  motive  is  one  drawn  from  Jesus.  John  does  not  drive  believers  with  the 
lash  of  the  law,  but  he  draws  them  with  the  cords  of  love.  2.  The  motive  is  drawn 
from  our  Lord's  expected  advent.  Notice  how  John  puts  it.  He  uses  two  words 
for  the  same  thing  :  "  when  He  shall  appear,"  and,  "  at  His  coming."  The  second 
advent  may  be  viewed  in  two  lights.  First,  as  the  appearing  of  one  who  is  here 
already,  but  is  hidden ;  and  next,  as  the  coming  of  one  who  is  absent.  In  the  first 
sense  we  know  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  abides  in  His  Church ;  according  to  His 
word,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  Yet,  though 
spiritually  present,  He  is  unseen.  The  spiritual  and  secret  presence  of  Christ  will 
become  a  visible  and  manifest  presence  in  the  day  of  His  appearing.  The  apostle 
also  uses  the  terra,  "  at  His  coming,"  or,  "  His  presence."  This  is  the  same  thing 
from  another  point  of  view.     In  a  certain  evident  sense  our  Lord  is  absent :  "  He  is 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  JOHN.  167 

not  here,  for  He  is  risen."  He  has  gone  His  way  unto  the  Father.  In  that  respect 
He  will  come  a  second  time,  "  without  a  sin-offering,  unto  salvation."  He  who  has 
gone  from  us  will  so  come  in  like  manner  as  He  was  seen  to  go  up  into  heaven. 
John  pleads  the  glorious  manifestation  of  our  Lord  under  both  of  these  views  as  a 
reason  for  abiding  in  Him.  As  to  our  Lord's  "  appearing,"  he  would  have  us  abide 
in  Christ,  that  we  may  have  confidence  when  He  appears.  What  does  he  mean  by 
having  confidence  when  He  shall  appear  ?  Why,  this :  that  if  you  abide  in  Him 
when  you  do  not  see  Him,  you  will  be  very  bold  should  He  suddenly  reveal  Himself. 
Before  He  appears,  you  have  dwelt  in  Him,  and  He  has  dwelt  in  you ;  what  fear 
could  His  appearing  cause  you  ?  The  word  translated  "  confidence  "  means  freedom 
of  speech.  If  our  Divine  Lord  were  to  appear  in  a  moment,  we  should  not  lose  our 
tongue  through  fear,  but  should  welcome  Him  with  glad  acclaim.  The  other  point 
is,  that  you  should  "  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming."  That  means, 
that  having  regarded  Him  as  being  absent,  you  have  not  so  Uved  that,  if  He  should 
suddenly  be  present  in  person,  you  would  be  ashamed  of  your  past  lite.  What  must 
it  be  to  be  driven  with  shame  away  from  His  presence  into  everlasting  contempt ! 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  highest  life  : — The  term  "httle  children"  is  a  term  of 

endearment.  John  was  a  man  of  love,  those  who  loved  Christ  he  loved  dearly. 
"  And  now,  little  children,"  or  better,  my  little  children.  The  good  have  a  property 
in  the  good.  The  words  imply  three  things — ^I.  An  actual  existence  in  Chbist. 
You  cannot  "  abide  "  in  Him  unless  you  are  actually  in  Him.  What  is  it  to  be  in 
Christ  ?  To  be  in  His  school  as  His  disciple,  in  His  family  as  His  brethren,  in  His 
character  as  His  imitators.  Spiritually,  aU  men  live  more  or  less  in  the  character 
of  others.  The  existing  generation  lives  in  the  character  of  its  predecessor,  loving 
children  live  in  the  character  of  their  parents.  To  live  in  His  character,  actuated 
in  all  things  by  His  Spirit,  guided  in  all  things  by  His  principles,  is  the  highest  state 
of  existence  for  man.  11.  The  possiBrLiTT  of  losing  this  state  op  existence.  If 
not,  why  should  we  be  exhorted  to  "  abide  "  ?  First,  the  constitutional  freedom  of 
the  soul  impUes  the  possibility.  Secondly,  the  corrupting  influences  of  society  are 
hostile  to  this  state  of  existence.  Thirdly,  the  exhortations  of  Scripture  imply  the 
danger  of  its  decay.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 
•'  Be  steadfast,"  <fec.  HI.  The  necessity  for  continuing  in  this  state  of  existence. 
"  When  He  shall  appear  we  may  have  confidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  at  His 
coming."  Or,  according  to  the  New  Version,  "  that  if  He  shall  be  manifested 
we  may  have  boldness,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming." 
The  idea  is  that  a  continuance  of  this  high  state  of  existence,  this  life  in  Christ 
will  enable  you  to  meet  Him  with  unabashed  confidence.  Sooner  or  later  He 
will  come  to  aU.  He  comes  to  aU  at  death.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Ashamed  to 
meet  the  Lord  : — A  man  lay  dying  many  years  ago.  He  had  lived  a  Christian  hie 
and  was  esteemed  by  aU  who  knew  him.  His  sons  stood  round  his  bed,  hanging 
upon  their  father's  lips,  and  prepared  to  treasure  the  last  words  which  he  should 
speak  to  them  in  this  life.  They  all,  and  the  aged  man  himself,  knew  that  he  must 
soon  cross  the  black  river  of  death,  so  it  was  no  shock  when  one  of  his  sons  asked, 
"  Father,  father,  are  you  not  afraid  to  die  ?  "  There  was  a  pause  as  if  the  dying 
man  turned  his  mental  gaze  in  upon  himself,  and  then  slowly  he  replied,  "  No,  no  ! 
I  am  not  afraid  to  die,  but,"  and  he  lifted  his  wasted  hand,  "  I  am  almost  ashamed 
to  die  when  I  look  back  upon  my  years  wasted,  that  might  have  been  spent  in  more 
active  service  for  my  Lord."  If  we  have  done  a  little  for  Christ,  how  little 
it  is !  How  half-hearted  have  been  our  efforts !  While  not  afraid  to  meet 
our  God,  we  are  almost  ashamed  to  meet  Him  bearing  "  nothing  but  leaves  " 
instead  of   "  sheaves  of  gathered  grain."      (J.  Elder   Gumming,   D.D.)  The 

advantage  of  abiding  in  Christ : — The  cloth  must  be  dipped  into  the  dyer's  vat,  and 
lie  there,  if  it  is  to  be  tinged  with  the  colour.  The  sensitive  plate  must  be  patiently 
kept  in  position  for  many  hours  if  invisible  stars  are  to  photograph  themselves 
upon  it.  The  vase  must  be  held  with  a  steady  hand  beneath  the  fountain  if  it  is  to 
be  filled.  Keep  yourselves  in  Jesus  Christ.  Then  here  you  will  begin  to  be  changed 
into  the  same  image,  and  when  He  comes  He  will  come  as  your  Saviour,  and  com- 
plete your  uncompleted  work,  and  make  you  altogether  Uke  Himself.  (.4.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Abiding  in  Christ  gives  confidence  : — It  is  only  in  proportion  as  we  keep 
ourselves  in  union  with  Christ,  in  heart  and  mind,  and  wiU,  and  work,  that  we  shall 
stand  steadfast.  The  hghtest  substances  may  be  made  stable,  if  they  are  glued  on 
to  something  stable.  You  can  mortise  a  bit  of  thin  stone  into  the  living  rock,  and 
then  it  will  stand  "  four-square  to  every  wind  that  blows."  So  it  is  only  on  condi- 
tion ol  our  keeping  ourselves  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  are  able  to  keep  ourselves 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

steadfast,  and  to  present  a  front  of  resistance  that  does  not  yield  one  foot,  either  to 
imperceptible  continuous  pressure,  to  sudden  assaults,  or  to  the  fluctuations  of  our 
own  changeful  dispositions  and  tempers.  The  ground  on  which  a  man  stands  has 
a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  firmness  of  his  footing.  You  cannot  stand  fast  upon  a 
bed  of  sliine,  or  upon  a  sandbank  being  undermined  by  the  tides.  And  if  we, 
changeful  creatures,  are  to  be  steadfast  in  any  region,  our  surest  way  of  being  so  is 
to  knit  ourselves  to  Him  "  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  and 
from  whose  immortality  will  flow  some  copy  and  reflection  of  itself  into  your  else 
changeful  natures.  (Ibid.)  If  ye  know  that  He  is  righteous,  ye  know  that 
every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is  bom  of  Him. — A  standard  of  judgment : — 
I.  A  STANDABD  OF  JUDGMENT  IS  SET  UP — "If  JB  know  that  He  is  righteous."  The 
expression  is  not  put  in  this  form  to  suggest  the  idea  of  doubtfulness.  On  the  con- 
trary, it  is  an  assumption  of  certainty.  "  If  ye  know  "  is  tantamount  to  "  since  ye 
know."  He  is  righteous  in  His  holiness.  He  maintains  it  in  a  way  which  is  in 
strictest  harmony  with  the  requirements  of  His  law.  It  is  never  compromised  in  the 
provisions  of  the  gospel.  He  is  righteous  in  His  truth.  He  has  uttered  no  threaten- 
ing which  He  shall  not  execute,  He  has  delivered  no  promise  which  He  shall  not 
fulfil.  He  is  equally  righteous  in  His  mercy.  "  Justice  and  judgment  are  the 
habitation  of  His  throne;  mercy  and  truth  go  before  His  face."  He  is  righteous  in 
His  goodness.  All  its  bounties  are  conferred  on  the  sinner  for  Jesus'  sake.  He  is 
righteous  in  His  justice.  "  Ye  say  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal.  Hear  now,  0 
house  of  Israel,  is  not  My  way  equal?  are  not  your  ways  unequal?"  "  Shall  not 
the  Judge  of  aU  the  earth  do  right?"     II.  The   evidence  fuknished  by  this 

STANDARD,  ENABLING    US    TO    JUDGE    OF    THE    GRACIOUS  STATE    OF    THE    BELIEVER.       "  Ye 

know  that  every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is  born  of  Him."  1.  There  are  some 
of  whom  it  may  be  said  they  are  righteous.  This  is  to  be  understood,  not  of  the 
imputed  righteousness  by  which  they  are  justified,  but  of  the  personal  righteousness 
by  which  they  are  sanctified.  If  it  is  asked,  how  is  such  a  change  made  to  pass 
upon  the  sinner?  our  reply  is  in  the  words  of  the  Divine  promise  (Jer.  xxxi.  33). 
This  is  enough  to  account  for  their  complete  transformation  of  life.  Of  every  one 
on  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  has  thus  operated  it  may  be  said,  "  He  is  righteous." 
A  few  words  wiU  explain  how  it  is  so.  He  thus  perceives  the  meaning  of  the  law. 
He  obtains  a  view  of  its  spirituality  and  extent  which  he  never  had  before.  He  sees 
how  it  covers  his  whole  life,  and  enters  into  the  deepest  recesses  of  his  heart.  He 
thus  feels  the  obligation  of  the  law.  He  is  led  distinctly  to  perceive  that  it  is 
impossible  for  it  to  relax  its  demands.  It  must  always  endure  to  claim  the  universal 
and  unbroken  homage  of  the  heart  and  life.  He  is  thus  made  to  love  the  law.  No 
matter  how  far  he  comes  short  of  it,  and  how  much  it  condemns  him,  he  cannot 
but  approve  and  admire  it.  He  condemns  himself,  but  he  justifies  it.  He  thus 
learns  habitually  to  avoid  the  violation  of  the  law.  He  cannot  live  in  sin.  He  may 
be  overcome  by  the  force  of  temptation ;  but  the  whole  bent  of  his  mind  is  towards 
righteousness.  He  is  thus  impelled  to  obey  the  law.  It  is  not  the  ground  of  his 
hope,  but  it  is  the  rule  of  his  life.  Say  now  what  must  be  the  influence  and  effect 
of  such  exercises  as  these?  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  of  their  subject,  "he  is 
righteous."  2.  Such  righteousness  furnishes  satisfying  proof  that  He  who  manifests 
it  is  born  of  God.  Nature  can  bear  no  such  fruit.  "  Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing 
out  of  an  unclean?  "  "That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh."  Education,  and 
example,  and  prudence  may  do  much,  but  they  cannot  produce  the  holiness  of 
which  we  have  spoken.  Again,  we  find  that  it  is  distinctly  ascribed  to  grace  in  the 
Divine  Word  (Eph.  ii.  10).  (Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Intermediate  condition  of  the 
Divine fellowsJiip — righteousness: — The  apostle  passes  to  a  new  thought  or  theme; 
a  new  view  of  the  fellowship  in  which  he  would  have  us  to  be  partakers  with  himsell 
and  all  the  apostles.  It  is  "  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ."  He  has  viewed  it  as  a  fellowship  of  light.  He  now  views  it  as  a  fellowship 
of  righteousness.  To  be  born  of  God  implies  community  of  nature  between  Him 
and  us.  I  cannot  be  really  His  child  unless  I  am  possessed  of  the  same  nature  with 
Him.  So  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  teaches  in  two  remarkable  passages  (Matt.  v.  43-45 ; 
John  viii.  38-44).  John  may  have  had  these  words  of  his  Master  in  his  mind  when 
he  wrote  the  brief  and  pithy  maxim,  "  God  is  righteous,  and  every  one  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  born  of  Him."  His  object  is  to  supply  a  searching  test  by  which 
our  abiding  in  God  may  be  surely  tried.  It  is  a  mode  of  proof  which  may,  without 
irreverence,  be  applied  in  the  first  instance  to  the  Son  Himself.  We  have  His  own 
warrant  for  so  applying  it  (John  xv.  9,  10).  It  is  by  keeping  His  Father's  com- 
mandments that  He,  as  the  Son,  born  of  tlie  Father,  abides  in  the  Father's  love.    Aa 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  169 

the  Father  is  known  by  Him  as  righteous,  so  He,  doing  righteousness,  is  proved  to 
be  born  of  Him.  He  doeth  the  works  of  His  Father,  and  so  evinces  His  Sonship. 
All  through,  the  stress  is  laid  on  righteousness.  That  is  the  distinguishing  cha- 
racteristic which  identifies  Him  that  is  born  of  God  :  the  common  quality  connect- 
ing what  He  does  as  born  of  God  with  the  nature  of  Him  of  whom  He  is  born.  You 
who  believe  are  born  of  God  as  He  is.  I  speak  of  His  human  birth  ;  in  which  you, 
in  your  new  birth,  are  partakers  with  Him,  the  same  Spirit  of  God  being  the  agent 
in  both,  and  originating  in  both  the  same  new  life.  His  birth  was  humiliation  to 
Him,  though  it  was  of  God ;  your  new  birth  is  exaltation  to  you,  because  it  is  of 
God.  His  being  born  of  God  by  the  Spirit  made  Him  partaker  of  your  human 
nature — your  being  born  again  of  God  by  the  Spirit  makes  you  partakers  of  His 
"  Divine  nature."  You,  thus  born  of  God,  come  to  be  of  the  same  mind  with  Him 
who  is  the  first  begotten  of  the  Father ;  especially  as  regards  your  knowing  that  God 
is  righteous,  and  that  it  is,  therefore,  and  must  be,  the  impulse  and  characteristic  of 
every  one  that  is  born  of  Him  to  do  righteousness.  For  if  you  are  thus  born  of  God 
must  you  not  be  as  thoroughly  on  His  side,  as  unreservedly  in  His  interest,  in  the 
great  outstanding  controversy  between  His  righteousness  and  man's  sin,  as  is  His 
well-beloved  Son  Himself  ?  First,  in  Him,  and  with  Him — born  of  God  into  fellow- 
ship with  Him  in  His  birth — you  enter  into  that  doing  of  righteousness  on  His  part 
which  was  the  main  design  of  His  being  born  ;  which  brings  into  perfect  harmony, 
not  God's  righteousness  and  man's  sin,  but  God's  righteousness  and  man's  salvation 
from  sin.  Ah !  what  an  insight  into  the  righteous  nature  and  character  of  God ; 
what  a  measure  of  cordial  oneness  of  principle  and  sentiment  with  Him,  entering 
into  His  very  mind  and  heart,  does  all  this  involve  !  How  far  removed  is  it  from 
that  loose,  easy-going  sort  of  Christian  virtue  which  would  not  itself  do  iniquity,  but 
is  very  tolerant  of  those  who  do  it ;  not,  like  Lot's  righteous  soul,  vexed  with  evil ; 
nor,  like  Lot,  preaching  righteousness  ;  but  rather  prone  to  look  on  sin  with  indif- 
ference or  complacency,  and  to  let  the  sinner  go  on,  without  warning  or  entreaty 
to  his  doom.  If  you  know  that  God  is  righteous,  and  make  conscience  of  doing 
righteousness  accordingly,  you  cannot  be  thus  tame  and  acquiescent ;  thus  cold  and 
callous.  To  you  righteousness,  God's  righteousness,  is  not  a  name,  but  a  reality. 
To  be  confirmed  to  it,  to  submit  to  it,  is  life.  [R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  What  is  it 
to  be  a  doer  of  righteousness  ? — 1.  Eighteousness  is  that  which  in  itself  is  right,  or 
according  to  the  will  of  God.  To  do  righteousness  is  to  do  that  which  He  com- 
mands, whether  it  relates  to  moral  or  positive  precepts.  2.  Doing  righteousness 
includes  in  it  a  regard  to  the  rectitude  and  propriety  of  what  is  commanded.  It  is 
not  the  honour  or  advantage  arising  from  the  performance  of  duty,  but  it  is  being  a 
Divine  requirement,  and  tending  to  glorify  God,  that  furnishes  the  motive  to  obedi- 
ence, and  renders  it  acceptable  in  His  sight  (Zech.  vii.  5,  6).  3.  The  sincerity  of 
our  obedience  is  implied  in  doing  righteousness.  Genuine  obedience  includes  the 
whole  compass  of  duty,  and  esteems  God's  testimonies  concerning  all  things  to  be 
right.  4.  It  includes  a  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  and  preserving  to  the  end. 
5.  Doing  righteousness  supposes  the  existence  of  a  righteous  principle.  The  tree 
must  be  made  good  before  the  fruit  can  be  good.  The  fountain  must  be  cleansed 
ere  the  streams  can  be  pure  ;  and  a  godly  life  can  only  be  the  effect  of  a  Divine 
nature.  6.  Those  only  can  be  said  to  work  righteousness  who  place  no  dependence 
on  the  righteousness  they  have  wrought.  Faith  in  Jesus  is  essential  to  aU  true 
obedience,  and  without  this  it  is  impossible  to  please  God.     {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  ni. 

Vebs.  1-6.  Behold,  what  mamier  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that 
we  should  he  called  the  sons  of  God. — Children  of  God : — These  two  verses  of 
St.  John's  Epistle  contain  a  simple  summary  of  true  religion.  "  If  ye  know 
that  He  is  righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is  begotten 
of  Him."  Thus  far  the  Old  Testament  goes.  Israel  had  learned  this  primary 
lesson  of  true  religion,  that  the  Almighty  is  the  Eighteous  Power.  Knowing 
Jehovah,  not  as  a  national  deity  who  would  help  His  own  people  whether  they 
were  right  or  wrong,  but  as  the  righteous  God  over  aU,  who  would  reject  Hia 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

chosen  people  if  they  did  wrong,  the  prophets  saw  clearly  also  that  only  those 
men  who  do  right  can  claim  to  be  the  sons  of  the  Most  High.  The  next  verse 
contains  a  summary  of  the  New  Testament  revelation  of  real  religion : 
"  Behold  what  manner  of  love,"  <fec.  It  is  all  from  God's  love  in  Christ  that  we 
have  right  to  be  called  children  of  God.  These  two  words — one  fulfilling  the 
Old  Testament,  the  other  opening  the  riches  of  the  New — mark  the  essence  of 
real  religion  :  righteousness  and  sonship.  Let  us  first  take  up  the  Old  Testament 
word  for  it.  It  is  a  solid  word.  The  true  religion  is  not  a  moral  veneering  of  life  ;  it 
is  not  a  piece  of  pious  ornamentation,  nor  an  official  robe  drawn  over  an  unprin- 
cipled heart.  It  is  not  an  emotional  substitute  for  conduct.  The  Old  Testament 
word  for  religion  is  a  word  of  cubic  contents — righteousness,  a  real  thing,  concrete 
as  just  dealing  between  man  and  man.  A  present  indisputable  argument  for  belief 
in  Moses  and  the  prophets  as  holy  men  of  old  inspired  of  God  is  that  they  made 
the  superhuman  effort  of  building  a  nation  on  the  Ten  Commandments.  They 
had  the  supernal  faith  to  command  a  people  to  do  right,  and  to  live  together  in 
just  relations  in  the  fear  of  God.  We  do  not  yet  dare  bring  our  politics  up  to  that 
level  of  the  prophets.  The  religion  which  first  mastered  the  lesson  of  eternal 
justice  and  made  it  the  foundation  of  a  state  was  not  a  faith  which  had  sprung  up 
of  itself  out  of  the  jungle  of  Canaanitish  superstitions.  It  was  not  found  in 
Babylon.  Assyria's  power  perished  for  the  lack  of  it.  The  true  God  impressed 
Himself  upon  Moses  and  the  prophets.  We  know  that  they  were  the  appointed 
bearers  of  a  Divine  revelation,  and  the  bringers  of  the  light,  very  much  as  we  might 
know  that  a  highway  running  up  to  some  clear  mountain  height  through  the  swamp 
and  the  underbrush  at  its  foot  was  never  a  spontaneous  freak  of  nature,  but  marks 
the  course  of  some  intelligent  purpose.  The  Lord  God  made  that  way  of  righteous- 
ness through  all  the  superstitions  and  idolatries  of  the  nations  on  and  up  to  its 
Messianic  height.  The  religion  of  eternal  righteousness  is  the  supernal  fact  of 
history.  Once  gain  sight  of  the  everlasting  righteousness,  and  nothing  else  seems 
great.  Observe  that  the  righteousness  which  from  beginning  to  end  the  Old  Testa- 
ment presses  for  is  no  abstraction,  but  concrete,  solid  right-doing.  The  preachers 
of  righteousness  is  the  Old  Testament  faced  men,  and  threw  themselves  in  the 
name  of  the  holy  God  into  the  thick  of  events.  They  were  the  fearless  advocates 
of  the  oppressed  ;  they  were  God's  statesmen  amid  the  shifting  politics  of  Jerusalem. 
They  could  flash  the  eternal  justice  into  the  covetous  eyes  of  princes.  Righteous- 
ness in  the  old  testament  is  no  scholar's  candle  flickering  in  an  attic ;  it  is  an 
electric  light  revealing  the  street ;  all  classes  have  to  pass  under  it  and  be  seen. 
Turn  now  from  the  prophets  to  the  New  Testament.  We  hear  ringing  clear  and 
full  through  the  preaching  of  the  apostles  another  word  for  the  true  religion.  It  is 
sonship.  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  The  essence  of  the  New 
Testament  is  in  the  Lord's  parable  of  the  prodigal  son.  So  Jesus  Himself  opened 
the  heart  of  the  gospel  toward  us  sinners.  The  grandest  thing  in  the  world  for  any 
man  to  do  is  really  to  live  day  and  night,  alike  in  the  darkness  or  in  the  joy  of  life, 
as  a  son  of  the  Most  High  God.  Only  one  ever  accomplished  perfectly  this  task ; 
and  we  for  the  most  part  do  but  succeed  as  yet  in  living  here  and  there,  now  and 
then,  as  the  children  of  the  Father  in  heaven.  But  think  a  moment  what  it  is  to 
do  this.  It  would  signify  within  us  a  very  genuine  humility.  In  a  life  of  sonship 
humility  would  have  to  be  at  times  that  conscious  sense  of  evil  or  of  wrongdoing 
which  is  repentance  for  sin.  The  humility  of  a  life  of  filial  dependence  on  God 
will  become  so  deep  and  pure  that  no  possible  outward  success  or  inward  spiritual 
triumph  will  be  able  to  cause  the  son  of  the  living  God  to  dwell  in  any  other  habit 
and  atmosphere.  Sonship,  again,  so  far  as  this  New  Testament  word  for  religion 
is  realised  by  any  of  us,  will  free  us  from  the  haunting  sense  of  strangeness  in  this 
world.  It  is  not  simply  the  mystery  of  things ;  it  is  the  mystery  of  ourselves  that 
baffles  us.  Death  does  not  grow  less  strange  from  our  increasing  familiarity  with 
it.  All  things  are  strange,  and  will  grow  stranger  to  us,  unless  we  can  discover 
Bome  diviner  thoughtfulness  in  them ;  unless,  amid  all  the  mystery  of  the  universe, 
we  shall  know  ourselves  as  God's  children,  and  begin  on  this  earth  to  be  in  our 
hearts  at  home  with  our  God.  This  likewise  will  be  the  mark  of  true  sonship, 
and  the  religion  of  sonship — obedience,  strong,  cheerful  obedience.  The  Christian 
sense  of  sonship,  so  far  as  we  receive  the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry  Abba, 
Father,  will  enable  us,  in  short,  to  live  the  simple  life  of  trust.  It  is  life  up  on  the 
Bunny  heights.  Trust  is  final  spiritual  mastery  of  things.  It  is  perfect  poise  of 
Bpirit,  like  the  poise  of  the  eagle  after  it  has  beaten  its  way  up  against  the  wind 
into  the  sky,  and  rests  circhng  with  buoyant  wings  upon  the  sunny  air.    Trust  ia 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  171 

ability  of  soul  to  live  happily  without  Divine  explanation.  Faith  in  God  is  willing- 
ness to  wait  for  explanations  of  things.  You  ask  for  reasons  why  certain  events 
have  happened  to  you  ;  why  any  evil,  such  as  we  may  meet  in  the  street,  is  tolerated 
for  a  moment  in  a  world  which  has  a  God  over  it ;  why  human  life  has  often 
proved  so  tragic  ;  why  death  reigns  ;  why  a  thousand  shadows  fleck  the  light ;  why, 
in  short,  we  mortals  seem  to  be  like  wanderers  in  a  forest,  where  it  is  both  dark 
and  bright.  Now,  faith  is  not  an  answer  to  any  of  these  inquiries  ;  faith  does  not 
yet  lead  us  out  with  the  clearing,  but  faith  is  trust  in  the  light  between  the  shadows, 
trust  that  the  light  is  high  and  eternal,  and  the  shadows  only  for  the  moment. 
Trust  is  the  discovery  of  the  soul  that  it  can  live  awhile  without  explanations,  and 
not  be  disturbed.  Such  trust  is  the  confidence  of  sonship.  Now,  I  am  aware  that 
men  who  have  to  meet  the  practical  urgencies  of  life  often  find  it  easier  to  come  to  '• 
some  determination  of  righteousness  than  it  is  for  them  to  let  their  lives  be  lifted 
up  into  the  assurance  of  sonship.  It  is  less  difficult  for  some  of  you  to  be  Old 
Testament  worthies  than  it  is  to  become  New  Testament  saints.  You  love  righteous- 
ness, and  you  hate  injustice  and  fraud.  There  you  are  inclined  to  stop.  It  is 
better  for  any  one  to  live  according  to  the  righteousness  of  the  Old  Testament  than 
not  to  live  at  all  from  the  Bible.  The  seeds  of  the  perfect  life  of  sonship  are  con- 
tained in  the  religion  of  the  prophets.  Nevertheless,  the  Christ  came  to  fulfil  the 
righteousness  of  the  old  dispensation.  The  righteousness  which  is  by  faith  is  our 
full  salvation.  Let  one's  dutiful  living  spring  directly  out  of  his  sense  of  sonship, 
and  it  will  become  a  transfigured  conscientiousness.  The  light  of  love  will  play  aU 
through  it.  To  this  higher  life  we  are  called.  Men  will  finally  do  right  toward  one 
another  when  they  shall  learn  to  live  together  as  sons  of  God.  The  present  revival 
of  right-doing  wiU  be  complete  when  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  men  are  born 
anew  as  the  children  of  the  Father  in  heaven.  {Newman  Smyth.)  The  Divine  birth — 
the  family  likeness : — The  first  verses  of  the  third  chapter  are  to  be  viewed  as  insepar- 
able from  the  last  verse  of  the  second.  It  is  that  verse  which  starts  the  new  line  of 
thought ;  our  "  knowing  that  God  is  righteous,  and  doing  righteousness  accordingly," 
in  virtue  of  our  "  being  bom  of  Him."  Born  of  Him  1  That  is  what  awakens 
John's  grateful  surprise.  I.  In  every  view  that  can  be  taken  of  it,  our  being  called 
the  sons  of  God  is  a  wonderful  instance  of  the  Father's  love.  U.  And  we 
ARE  His  children:  "Beloved,  now  are  we  children  of  God."  Our  being  called 
children  of  God  is  a  reality ;  our  being  born  of  God  makes  it  so.  The  world  may 
not  know  us  in  that  character,  for  "  it  knows  not  God,"  and  has  never  known 
Him.  Let  us  lay  our  account  with  having  to  judge  and  act  on  principles  which 
the  world  cannot  understand.  Let  us  be  God's  children  indeed ;  though  on  that 
very  account  the  world  that  has  not  known  God  should  not  know  us.     HI.  For 

WHATEVER   THE   WORLD    MAT    THINK     OR     SAY,    "  WE   ARE   THE    CHILDEEN    OF   GOD,"    HiS 

dear  children  ;  sharers  of  His  Divine  nature ;  the  objects  of  His  fatherly  love.  It 
concerns  us  to  bear  this  in  mind,  to  feel  it  to  be  true.  It  is  our  safety  to  do  so.  It  is 
what  is  due  to  ourselves ;  it  is  what  God  expects,  and  has  a  right  to  expect  from 
us.  Let  us  stay  ourselves  on  the  conviction  that  our  being  God's  children  is  not  a 
matter  of  opinion,  dependent  on  the  world's  vote,  but  a  matter  of  fact,  flowing 
from  the  amazing  manner  of  love  which  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us.  And 
let  us  be  put,  as  the  saying  is,  upon  our  mettle,  to  make  good  our  claim  to  be  God's 
children  by  such  a  manifestation  of  our  oneness  of  nature  with  Him  of  whom  we 
are  born  as  may,  by  God's  blessing,  overcome  some  of  the  world's  ignorant 
unbelief,  and  lead  some  of  the  world's  children  to  try  that  manner  of  love  for 
themselves,  to  taste  and  see  how  good  the  Lord  is.    TV.  And  we  are  to  do  so  all 

THE  rather  because  THESE  DRAWBACKS  AND  DISADVANTAGES  WILL  NOT  LAST  LONG.      Ws 

are  only  at  the  beginning  of  our  life  as  God's  children.  1.  What  is  set  before  us  as 
matter  of  hope  in  the  future  life  is  not  something  different  from  what  is  to  be  attained, 
enjoyed,  and  improved  by  us,  as  matter  of  faith,  and  of  the  experience  of  faith  in  the 
present  life.  2.  When  it  does  appear  what  we  are  to  be,  when  that  is  no  more  hidden 
but  disclosed,  we  shall  be  like  God  whose  children  we  are  as  being  born  of  Him  :  "  for 
we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  The  full  light  of  all  His  perfection  as  the  righteous 
God  will  open  upon  our  view ;  we  shall  know  the  righteous  Father  as  the  Son 
knows  Him.  Is  not  this  a  hope  "fuU  of  glory"?  And  is  it  not  a  hope  fuU  of 
holiness  too?  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  God's  adoptive  love: — I.  First,  we  are 
arrested  by  the  manner  in  which  the  apostle  opens  the  subject — "Behold,  what 
manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us."  It  is  the  language  of  adoration 
and  wonder.  Our  astonishment  might  well  be  excited  that  God  had  created  us  ; 
that  He  preserved  us,  notwithstanding  our  unworthiness.     But  that  He  should 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

adopt  sinners   was   condescension   which  might  well   prompt   the    exclamation, 
"Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us."  What,  then,  is 
the    manner    of    this    love  ?     It    passeth   knowledge.     It   was    everlasting    love, 
gratuitous  love,  and  at  the  same  time  costly  love.     And  then  how  rich  the  blessings 
procured  by  such  love.     2.  "  We  are  called  the  sons  of  God."     It  is  clear  this 
statement  must  be  understood  in  a  restricted  sense.     All  are  the  sons  of  God  by 
creation,  also  by  providence.     The  text  refers  to  a  sonship  peculiar  to  those  who 
are  the  objects  of  redeeming  love.     Adoption  into  the  family  of  God  is  singled  out  as 
evidence  and  effect  of  His  love.     Nor  can  we  wonder  at  this  selection.     Think  of 
the  work  that  is  done  when  the  sinner  is  made  a  son  of  God.     It  is  a  new  birth 
unto  righteousness.     The  sinner  is  made  alive  unto  God.     Think,  again,  of  the 
change   that   is   effected   in  such   a   work.     Think   of  the   privileges   of   sonship. 
Think,  finally,  of  the  inheritance  in  store  for  them.     "  If  children  then  heirs,  heirs 
of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ."     3.  The  estimate  formed  of  the  privilege  of 
sonship  by  the  world.     "  Therefore  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  Him 
not."     It  might  have  been  supposed  that  all  men  would   applaud  them  as  the 
happiest  and  most  excellent  of  the  children  of  men.     But,  alas  !  it  is  very  different. 
The  world  does  not  know  the   sons  of   God.     The  world  both  disapproves  and 
dislikes  the  peculiarity  of  the  sons  of  God.     The  reason  is  suggested  in  the  text. 
•'  Therefore,"  saith  the  apostle.     He  had  only  said  it  was  a  blessed  thing  to  be 
called  the  sons  of  God.     Can  it  be,  then,  this  is  that  which  the  world  dislikes  ?     This 
is  clearly  his  meaning.     Worldly  men  do  not  understand  the  doctrine  of  sonship. 
It  is  too  spiritual  for  their  perception.      They  scorn  it  as  the  offspring  of  spiritual 
pride.     Unhappily,  however,  for  their  hot  displeasure,  there  is  an  indisputable  fact 
to  prove  this  enmity  of  the  world  to  the  sons  of  God.     It  is  quoted  by  the  apostle. 
It  is  the  rejection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     He  says  of  the  world  and  of  Him,  "  it 
knew  Him  not."     This  accords  with  the  history,  "  He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His 
own  received  Him  not."     "  All  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer 
persecution."    Ought  this,  then,  to  offend  them  ?    Certainly  not.    It  ought  to  profit 
them.    It  should  put  them  on  their  guard,  that  they  may  give  no  unnecessary 
offence.      It    should    make  them  thankful  they   are  not    of    the    same    spirit. 
4.  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."     How  carefully  the  views  of  the 
apostle  are  balanced  in  this  passage.     When  he  set  forth  sonship  and  its  high 
privileges  he  annexed  a  caution,  "  the  world  knoweth  us  not,"  lest  any  might  be 
disappointed  and  injured.     So  again  after  he  had  given  that  caution  he  reassures 
them  of  the  reality  and  continuance  of  their  blessedness,  "  Now  are  we  the  sons  of 
God."    This  might  be  rendered  necessary  by  the  dark  suspicions  of  their  own 
minds.     They  found  much  within  them  contrary  to  what  they  could  desire  or 
might  expect.    Let  them  not  be  cast  down.      Or  it  might  be  rendered  necessary  by 
the  conduct  of  others  towards  them.     They  might  find  themselves  suspected  and 
evil  entreated.     Through  it  all  let  them  remember  they  are  still  the  sons  of  God. 
Nor  should  they  forget  what  was  required  of  them  as  such.      *'  Only  let  your  con- 
versation be  as  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ."     "  Walk  worthy  of  your  high 
vocation."     So  living  they  might  enjoy  the  sweet  consciousness  that,  let  the  world 
do  or  say  as  they  might,  they  could  appropriate  the  assuring  words,  "  Now  are  we 
the  sons  of  God."     5.  Their  thoughts  are  directed  to  the  future.     "It  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be."      6.  "Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth 
himself  even  as  He  is  pure."     {J.Morgan,  D.D.)        Adopting  love  of  the  Father: — 
I.    Look  at  the  result  or  purpose  of  this  love,  and  we  shall  be  the  better 
PREPARED  TO  UNDERSTAND  ITS  "MANNER."     What   "manner"   of  love  is   this,   in 
transforming  those  who  were  once  so  unlike  Him?      Love  prompted  Him  to  adopt 
them;  and   after  they   are   adopted    He   has   peculiar  delight  in   them.     What 
"  manner "  of  love  is  this,  that  the  fallen  should  at  length  have  a  place  in  Hla 
bosom  which  the  unfallen  can  never  occupy  !     Still  more,  a  glorious  destiny  awaits 
them.     When  the  years  of  minority  are  expired  the  children  are  taken  home  to 
the    household   on   high,    where  the  whole  family  form  one  unbroken  and  vast 
assemblage.     The  extraordinary  love  of  the  Father  is  also  seen  in  the  entire  circuit 
of  discipline  which  has  been  arranged  for  His  children.     And  will  not  such  a  child 
be  content  in  any  circumstances  ?     What  is  good  for  him  his  Father  will  give  him. 
As  much  of  temporal  blessing  will  he  get  as  he  can  improve.     II.  The  sinqularitt 
OF  the  Divine  affection.     1.  And  first,  the  love  that  leads  a  man  to  call  a  child 
his  own,  which  is  not  his  by  natural  descent,  has  not  such  a  "  manner  "  about  it. 
For  when  among  men  a  child  is  adopted,  it  is  usually  because  the  adopter  thinks  it 
worthy  of  his  regard  ;  because  there  is  something  in  its  features  or  character  that 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  173 

pleases  him.  But  no  such  motive  could  prompt  the  Divine  affection,  for  we  are 
utterly  lost  and  loathsome  before  Him.  2.  Again,  if  one  adopts  a  child,  it  is 
commonly  because  himself  is  childless,  or  his  hearth  may  have  been  desolated  by 
war  or  disease.  He  longs  to  have  some  object  near  him  on  which  to  expend  his 
attachment.  But  Jehovah  had  myriads  of  a  flourishing  progeny — uncounted  hosts 
of  bright  intelligences,  who  have  never  disobeyed  Him.  But  the  present  condition 
of  the  sons  of  God  is  veiled  and  incomplete.  "  Therefore,"  the  apostle  adds,  "  the 
world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  Him  not."  The  mission  of  the  Son  of 
God  was  spiritual,  was  too  ethereal  for  the  coarse  vision  of  the  world  to  detect,  or 
its  sordid  heart  to  admire.  Its  great  ones,  and  not  its  good  ones,  divide  among 
themselves  the  world's  homage.  Not  that  the  world  is  able  to  ignore  Christianity. 
But  it  admires  it  not  for  itseK  but  for  its  splendid  results — for  the  beneficial 
effects,  in  the  form  of  patriotism  and  philanthropy,  which  it  has  produced.  It  is 
not  Wilberforce  the  saint,  but  Wilberforce  the  queller  of  the  slave  trade,  that  men 
admire.  The  dignity  and  prospects  of  the  sons  of  God  are  not  of  a  secular  and 
visible  nature.  "  The  world  knoweth  them  not."  But  should  this  ignorance  on 
the  part  of  the  world  dispkit  you  ?  By  no  means.  Your  case  is  not  solitary.  It 
did  not  recognise  the  Son  of  God.  "  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  Despite  of 
this  non-recognition  on  the  part  of  the  world,  we  are  the  sons  of  God.  The  reahty 
of  our  adoption  is  not  modified  by  the  world's  oblivion  of  it.  It  may  be  undis- 
covered by  others,  but  our  own  experience  gives  ourselves  the  full  assurance  of  it. 
But  noble  as  is  our  present  condition,  our  ultimate  dignity  surpasses  conception. 
"  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  Even  though  we  now  revel  in  the 
Divine  favour,  yet  such  transcendent  felicity  is  scarcely  a  premiss  to  reason  from  as 
to  the  glory  of  our  ultimate  heritage.  There  is  so  much  about  us  that  clogs  and 
confines  us — so  deep  is  the  shadow  that  earth  throws  over  the  children  of  God  that 
any  inference  as  to  coming  freedom  and  glory  is  all  but  an  impossibihty.  Such 
being  the  present  ecUpse  of  our  sonship,  there  is  the  less  wonder  that  "  the  world 
knoweth  us  not."  Their  aim  is  to  be  as  hke  Him  as  they  can  be  here,  in  the  hope 
that  they  shall  be  perfectly  like  Him  hereafter.  {John  Eadie,  D.D.)  The 
manner  of  love  bestmved  upon  us : — I.  The  manneb  of  love  which  the 
Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us.  1.  Sovereign  in  its  exercise.  2.  Gracious 
in  its  communication.  3.  Merciful  in  its  regards.  4.  Everlasting  in  its 
continuance.  II.  The  consequences  which  flow  to  us  feom  that  love.  1. 
Present  adoption  into  God's  family.  2.  Future  restoration  to  His  image. 
in.  The  attention  with  which  the  whole  should  be  begaeded.  1.  Your 
attention  should  deepen  your  humility.  2.  Your  attention  should  strengthen 
your  confidence.  3.  Your  attention  should  excite  your  affection.  (W.Mudge,B.A.) 
The  present  relationship  and  future  prospects  of  the  faithful : — I.  The  Chkistian's 
present  state  is  one  of  relationship  to  God.  It  impUes — 1.  Godlikeness.  2. 
Confidence.  3.  Liberty.  4.  It  entitles  us  to  a  glorious  inheritance.  11.  The  ciecum- 
stances  of  his  future  life  are  in  a  great  measure  unknown  to  heu.   in.  We  have, 

NEVERTHELESS,    SUFFICIENT   KNOWLEDGE    OF    THAT   FUTURE    TO   MAKE    US   HAPPY   IN   THE 

PRESENT.  {H.  P.  Bowen.)  The  iconderful  love  of  God  as  displayed  in  human  redemp- 
tion : — I.  The  unworthiness  of  its  objects.  II.  The  expensiveness  of  the  sacrifice. 
III.  The  vabiety  and  vastness  of  the  blessings  secured  to  us  through  this  adopting 
love.  1.  Present.  2.  Future.  IV.  This  love  is  to  be  to  us  a  subject  of  meditation. 
"  Behold."  1.  Admire  it.  2.  Trust  in  it.  3.  Extol  it.  4.  Beheve  it.  {W.  Lloyd.) 
What  manner  of  love: — Here,  you  notice,  that  although  St.  John  had  been 
learning  more  and  more  about  the  love  of  God  all  his  days,  he  does  not  trust  himself 
to  characterise  it.  I  beUeve  throughout  eternity  we  shall  never  find  the  right  word 
for  it.  Even  if  we  think  that  we  have  made  some  such  grand  discovery  as  to 
present  it  to  us  in  an  altogether  new  hght,  we  shall  still  go  on  discovering  that  there 
is  more  to  be  said  about  it.  Mark,  the  love  spoken  of  here  is  the  love  of  the  Father. 
This  text  takes  us  right  back  to  the  source  from  which  all  other  blessings  flow. 
That  word  "  Father !  "  —there  is  scarcely  a  heart  in  which  there  does  not  seem  to 
be  awakened  something  hke  a  sympathetic  thriU  at  the  sound — even  those  who  are 
most  estranged  from  God  by  sin  and  wicked  works.  Does  it  not  answer  to  an 
inward  yearning  of  our  human  hearts  ?  Orphans  are  we,  and  desolate,  unless  we 
know  that  within  the  veil  we  have  One  who  not  only  bears  a  Father's  name  but 
possesses  a  Father's  heart.  Now  observe,  this  love  is  represented  as  being 
definitely  bestowed,  with  a  view  to  a  specific  end,  and  that  end  is  in  order  that 
we  might  be  called  the  sons  of  God.  We  might  have  been  called  the  sons  of  God  ia 
the  sense  of  creation,  without  any  such  love  being  bestowed  upon  us,  without  any 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

gift  being  made.  There  was  no  particular  difficulty  in  our  being  placed  in  such  a 
position  ;  indeed,  as  an  historical  fact,  we  are  His  offspring.  Nor,  again,  was  there 
any  special  difficulty  in  the  way  of  His  adopting  a  certain  ecclesiastical  relationship 
to  us,  standing  to  us  in  the  relation  of  Father  to  an  ecclesiastical  theocracy,  which 
He  HimseK  established;  there  was  no  difficulty  in  that.  But  in  order  that  He 
might  stand  in  the  relationship  indicated  to  us  in  this  sense,  as  "  our  Father,"  and 
put  us  in  the  position  indicated  by  the  word  "  son  "  in  this  passage,  it  was  necessary 
that  He  should  make  such  a  manifestation  of  His  love  towards  us  as  He  has  made 
in  the  Incarnation.  Now  we  pass  on  to  consider  this  special  relationship,  and  the 
first  thought  that  strikes  me  is  this,  that  in  order  that  you  and  I  might  attain  to  it 
the  love  of  God  had  first  of  all  to  surmount  a  stupendous  difficulty.  There  was  a 
question  which  God  represents  Himself  as  putting  to  Himself,  and  that  question  is, 
"  How  shall  I  set  thee  amongst  the  children  ?  "  Oh,  you  say,  by  an  act  of  God's 
sovereign  power.  But  an  act  of  God's  sovereign  power  would  not  make  us  real 
children  of  His.  The  child  partakes  of  the  nature  of  his  parent.  Now,  we  have 
lost  the  nature  of  our  spiritual  Parent,  we  have  inherited  the  nature  of  our  earthly 
parent :  the  old  Adam.  We  come  into  the  world  with  an  hereditary  taint  of 
rebellion  against  God.  How  many  of  us  there  are  who,  from  our  earliest  days,  have 
gone  on  living  consistently  with  this  start.  Now,  under  those  circumstances,  how 
can  God  put  us  amongst  the  children?  If  God  were  to  say  to  one  of  you,  "  You 
are  My  child,"  would  that  make  you  His  child  unless  He  were  first  to  perform  a 
moral  miracle  upon  you  ?  Now,  God  performs  moral  miracles,  but  He  does  it  in  a 
particular  way.  He  so  performs  the  miracle  that  in  the  actual  performance  of  it 
our  will  shall  be  consciously  co-operating  with  Him.  "  How  shall  I  set  thee  among 
the  children  ?  "  The  answer  is  given  in  the  gift  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There 
was  only  one  way  in  which  the  love  of  God  could  achieve  this  marvellous  result. 
It  was  to  be  done  by  a  gift — the  gift  of  Incarnate  Love.  What  do  we  know  about 
the  love  of  God  ?  I  see  it  revealed  in  the  human  form  of  Jesus.  What  is  that  love 
of  God  like  ?  I  apprehend  its  character  by  gazing  into  the  face  of  Jesus.  What  is 
it  that  the  love  of  God  actually  does  achieve?  It  achieves  its  very  end,  it  achieves 
the  end  of  bringing  me,  poor,  guilty  rebel  as  I  am,  into  a  filial  relationship  with 
God ;  enabling  me  to  look  up  into  God's  face  and  say,  "  Thank  God,  I  now  am  a 
child  of  God."  How  is  this  done  ?  It  is  done  by  a  new  birth.  How  is  this  birth 
to  be  effected  ?  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  But  how  am  I  to  pass  from  the  old 
life  into  this  new  life  of  God  ?  I  am  "  bom  not  of  the  flesh  nor  of  the  will  of  man, 
but  of  the  win  of  God."  How  am  I  born  ?  By  complying  with  that  will,  by 
surrendering  myself  to  the  revealed  love  of  God  in  the  person  of  Christ.  If  at  some 
great  cost  some  boon  which  you  very  much  require  is  brought  within  your  reach, 
and  if  you  spurn  it,  I  venture  to  say  it  is  impossible  to  cut  your  benefactor  more  to 
the  heart  than  by  such  a  line  of  conduct.  Now,  then,  are  you  called  a  child  of  God  ? 
Does  God  call  you  so  ?  Is  it  so  ?  If  not,  why  not  ?  Don't  say  that  God  has  made 
it  so  difficult.  Do  you  think  it  probable  that  God  should  refuse  the  very  boon 
which  He  has  given  His  Son  in  order  to  bestow?  {A.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken.)  The 
sons  of  God  : — 1.  The  privilege  itself  is  to  be  "  called  the  sons  of  God."  Mark,  not 
subjects  or  servants,  but  sons ;  and  to  be  called  the  sons  of  God  is  to  be  the  sons  of 
God.  2.  The  fountain  and  first  rise  is  the  "  love  of  the  Father,"  who  is  everywhere 
represented  as  the  first  cause  of  our  blessedness.  God's  love  is  nothing  else  but  His 
goodwill  and  resolution  to  impart  such  great  privileges  to  us ;  He  did  it  because  He 
would  do  it ;  He  was  resolved  to  do  it,  and  took  pleasure  in  it.  3.  The  wonderful 
degree  in  the  expression  of  His  love,  "  What  manner  of  love."  The  expression 
noteth  not  only  the  quality,  but  quantity.  4.  The  note  of  attention,  or  the  terms 
used  exciting  our  attention,  "Behold."  There  is  a  threefold  "  behold  "  in  Scripture, 
and  they  are  applicable  to  this  place ;  as — (1)  The  behold  of  demonstration,  which 
is  referred  to  a  thing  or  person  present,  and  noteth  the  certainty  of  sense  (John 
i.  29).  (2)  The  behold  of  admiration,  or  awakening  our  drowsy  minds,  when  any 
extraordinary  thing  is  spoken  of  (Lam.  i.  12).  So  here  in  the  case  of  good,  is  there 
any  love  like  unto  this  love  ?  And  all  is  that  we  may  entertain  it  with  wonder  and 
reverence.  (3)  The  behold  of  gratulation,  as  rejoicing  and  blessing  ourselves  in  the 
privOege  (Psa.  cxxi.  4).  I.  There  is  such  a  relation  as  that  of  father  akd 
CHILDREN  between  God  AND  His  PEOPLE.  1.  It  proceedcth  from  a  distinct  cause, 
His  special  and  peculiar  love,  not  from  that  common  goodness  and  bounty  which 
He  expresseth  to  all  His  creatures  (Psa.  cxlv.  9).  But  this  is  the  special  act  of  His 
grace  or  of  His  great  love  (Eph.  ii.  4,  5).  2.  The  foundation  of  this  relation  is 
not  our  being  which  we  have  from  Him  as  a  Creator,  but  our  new  being  which  we 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  175 

have  from  Him  as  a  Father  in  Christ.  3.  The  whole  commerce  and  communion 
that  is  between  us  and  Him  is  on  God's  part  fatherly,  on  our  part  childlike.  II. 
That  this  is  a  blessed  and  glorious  privilege  will  appear  if  we  consider — 1.  The 
person  adopting,  the  great  and  glorious  God,  who  is  so  far  above  us,  so  happy 
within  Himself,  and  needeth  not  us  nor  our  choicest  love  and  service  ;  who  had  a 
Son  of  His  own,  Jesus  Christ,  the  eternally-begotten  of  the  Father,  "  the  Son  of  His 
love,"  in  whom  His  soul  found  such  full  complacency  and  delight.  2.  The  persons 
who  are  adopted — miserable  sinners.  3.  The  fountain  of  this  mercy  and  grace,  or 
that  which  moved  God,  was  His  love  :  this  was  that  which  set  His  power  and  mercy 
at  work  to  bring  us  into  this  estate.  (1)  This  was  an  eternal  love ;  the  first  founda- 
tion of  it  was  laid  in  the  election  of  God ;  there  is  the  bottom  stone  in  this  building. 
(2)  It  was  a  free  love :  "  I  will  love  them  freely."  (3)  It  is  special,  peculiar  love, 
not  common  to  the  world  ;  yet  this  love  was  bestowed  upon  us.  (4)  It  is  a  costly 
love,  considering  the  way  how  it  is  brought  about.  4.  The  dignity  itself  nakedly 
considered ;  it  is  a  greater  honour  than  the  world  can  afford  to  us,  a  matter  to  be 
rather  wondered  at  than  told.  5.  It  is  not  a  naked  and  empty  title,  but  giveth  us  a 
right  to  the  greatest  privileges  imaginable.  (1)  With  respect  to  the  present  state ; 
and  there — (a)  He  will  give  us  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  our  sanctifier,  guide,  and 
comforter.  (6)  He  giveth  us  an  allowance  of  sach  temporal  things,  of  outward 
mercies,  as  are  convenient  for  us  (Matt.  vi.  25,  30).  (2)  With  respect  to  the  life  to 
come.     Eternal  blessedness  is  the  fruit  of  adoption  (Eom.  viii.  17).     III.  Believers 

OUGHT    TO    be    excited    TO    THE    EARNEST    CONSIDERATION    OF    IT.       1.    To    quickcU    OUT 

thankfulness,  which  is  the  chief  motive  and  principle  of  gospel-obedience.  2.  That 
we  may  keep  up  the  joy  of  our  faith  and  comfort  in  afflictions  from  the  world. 
Though  we  be  God's  children,  yet  the  greater  part  of  the  world  treateth  us  as 
slaves.  It  doth  support  us  often  and  frequently  to  consider  the  world  cannot  hate 
us  so  much  as  God  loveth  us.  3.  That  we  may  be  satisfied  and  contented  with 
our  portion ;  if  you  have  God  to  your  Father,  what  though  you  be  straitened  in  the 
world  ?  4.  To  stir  us  up  to  be  exemplary  in  holiness ;  for  if  God  be  matchless  in 
His  love  we  should  be  singular  in  our  holiness ;  our  return  must  carry  proportion 
with  our  receipts.  5.  We  should  consider  it,  that  we  may  clear  up  our  interest  the 
more  in  it  and  not  foolishly  content  ourselves  with  an  inferior  happiness.  The  use 
that  I  shall  make  of  it  is  to  persuade  you  to  put  in  for  a  share  in  this  blessed 
privilege.  To  direct  you  in  this,  let  me  tell  you— (1)  That  this  new  relation 
dependeth  on  the  new  birth,  and  that  none  are  adopted  but  those  that  are  regenerated 
and  renewed  to  the  image  and  hkeness  of  God ;  aU  others,  though  called  Christians, 
are  degenerate  children.  (2)  Kegeneration  is  God's  act ;  but  repentance  and  faith, 
which  are  the  immediate  issues  of  it,  are  ours,  and  you  must  enter  by  the  strait  gate 
if  you  would  enter  into  God's  family  and  obtain  the  privileges  of  it.  (3)  If  you  would 
have  the  privileges  of  children  you  must  perform  the  duties  of  children ;  we  catch 
at  privileges  bui  neqlect  duty.  Now  the  great  duty  of  children  is  to  love,  please, 
and  honour  their  father.  (4)  If  we  would  enjoy  the  privileges  of  the  famUy  we  must 
submit  to  the  discipline  of  the  family.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  spiritual  sonship  : — 
In  the  words  there  are  two  things  chiefly :  First,  what  this  means  "  Sons  of  God  "  ; 
secondly,  what  this,  "  To  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  First,  sons  of  God  is  a  title 
used  divers  ways  ;  the  son  of  God  is  either  by  nature,  or  by  creation,  or  by  partici- 
pation, or  by  a  general  profession,  or  by  adoption.  Now,  when  this  sonship 
by  adoption  is  applied  to  those  whom  God  chooseth,  there  are  two  kinds  of  it 
mentioned  in  Scripture,  the  former  of  which  is  but  a  resemblance  and  figure  of  the 
latter.  Of  it  is  that  speech  of  God  to  Moses  (Exod.  iv.  22),  which  very  privilege 
Paul  calleth  by  the  name  of  adoption  (Kom.  ix.  4).  By  it  is  no  other  thing  meant 
but  God's  choosing  that  people  out  of  all  nations  under  heaven  to  be  His  peculiar 
people ;  which,  albeit  it  were  an  high  favour,  yet  it  was  not  properly  a  spiritual 
blessing,  but  a  type  and  a  shadow  of  that  adoption  which  Paul  calleth  the  adoption 
of  sons  (Gal.  iv.  5),  which  is  that  grace  of  God  by  which  He  is  pleased  to  take  us 
for  His  children  in  Christ,  and  to  make  us  heirs  together  with  Him  of  eternal 
glory ;  and  this  is  that  which  John  speaketh  of  in  this  place.  The  second  thing  is, 
what  it  is  to  be  called  the  sons  of  God.  It  must  not  be  so  taken  as  though  this  of 
being  the  sons  of  God  were  a  matter  of  title  only  without  substance,  as  when  a  man 
hath  a  word  of  respect  cast  upon  him  only  for  compliment's  sake  ;  but  to  be  called 
the  sons  of  God  and  to  be  the  sons  of  God  are  here  all  one.  The  general  points 
are  these — First,  that  the  state  of  God's  adoption  is  a  glorious  estate.  Secondly, 
that  it  is  an  estate  of  which  it  is  possible  for  him  that  is  invested  into  it  to  be 
assured  in  his  own  soul.     Thirdly,  that  it  is  an  estate  unalterable.     Fourthly,  that 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRAT OR.  [chap.  in. 

the  alone  spring  and  beginning  of  it  is  God's  love.  How  the  first  point  is  grounded 
upon  this  Scripture  appears  by  the  admiration  which  the  apostle  breaks  out  into, 
wondering  at  the  infiniteness  of  God's  mercy,  who  should  vouchsafe  unto  the  sons 
of  men  such  a  prerogative,  and  provoking  others  to  join  with  him  therein,  as  though 
it  were  a  matter  singular  from  all  example  that  we  should  be  advanced  to  so  great 
an  honour  to  be  the  sons  of  God.  I  could  easily  collect  even  a  cloud  of  circum- 
stances for  the  enlarging  the  glory  and  worth  of  this  estate ;  I  will  reduce  all  to 
three  heads.  The  first  is  the  excellency  of  the  means  to  procure  it  to  us.  The 
second  is  the  majesty  of  the  person  by  whose  name  (through  our  adoption)  we  are 
entitled.  The  third  is  the  prerogatives  and  privileges  that  are  belonging  to  it.  Now 
these  prerogatives  are  to  be  distinguished  thus  :  To  be  either  in  this  life  or  hereafter. 
Touching  this  life  I  will  name  only  two.  The  first  is  an  interest  into  God's 
particular  and  special  providence.  If  my  wants  be  outward  here  is  my  Heavenly 
Father  standing  by  me,  He  knoweth  what  I  need,  and  He  cannot  forget  me.  If  my 
defects  be  from  within  He  is  that  God  of  all  grace,  and  shall  fulfil  all  my  necessities. 
This  privilege  of  God's  especial  providence  is  that  river  of  God  out  of  which  flow 
these  streams  to  make  glad  the  adopted  of  God.  The  second  prerogative  in  this 
life  is  the  free  use  of  God's  creatures,  both  for  necessity  and  for  delight.  This  is  a 
true  saying.  The  charter  anciently  given  by  the  great  Lord  of  all  at  our  first 
creation,  touching  the  use  of  His  creatures,  was  forfeited  Luto  the  hands  of  the 
Donor  by  Adam's  fall.  It  is  restored  and  renewed  by  Cuiist,  and  only  to  those  who 
are  honoured  with  the  adoption  of  sons,  only  the  heirs  of  heaven  are  the  right 
inheritors  of  the  earth  ;  aU  the  rest  are  but  usurpers.  Now  for  the  prerogative  of 
the  sons  of  God  appertaining  to  the  life  to  come,  which  way  shall  I  begin  to 
express  it?  When  Haman  was  willed  to  speak  by  Ahasuerus,  What  should  be 
done  to  the  man  whom  the  king  would  honour,  he  (supposing  that  the  king  had  no 
meaning  to  honour  any  but  him),  said  thus  (Est.  vi.  8,  9).  So  shall  it  be  to  the  sons 
of  God  at  the  day  of  judgment.  What  should  now  be  the  use  of  this  doctrine,  or 
wherefore  hath  this  dignity  of  adoption  been  set  before  us,  but  to  stir  us  all  up  to 
say  in  our  hearts,  as  Christ's  hearers  did  when  He  had  spoken  to  them  of  the  bread 
of  life.  Lord  (said  they)  evermore  give  us  this  bread.  So  you,  I  beseech  you,  say 
every  one  in  the  strength  of  your  best  desires.  Is  the  state  of  adoption  such  an 
honourable  estate  ?  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  dignity.  And  now,  touching  the 
means  by  which  those  that  do  affect  this  prerogative  of  adoption  may  attain  unto 
it.  There  are  two  places  of  Scripture  especially  by  which  we  may  be  rightly 
informed  in  this  matter  (Gal.  iii.  26 ;  John  i.  12).  Both  put  together  do  make  this 
good,  that  the  means  of  adoption  is  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  or  believing  in  His  name. 
First,  what  kind  of  faith  it  is  which  makes  us  capable  of  adoption.  Secondly,  how 
it  brings  us  to  be  the  sons  of  God.  Thirdly,  how  itself  is  wrought  in  the  hearts  of 
the  adopted.  Touching  the  first,  this  I  say,  that  the  believing,  or  faith,  which 
maketh  a  man  the  son  of  God  is  an  action  of  the  will,  whereby  a  man  knowing 
certainly  out  of  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  promised  Saviour  of  mankind 
doth  for  the  matter  of  his  soul  settle  his  heart  and  repose  himself  wholly  and  solely 
upon  Him.  This  is  properly  that  faith  which  is  called  justifying  or  saving  faith. 
For  the  second,  that  also  is  necessary  to  be  rightly  opened,  because  some  men  of 
corrupt  minds  do  think  these  speeches,  faith  justifieth,  faith  adopteth,  faith  saveth, 
to  be  derogatory  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  to  carry  a  contradiction  to  these,  Christ 
justifieth,  Christ  adopteth,  Christ  saveth.  Understand  we  therefore,  and  be  not 
deceived.  One  thing  may  be  spoken  of  divers  particulars  in  a  different  sense :  as, 
for  example,  God  the  Father  adopteth,  Christ  Jesus  adopteth,  the  Holy  Ghost 
adopteth,  faith  adopteth ;  these  are  all  true  and  without  any  mutual  contrariety, 
God  the  Father  adopteth  as  the  fountain  of  adoption ;  Christ  as  the  ground  of 
adoption  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  applier  of  adoption ;  faith  as  the  instrument  of 
adoption.  The  third  point  was  to  show  how  this  faith  is  wrought  in  the  hearts  of 
the  adopted.  The  Supreme  Giver  of  faith  is  God,  every  good  gift  is  from  Him. 
The  second  doctrine  is,  that  it  is  possible  for  him  that  is  the  son  of  God  to  be 
assured  in  his  own  soul  that  he  is  so.  I  am  commanded  by  my  Saviour  when  I 
pray  to  call  God  Father.  How  is  He  to  me  a  Father  into  whose  presence  I  may  dare 
to  come,  but  as  I  am  His  adopted  son  in  Christ  ?  Shall  I  term  Him  Father,  and 
have  no  assurance  that  I  am  His  son  ?  This  were  intolerable  presumption.  To 
bring  us  to  the  assurance  of  our  adoption  is  the  drift  of  preaching,  the  scope  of 
praying,  and  the  intent  of  our  administering  and  receiving  the  sacraments :  all  aim 
and  drive  at  this,  that  we  may  learn  to  apply  the  general  sweetness  of  the  Scriptures 
to  our  own  particulars.    But  to  cut  oil  all  mistakings :  here  is  a  necessary  question 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  177 

to  be  made  touching  this  assurance  of  adoption,  Whether  it  be  such  an  assurance 
which  is  so  certain  that  it  is  never  disturbed  with  doubting  ?  I  answer :  I  dare 
not  say  it  is  such  an  assurance ;  I  know  David  knew  himself  to  be  the  chosen  of 
God,  yet  I  know  that  sometimes  he  thought  he  was  cast  out  of  God's  sight,  and 
that  the  Lord  would  show  no  more  favour  (Psalms  xxxi.  22,  Ixxvii.  7,  Ixix.  3). 
What  assurance  then  (will  you  say)  is  this  you  discourse  of  ?  I  answer,  an 
assurance  striving  after  assurance;  an  assurance  wrestling  and  combating  with 
continual  doubtings.  It  is  the  wisdom  of  God  by  this  very  means  to  settle  the 
hearts  of  His  chosen.  It  was  one  of  the  old  rules  of  the  law,  that  in  the  mouth  of 
two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  should  stand.  It  is  therefore  the  wisdom  of  God 
that  the  assurance  of  adoption  should  be  grounded  upon  the  testimony  of  two 
very  sufficient  witnesses,  the  Spirit  of  God  and  our  own  spirit.  The  Spirit  of 
God  bears  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  {S.  Hieron.) 
The  Father^s  love  and  the  ddldre^i's  blessedness : — I  have  taken  the  text  from  the 
New  Version,  which  gives  us  this  very  emphatic  Amen  :  "And  such  we  are."  Well 
may  the  apostle  cry  "  Behold  1 "  as  he  sets  forth  this  wonderful  truth.  I.  See, 
then,  WHENCE  this  love  comes.  Behold  what  manner  of  love  "  the  Father  "  hath 
bestowed  upon  us.  Let  men  come  to  think  that  God  is  against  them,  and  what  can 
they  do  ?  There  is  nothing  for  it  then  but  utter  despair.  But  if  a  man  only 
believes  through  and  through  him  that  God  loves  him — that  God  wants  to  help 
him — then  let  winds  blow,  let  earth  tempt,  that  man  can  hope ;  he  can  rise  up  and 
can  come  home ;  he  is  more  than  conqueror.  But  saith  some  timid  soul.  Does  it 
not  say  that  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  ?  True.  How  then  can  He 
love  me  ?  WeU,  it  is  because  He  loves  that  He  is  angry.  If  I  were  going  on  my 
way,  and  heard  a  set  of  boys  rough  and  rude  and  profane,  I  should  feel  sorry  for 
them ;  but  if  I  saw  my  son  amongst  them  I  should  feel  not  sorry  only,  but  angry — 
angry  not  because  I  did  not  love  him,  but  because  I  did.  All  the  meaning  of 
Christ's  coming — of  His  life  and  death  and  resurrection  and  intercession — is  the 
story  of  God's  love  to  us.  All  the  gracious  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  lead  us 
into  the  assurance  of  His  love.  II.  Let  us  draw  near  and  look  at  the  feeeness 
AND  fulness  of  THE  LOVE  OF  GoD.  1.  It  docs  not  procecd  from  any  need  in  the 
Divine  nature.  That  wonderful  preface  to  the  writings  of  St.  John  shows  us  the 
Only  Begotten  dwelling  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father.  There  is  the  eternal  com- 
munion. There  is  love's  satisfaction.  The  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  eternal  communion  and  fellowship.  2.  This  love  of  God  is  not  mere  pity.  It  is 
not  that  the  Ahnighty  is  moved  by  our  needs  and  miseries  as  the  Samaritan  of  old. 
Pity  saw  the  wants,  and  would  give  what  it  could  spare ;  but  love  saw  the  son,  and 
could  not  give  enough.  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed 
upon  us — love  that  takes  us  for  His  very  own ;  love  that  would  hold  us  in  closest 
communion  and  tenderest  relationship ;  love  that  saith,  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with 
Me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine."  3.  Behold  what  manner  of  love — it  is  a 
righteous  love.  It  may  yearn  to  deliver  and  to  restore,  but  there  is  one  thmg  it  can 
never  do — it  cannot  pass  by  sin.  It  can  never  make  light  of  that.  And  who  of  us 
could  trust  God's  love  if  He  did  ?  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  that  He  laid 
down  His  life  for  us.  And  now  there  meets  us  love  that  is  righteous,  and  therefore 
free  and  fuU.  Love  that  hath  nothing  to  conceal,  nothing  to  be  afraid  of.  4. 
Another  light  falls  on  the  text  if  we  turn  it  round  and  think  of  the  children — that 
we  should  be  called  the  children  of  God.  Adoption  has  much  in  it  that  is  beautiful 
and  very  gracious.  But  ours  is  not  an  adoption  ;  we  are  His  by  regeneration.  It 
is  not  a  new  name  but  a  new  nature  which  is  bestowed  upon  us.  Begotten  of  God, 
we  are  His  children  indeed  and  of  a  truth.  Do  not  explain  it  away  as  a  figure. 
"And  so  we  are."  Bound  to  the  heart  of  the  Father  by  the  tenderest  ties  of 
relationship.  Wonder  at  it,  but  do  not  doubt  it.  Claim  it,  in  all  its  fullest  privilege 
and  blessing.  {M.  G.  Pearce.)  The  Father's  love  to  His  family  : — I.  What  God's 
uviNG  FAMILY  ARE  CALLED  UPON  TO  BEHOLD.  "  What  manner  of  love,"  &c.  1.  It 
is  covenant  love.  2.  Unchangeable  love.  3.  Incarnate  love.  4.  Redeeming  love. 
6.  Pardoning  love.  6.  Restoring  love.  11.  What  they,  upon  whom  the  Father's 
LOVE  IS  bestowed,  ARE  CALLED.  "  The  sons  of  God."  1.  It  is  not  a  fictitious  name. 
2.  It  is  a  name  which  shows  the  peculiar  relation  they  sustain  ta  God.  3.  It  is  a 
name  which  gives  them  a  title  to  all  things  in  the  whole  universe  of  God.  IH. 
What  the  sons  of  God  sat  of  the  world.  "  Knoweth  us  not."  1.  The  world 
knoweth  not  the  life  which  they  live — even  a  life  of  faith  on  the  Son  of  God,  and  a 
life  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  2.  The  world  knoweth  not  their  inward  conflicts ;  the 
flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit,  &c.    3.  The  world  knoweth  not  their  doubts  aoid 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

fears.  4.  The  world  knoweth  not  their  joys  and  sorrows.  6.  The  world  knoweth 
not  the  doctrines  which  the  children  of  God  are  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which 
the  world  cannot  receive.  IV.  The  reason  why  the  world  knoweth  not  the 
SONS  OF  God.  "  Because  it  knew  Him  not" — the  Incarnate  God.  {J.  J.  Eastmead.) 
The  digfiity  of  human  nature  and  its  consequent  obligations  : — 1.  We  are  the  sons  of 
God — of  the  first  and  greatest  of  Beings.  What  noble  and  elevated  sentiments  should 
fill  our  minds  !  How  should  we  rise  above  everything  that  is  low  and  worthless  to 
what  is  dignified  and  elevating !  2.  We  are  the  sons  of  God — of  the  purest  and 
best  of  Beings.  How  pure  and  holy  should  be  the  affections  which  animate 
our  own  breasts !  3.  We  are  the  Sons  of  God.  How  much  should  we  love  God, 
our  Creator,  Unwearied  Benefactor,  who  discovers  His  paternal  relation  to  us 
by  unceasing  care  and  the  most  substantial  benefits!  How  greatly  should  we 
honour  Him  !  How  devoutly  should  we  trust  in  Him !  How  cheerfully  should  we 
submit  to  Him !  How  diligently  should  we  serve  Him  1  (Charles  Lowell.)  A 
Christian's  high  condition  and  hope : — "  Behold  what  manner  of  love  "  (what  great 
and  singular  love,  that  is  to  say)  "  the  Father  hath  bestowed,"  &c.  Now  this  seems 
to  imply  that  we  had  forfeited  the  name.  Like  the  prodigal  in  the  parable,  we  had 
vu'tually  renounced  our  sonship  and  inheritance  ;  and  it  was  a  question  of  agonis- 
ing interest,  whether  God  would  ever  again  consent  to  stand  towards  us  in  the 
relation  of  a  parent.  And  so  when  Almighty  God,  regarding  us  in  Christ,  declares, 
"  I  will  be  a  Father  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  My  sons  and  daughters,"  we  under- 
stand that  His  anger  is  turned  away,  that  our  offences  are  cast  behind  His  back,  and 
that  we  are  restored  to  all  the  privileges  which  appertain  to  children.  Such  are  the 
blessings  comprehended  in  the  promise,  "  Ye  shall  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  But 
there  is  still  more  in  it.  Not  only  had  we  forfeited  the  right  to  call  God  Father,  but 
we  had  also  lost  the  child-like  spirit.  And  therefore  when  God  calls  us  children,  on 
the  ground  of  being  reconciled  to  us  in  Immanuel,  He  engages  to  make  us  so  by 
communicating  to  us  of  His  Spirit.  The  apostle,  after  this  burst  of  admiration  at 
the  love  God  shows  towards  His  people  in  Christ,  and  the  honours  He  puts  upon 
them,  anticipates  an  objection.  Are  we  indeed  so  great  and  honourable?  Yet, 
what  is  our  condition  upon  the  earth?  The  rich,  the  great,  the  wise  of  this 
world  stand  aloof  from  us,  as  from  persons  of  disturbed  intellect  or  morose 
temper.  Are  we  indeed  so  great  before  God,  while  so  little  before  men?  It  is 
even  so.  God  seeth  not  as  man  seeth :  and  that  which  is  vile  to  human  judg- 
ment is  precious  in  His  sight.  Was  it  not  so  with  holy  men  and  prophets 
and  apostles  of  old  ?  Was  it  not  so  with  Jesus  Himself  ?  Indeed,  there  is  much 
of  comfort  in  the  thought  suggested  by  the  words,  "  Therefore  the  world 
knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  Him  not."  If  you  do  not  resemble  Christ,  who 
was  so  unlike  ordinary  men,  the  world  which  loves  its  own  would  know  and 
approve  you.  For  your  conscience  may  justly  testify  that  therefore  the  world 
which  rejected  Christ  refuses  to  know  you  with  approbation,  because  it  perceives  in 
you  His  features  and  carriage.  And,  after  all,  we  are  sons.  That  is  our  confidence, 
our  comfort,  our  triumph.  And  here  I  must  remind  you  of  the  duties  which  flow 
from  this  relation  to  God — the  duties  of  obedience  and  trust.  If  you  are  children 
of  the  Most  High,  to  Him,  surely,  more  than  to  any  human  superior,  must  absolute 
obedience  be  due.  As  a  Creator,  as  a  King,  as  a  Master,  He  might  have  demanded, 
with  perfect  justice,  the  consecration  of  all  our  faculties  to  His  service.  But  He 
speaks  to  us  by  a  tenderer  name :  "  I  am  your  Father,"  He  says.  Try  to  show  your- 
selves worthy  of  that  noble  estate  by  a  child-like  deportment  towards  Him.  Well, 
then,  we  are  actually  the  sons  of  God,  through  His  free  and  abounding  grace, 
although  not  yet  wearing  a  royal  diadem  and  clothed  in  princely  apparel.  "  It  doth 
not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  The  real  grandeur  of  the  righteousness  is 
overshadowed  by  the  hand  of  Providence ;  the  present  display  of  it  being  incom- 
patible with  their  own  spiritual  welfare,  and  with  the  scheme  of  God's  kingdom. 
Yet,  while  glorifying  the  grace  which  bestows  upon  us  so  great  a  privilege,  forget  not 
the  duty  it  entails.  Remember  that  to  live  as  slaves  of  sin  and  the  world,  after  God 
has  freed  you  from  that  bondage,  and  brought  you  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  His  own 
children,  would  be  infinitely  base  and  ungrateful.  Therefore  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God  to  enable  you  to  walk  worthy  of  this  high  relation.  (J.  N.  Pearson,  M.A.) 
Sons  of  God  .• — I.  Notice  the  word  "  behold,"  with  which  the  words  of  my  text  are 
introduced,  which  gives  an  item  of  the  vast  importance  of  what  is  contained  in  them. 
It  is  used  by  the  Lord  HimseK,  by  the  prophets,  and  Christ,  and  the  evangeUstsonsome 
very  particular  occasions,  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament  (Isa.  xl.  10,  xlii.  1 ; 
Zech.  iii.  8,  9 ;  Rev.  1.  7,  iii.  20,  xxi.  3,  Ac).    II.  What  we  are  called  upon  to 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  179 

BEHOLD.  "  Behold,  what  maimer  of  loveUhe  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us."  He 
is  not  here  calling  on  us  to  believe  the  love  wherewith  God  hath  loved  us  ;  nor  is  he 
calling  on  us  to  receive  the  knowledge  of  it  into  our  minds,  that  we  may  receive  the 
same  into  our  hearts.  He  is  calling  us  to  behold  it,  to  look  at  it,  to  contemplate  it 
in  its  original — in  its  spring  and  fountain — in  its  freeness  and  sovereignty — in  the 
nature  of  it — in  the  manner  of  it — in  its  gifts  and  blessings.  The  love  of  God  is  a 
subject  for  the  minds  of  God's  saints  to  contemplate.  They  may  well  behold, 
survey,  and  take  a  view  of  it,  by  faith.  It  is  the  greatest  thing  in  God  Himself, 
which  we  are  concerned  in.  His  love  to  us  is  a  free  love.  It  is  also  sovereign  love. 
It  proceeds  from  Himself  alone.  It  is  a  love  fixed  on  us.  It  is  a  love  of  complacency 
and  delight.  It  is  an  immutable  and  an  everlasting  love.  Survey  it  in  election,  in 
predestination,  in  adoption,  in  salvation,  in  the  blessedness  of  personal  communion. 
It  is  vast-glorious.  It  surpasseth  all  finite  understanding.  IH,  The  speciality  of 
THIS.  What  in  the  love  of  the  Father  it  is  which  the  apostle  would  have  these 
saints  to  take  special  notice  of.  It  is  this,  "  That  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of 
God."  "  It  is,"  says  Dr.  Goodwin,  "  but  a  title  which  is  here  expressed."  "  Yet," 
says  Mr.  Bomaine,  "  God  bestows  no  empty  titles."  He  gives  aU  contained  in  it. 
Therefore  the  greatness  of  the  love  of  God  is  contained  herein.  To  be  heirs  of  God, 
and  co-heirs  with  Christ,  in  aU  the  riches  of  God's  communicable  grace  and  glory, 
this  is  the  fruit  and  blessedness  which  flows  from  the  grace  and  royalty  of  adoption. 
God  is  our  inheritance,  and  we  are  His  inheritance.  IV.  Though  this  be  the  case, 
that  we  are,  and  are  called,  "  the  sons  of  God,"  and  this  title  is  bestowed  on  us  by 
our  heavenly  Father,  tet  the  woeld  knoweth  us  not,  as  so  called,  and  as  thus 
distinguished  by  free  sovereign  favour ;  neither  did  they  our  Lord  before  us.  It  is 
the  same  to  the  very  present  moment,  yet  we  wonder  at  it,  whilst  there  is  not  the 
least  cause  for  it,  if  we  but  reflect  one  moment.  How  can  contraries  unite  ?  The 
longer  you  live,  the  more  you  will  find  supernatural  truths  disrelished.  The  present 
day  is  not  that  in  which  any  are  persecuted  for  their  profession.  Yet  it  is  a  day 
when  supernatural  truth,  and  the  supernatural  gospel,  and  a  supernatural  pro- 
fession of  them,  were  never  more  heartily  despised.  (S.  E.  Pierce.)  Children  of 
God : — I.  How  eeal  Chbistians  abe  to  be  understood  to  be  the  childben  of 
God.  II.  What  considebations  mat  serve  to  heighten  and  endeae  the  lovk 
OF  God  in  taking  them  into  this  belation  to  Himself.  1.  The  consideration 
of  His  majesty  and  supreme  greatness,  which  thus  vouchsafes  to  make  and  own  U3 
for  His  children,  notwithstanding  our  infinite  distance  from  Him  (1  Sam.  xviii.  18). 
2.  The  consideration,  how  early  the  Divine  love  laid  the  foundation  of  thoir  sonship 
whom  it  pleased  to  recover  from  the  common  ruin,  in  which  it  saw  them  lie 
involved  with  others.  3.  The  consideration  of  the  means  ordained  to  make  way 
for  their  adoption,  even  the  sufferings  and  death  of  the  only-begotten  Son  of  the 
Father  to  view.  (1)  Consider  the  person  given:  He  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — 
God's  eternal  and  only-begotten  Son.  (2)  Consider  what  this  Person  is  sent  for, 
viz.,  to  suffer,  to  be  put  to  death,  even  by  those  that  He  came  to  save.  (3)  This 
love  win  appear  all  miracle  if  we  consider  the  persons  Christ  was  given  for,  to  do 
and  suffer  aU  this,  even  for  the  infinitely  unworthy.  (4)  We  have  reason  to  admire 
the  love  of  God  in  making  us  His  sons  upon  this  further  consideration,  it  we  call  to 
mind  the  state  He  finds  us  in  when  He  comes  to  work  the  blessed  change,  and  the  power 
and  patience  He  exercises  therein.  (5)  The  happy  difference  made  in  the  relation  of 
such  as  are  dignified  to  be  children  of  God,  both  from  themselves,  before  it  was  made, 
and  from  others.  (6)  The  privileges  of  the  sons  of  God,  negative  and  positive,  as 
to  time  and  eternity,  heighten  and  endear  the  love  of  God  to  all  that  are  called  to 
be  and  really  made  such.  (D.  Wilcox.)  The  privileges  of  the  good : — I.  That 
privileges  of  unspeakable  worth  "  NOW  "  belong  to  the  disciples  of  Cheist. 
"  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."    11.  That  notwithstanding  these  high  peivi- 

LEGES    they   ABE,    WHILE    IN    THIS   LOWEE    WORLD,    SUBJECT    TO    TBIBULATION.         "  The 

world  knoweth  them  not" — knoweth  not  their  spirit,  their  character,  their  dignity. 
III.  That  peivileges  of  a  higheb  obdee  await  the  childben  of  God  in  a 
FUTUBE  state.  "  When  He  shaU  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see 
Him  as  He  is."  TV.  That  those  privileges  of  theie  future  state  cannot  bb 
FULLY  BEVEALED  TO  God's  PEOPLE  ON  EAETH.  "  It  doth  uot  yet  appear  what  we 
shall  be."  V.  That  all  these  peivileges,  present  and  to  come,  flow  feom 
THE  "  LOVE  "   OF  THE  Fatheb.      "  Bchold,   what  manner  of  love  !  "      VI.  That 

EVEEY   MAN,  THAT    HATH    THIS   HOPE    OF    HEAVEN    THBOUGH    THE    LOVE    OF    THE    FaTHEB, 

*'puBiriETH  HIMSELF."  (Samuel  Robcrts,  M.A.)  The  love  that  calls  us  sons: — 
It  is  not  SO  much  to  the  contemplation  of  our  blessedness  in  being  sons,  as  to  the 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

devout  gaze  on  the  love  which,  by  its  wonderful  process,  has  made  it  possible  for 
us  to  be  sons,  that  we  are  summoned  here.  Again,  you  will  find  a  remarkable 
addition  to  our  text  in  the  Eevised  Version,  namely,  "  and  such  we  are."  Now 
these  words  are  parenthetical,  a  kind  of  rapid  "  aside  "  of  the  writer's,  expressing 
his  joyful  confidence  that  he  and  his  brethren  are  sons  of  God,  not  only  in  name, 
but  in  reality.  I.  The  love  that  is  given.  The  apostle  bids  me  "  behold  what 
manner  of  love."  I  turn  to  the  Cross  and  I  see  there  a  love  which  shrinks  from 
no  sacrifice,  a  love  which  is  evoked  by  no  lovableness  on  my  part,  but  comes  from 
the  depth  of  His  own  Infinite  Being,  who  loves  because  He  must,  and  who  must 
because  He  is  God ;  a  love  which  sighs  for  recognition,  which  desires  nothing  of 
me  but  the  repayment  of  my  poor  affection ;  a  love  that  will  not  be  put  away  by 
all  sinfulness  and  shortcomings  and  evil.  In  like  manner  we  have  to  think,  if 
we  would  estimate  the  "manner  of  this  love,"  that  through  and  in  the  great 
sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  there  comes  to  us  the  gift  of  a  Divine  life  like  His  own. 
We  may  gain  another  measure  of  the  greatness  of  this  love  if  we  put  an 
emphasis  on  one  word,  and  think  of  the  love  given  to  "  ws,"  such  creatures  as 
we  are.  II.  The  sonship  which  is  the  purpose  of  this  given  love.  The  writer 
draws  a  broad  distinction  between  "  the  sons  of  God  "  and  the  world  of  men  who 
do  not  comprehend  them ;  and  so  far  from  being  themselves  sons,  do  not  even 
know  God's  sons  when  they  see  them.  And  there  is  a  deeper  word  still  in  the 
context.  John  thinks  that  men  (within  the  range  of  light  and  revelation,  at  all 
events)  are  divided  into  two  families — "  the  children  of  God  and  the  children  of 
the  devil."  There  are  two  families  amongst  men.  Thank  God  !  the  prodigal  son, 
in  his  rags  amongst  the  swine,  and  lying  by  the  swine-troughs  in  his  filth  and  his 
husks  and  his  fever,  is  a  son.  He  has  these  three  elements  and  marks  of  son- 
ship  that  no  man  ever  gets  rid  of :  he  is  of  a  Divine  origin,  he  has  a  Divine 
likeness  in  that  he  has  got  mind  and  will  and  spirit,  and  he  is  the  object  of  a 
Divine  love.  All  that  is  blessedly  and  eternally  true,  but  it  is  also  true  that  there 
is  a  higher  relation  than  that  to  which  the  name  "  Children  of  God  "  is  more 
accurately  given,  and  to  which  in  the  New  Testament  that  name  is  confined. 
What  is  implied  in  that  great  name  by  which  the  Almighty  gives  us  a  name  and  a 
place  as  of  sons  and  daughters  ?  Clearly,  first,  a  communicated  life ;  therefore, 
second,  a  kindred  nature  which  shall  be  "  pure  as  He  is  pure  "  ;  and,  third,  growth 
to  full  maturity.  III.  The  glad  recognition  of  the  sonship  by  the  child's 
heart.  "Such  we  are" — the  "Here  am  I,  Father,"  of  the  child,  answering  the 
Father's  call,  "  My  Son."  He  turns  doctrine  into  experience.  The  truth  is  nothing 
to  you,  unless  you  have  made  it  your  very  own  by  faith.  Do  not  be  satisfied 
with  ihe  orthodox  confession.  Unless  it  has  touched  your  heart  and  made 
your  whole  soul  thrill  with  thankful  gladness  and  quiet  triumph,  it  is 
nothing  to  you.  Can  you  say,  "  And  such  are  we  "  ?  Take  another  lesson. 
The  apostle  was  not  afraid  to  say,  "  I  know  that  I  am  a  child  of  God." 
Do  not  be  afraid  of  being  too  confident,  if  your  confidence  is  built  on  God,  and  not 
on  yourself ;  but  be  afraid  of  being  too  diffident,  and  be  afraid  of  having  a  great 
deal  of  self-righteousness  masquerading  under  the  guise  of  such  a  profound  con- 
sciousness of  your  own  unworthiness  that  you  dare  not  call  yourself  a  child  of 
God.  IV.  The  loving  and  devout  contemplation  or  this  wonderful  love.  I 
have  but  two  remarks  to  make  about  that,  and  the  one  is  this,  that  that  habit  of 
devout  and  thankful  meditation  upon  the  love  of  God,  as  manifested  in  the  sacrifice 
of  Jesus  Christ,  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  vigorous  and  happy  Christian  life. 
How  can  a  thing  which  you  do  not  touch  with  your  hands  and  see  with  your  eyes 
produce  any  effect  upon  you,  unless  you  think  about  it  ?  But  remember  that  we 
cannot  keep  that  great  sight  before  the  eye  of  our  minds  without  effort.  You  will 
have  very  resolutely  to  look  away  from  something  else,  if,  amid  all  the  dazzling 
gauds  of  earth  we  are  to  look  over  them  all  to  the  far-off  lustre  of  that  heavenly 
love.  Just  as  timorous  people  in  a  thunderstorm  will  light  a  candle  that  they  may 
not  see  the  lightning,  so  many  Christians  have  their  hearts  filled  with  the  twinkling 
light  of  some  miserable  tapers  of  earthly  care  and  pursuits,  which,  though  they  be 
dim  and  smoky,  are  bright  enough  to  make  it  hard  to  see  the  silent  depths  of 
heaven,  though  it  blaze  with  a  myriad  stars.  Wrench  yourselves  away  from  the 
absorbing  contemplation  of  Birmingham  jewellery  and  paste,  and  look  at  the  true 
riches.  Do  not  let  the  trifles  which  belong  not  to  your  true  inheritance  fill  your 
thoughts,  but  renew  the  vision,  and  by  determined  turning  away  of  your  eyes  from 
beholding  vanity,  look  away  from  the  things  that  are  seen,  that  you  may  gaze  upon 
the  things  that  are  not  seen,  and  chiefest  among  them  on  the  love  of  God  in  Chrisi 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  181 

Jesus  our  Lord.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Therefore  tlie  world  knoweth  us  not, 
because  it  knew  Him  not. — Christians  unknown  : — If  we  were  to  ask  worldly  men 
what  is  the  difference  between  Christians  and  themselves,  we  should  suppose,  from 
their  answer,  that  it  was  very  trifling  and  of  small  moment.  They  appear  to  think 
that  the  distinction  between  the  people  of  God  and  the  world  has  no  foundation 
except  in  the  self-righteous  conceits  of  those  who  assert  it.  But  is  there  no 
foundation  for  it  in  truth?  1.  From  Scripture  language  and  examples  we  should 
not  expect  that  the  worldly  would  readily  perceive  the  difference  between  Christians 
and  themselves.  Here  it  is  expressly  asserted  that  Christians  should  be  in  a  great 
measure  unknown  in  the  world.  Again,  the  life  of  the  believer  is  called  a  hidden 
life:  "Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  and  the  spirit  of  piety  is  called  "the 
hidden  man  of  the  heart."  And  again,  when  we  remember  how  Jesus  and  His 
apostles  were  regarded  we  may  readily  suppose  that  the  Christian  now  would  be 
unknown  in  the  world.  2.  Those  who  are  not  Christians  are  not  qualified  to  judge 
of  the  difference  between  themselves  and  those  who  are  Christians.  Were  an 
ignorant  and  a  learned  man  to  be  placed  in  company  with  each  other,  which  would 
perceive  most  clearly  their  difference  of  attainment?  Why,  the  ignorant  man 
would  realise  perhaps  that  there  was  some  inferiority  on  his  part,  but  upon  the 
whole  would  be  very  well  satisfied  with  himself.  Just  so  is  it  in  the  present  case  ; 
no  one  is  qualified  to  decide  whether  Christians  differ  from  others  unless  he  is 
himself  a  Christian.  3.  The  distinction  between  Christians  and  others  is  of  such  a 
character  that  it  is  not  easily  noticed  by  the  worldly.  The  qualities  which  the 
world  admires  are  obtrusive  and  showy,  but  those  which  religion  cherishes  are 
humble  and  unobtrusive,  and,  like  certain  modest  flowers,  prized  by  those  who 
value  and  seek  after  them,  but  despised  by  the  unthinking.  4.  The  worldly  hear 
all  the  dissensions  among  the  various  denominations  of  Christians,  and  they  see 
everything  that  is  discreditable,  but  they  enter  not  into  the  secret  and  chief  blessed- 
ness of  religion.  Like  strangers  on  the  shore  of  an  unknown  country,  who  behold 
great  barrenness  and  desolation,  hear  the  dashing  of  the  waves,  and  are  ready  to 
conclude  it  is  a  most  dismal  region,  while  farther  in  than  they  have  ever  penetrated 
there  may  be  pleasant  and  fertile  fields.  5.  It  is  to  the  prejudice  of  Christians  that 
the  worst  representatives  of  their  profession  are  most  prominently  before  the  world, 
while  the  more  worthy  are  more  concealed.  Is  there  among  those  with  whom  we 
are  acquainted  a  professor  who  has  more  zeal  than  knowledge  ? — his  character  will 
be  well  known ;  his  sayings  will  be  often  repeated,  with  the  bitter  remark  that  such 
things  are  enough  to  disgust  one  with  religion.  But  is  there  one  that  glorifies  God 
by  patience  under  affliction,  by  striving  to  bring  his  heart  and  life  to  correspond 
with  God's  Word,  by  humble  efforts  to  do  good,  by  a  life  of  prayer  and  self-denial  ? 
Ah,  the  attention  of  the  world  is  never  drawn  to  such  as  these ;  they  pass  through 
it  unknown.  {W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  The  world  knoweth  us  not: — First,  of  the 
concession  ;  and  there  the  first  granted  truth  is — 1.  That  the  children  of  God  are 
obnoxious  to  the  contempt  and  hatred  of  the  world :  "  The  world  knoweth  us  not, 
because  it  knew  Him  not."  2.  The  second  concession  is  the  imperfection  of  the 
present  state,  by  which  the  glory  of  this  privilege  is  darkened.  It  doth  not  appear 
what  we  shall  be  by  what  we  are  now.  The  heirs  of  the  world  make  a  great  show 
and  noise ;  they  may  be  pointed  at  where  they  go ;  there  goeth  such  a  prince,  or 
such  a  lord's  son  and  heir ;  but  God's  children  carry  no  such  port  and  state. 
Secondly,  by  way  of  correction ;  and  there — 1.  He  asserts  the  reality  of  the 
privilege:  "Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  2.  That  in  the  future  state 
the  glory  of  God's  children  shall  be  manifest :  "  When  He  shall  appear  we  shall  be 
like  Him."  That  shall  be  the  day  of  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  (Eom. 
viii.  19).     First  Christ,  and  then  aU  the  rest  of  His  children  (Col.  iii.  3,  4).     I.  Our 

GLORIOUS    RELATION    TO     GOD,    WITH    THE     EFFECTS     AND     FRUITS    OF     IT,    IS    A     THING 

HIDDEN  AND  NOT  SEEN.  1.  It  is  not  Seen  by  the  world  ;  the  world  knoweth  us  not, 
as  it  knew  Him  not ;  it  is  hidden  from  the  world,  as  colours  from  a  blind  man ; 
they  have  no  eyes  to  see  them.  (1)  Because  they  are  blinded  by  the  delusions  of 
the  flesh,  and  cannot  judge  of  spiritual  things  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  (2)  Being  blinded 
with  malice  and  prejudice  they  censure  this  estate  perversely,  and  so  malign  it  and 
oppose  it  (1  Peter  iv.  4,  5).  But  their  perverse  judgment  should  be  no  discourage- 
ment to  the  godly  in  the  way  of  holiness,  wherein  they  endeavour  to  imitate  God, 
their  heavenly  Father,  (a)  Because  if  God  be  not  known  nor  honoured  in  the 
world,  nor  Christ,  nor  the  Spirit,  why  should  we  take  it  unkindly?  (b)  Their 
opinion  is  little  to  be  valued,  and  therefore  we  should  rather  pity  their  ignorance 
than  be  offended  by  their  censures,      (c)  Christians  should  be  satisfied  with  the 


182  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

approbation  of  God.  It  is  enough  that  we  have  God's  image,  God's  favour  and 
fellowship,  and  are  taken  into  God's  family,  (d)  It  might  be  cause  of  suspicion  to 
us  if  we  were  hugged  and  embraced  by  the  world.  It  is  better  to  have  the  praise  of 
their  hatred  than  the  scandal  of  their  love  and  approbation,  (e)  Those  that  are 
truly  blessed  in  their  own  consciences  cannot  be  truly  miserable  by  the  judgment  of 
other  men  (2  Cor.  i.  12).  (/)  The  slanders  and  mockery  of  worldly  men  should  be  no 
discouragement  to  us  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord ;  for  God  will  reckon  with  them 
about  their  hard  speeches  against  His  people  (1  Peter  iv.  4).  2.  As  our  dignity  is 
not  of  the  world,  so  in  itself  it  doth  not  appear  during  our  present  state.  (1)  The 
privileges  that  belong  to  our  dignity  and  prerogative  of  adoption  are  spiritual,  and 
therefore  make  no  fair  show  in  the  flesh,  as  for  instance — (a)  The  image  of  God  la 
an  internal  image  (Psa.  xlv.  13).  (b)  The  life  which  floweth  thence  is  hidden 
(Col.  iii.  3),  like  the  sap  of  the  tree,  which  is  not  seen  though  the  fruit  appear,  (c) 
Their  comforts  are  spiritual,  known  by  feeling  rather  than  by  report  and  imagin- 
ation :  "  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  aU  understanding,  shaU  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds,  through  Jesus  Christ."  (d)  The  protection  and  supplies  of  God'a 
providence  ;  it  is  a  secret,  it  is  a  mystery  and  a  riddle  to  the  world  that  must  have 
all  under  the  view  of  sense  (Psa.  xxxi.  20).  (2)  Because  it  is  hidden  (Col.  iii.  3), 
not  only  in  point  of  security,  as  maintained  by  an  invisible  power,  but  hidden  in 
point  of  obscurity ;  there  is  a  veil  upon  it.  (a)  The  spiritual  life  is  hidden  under 
the  veil  of  the  natural  life  (Gal.  ii.  20).  (b)  Another  veil  is  that  of  afflictions  and 
outward  meanness  and  abasement,  (c)  Another  veil  is  reproach  and  calumnies 
(2  Cor.  vi.  8).  (d)  There  is  another  veil :  Christians  quench  the  vigour  and 
obscure  the  glory  of  this  life  by  their  infirmities;  they  have  too  much  of  Adam 
and  too  httle  of  Jesus,  and  so  the  spiritual  life  is  carried  on  darkly ;  the  good  herbs 
and  flowers  are  hidden  in  neglected  gardens  by  the  plenty  of  weeds.  (3)  It  is 
future :  "  Now  are  we  the  children  of  God,  but  it  doth  not  appear  what  we  shall 
be  " ;  and  so  our  filiation  is  not  only  hidden  from  others,  but  in  a  great  measure 
from  ourselves.  II.  The  reasons  why  this  glory  doth  not  appear.  1.  Because 
now  is  the  time  of  trial,  hereafter  of  recompense  ;  therefore  now  is  the  hiding  time, 
hereafter  is  the  day  of  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.  Christ  had  his  bright 
side  and  dark  side,  a  glory  to  be  seen  by  those  eyes  that  were  anointed  with 
spiritual  eye-salve,  and  affliction  and  meanness  enough  to  harden  them  that  had  no 
mind  to  see ;  so  God  hath  His  chosen  ones  in  the  world  who  keep  up  His  honour 
and  interest,  and  He  hath  His  ways  to  express  His  love  to  them,  but  not  openly. 
2.  Now  is  the  time  of  faith,  hereafter  of  sight ;  and  "  faith  is  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen."  Therefore  in  this  day  of  faith  God  will  not  too  openly  expose 
things  to  the  view  of  sense,  for  that  would  destroy  faith.  Now  we  are  sanctified 
and  justified,  and  live  by  faith.  3.  That  we  may  be  conformed  to  our  head,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  not  with  external  appearance.  4.  God  hath  chosen 
this  way  as  most  fit  to  advance  His  glory ;  He  will  give  us  little  in  hand  that  He 
may  daUy  hear  from  us,  and  we  may  seek  our  supplies  from  Him,  for  the  spirit  of 
adoption  was  given  us  that  we  may  cry,  "  Abba,  Father  "  ;  and  also  that  His  power 
may  be  perfect  in  our  weakness.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Slighted  by  the  world  : — 
Virtue  loses  not  its  worth  by  being  slighted  by  the  world.  (Scraggs.)  The  world 
does  not  know  Christ : — The  principle  [on  which  He  manifests  Himself  to  His 
people  as  He  does  not  to  the  world]  is  illustrated  by  some  of  the  common  facts  of 
life.  A  man  is  present  to  his  friend,  as  he  is  not  to  a  stranger,  though  he  may  be 
at  the  same  moment  speaking  to  both.  The  light  which  floods  the  landscape  with 
a  deluge  of  beauty  is  present  to  him  who  sees  it  as  it  is  not  to  the  blind  man  walk- 
ing at  his  side.  Music,  though  it  may  ripple  round  the  deafened  ear,  is  only 
present  to  him  who  hears  it.  The  discourse  of  the  naturalist  on  his  experiments, 
of  the  scholv  on  his  books,  of  the  mathematician  who  is  talking  with  raptures  on 
the  beauties  of  a  theorem,  will  bring  things  into  the  presence  of  initiated  listeners 
which  are  still  remote  from  the  minds  of  those  in  the  very  same  company  who 
have  no  sympathy  with  the  theme.  {C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  The  hidden  life  : — 
Standing  by  the  telegraphic  wires  one  may  often  hear  the  mystic  wailing  and  sigh- 
ing of  the  winds  among  them,  like  the  strains  of  an  ^olian  harp,  but  one  knows 
nothing  of  the  message  which  is  flashing  along  them.  Joyous  may  be  the  inner 
language  of  those  wires,  swift  as  the  lightning,  far-reaching  and  full  of  meaning, 
but  a  stranger  intermeddles  not  therewith.  Fit  emblem  of  the  believer's  inner  life  ; 
men  hear  our  notes  of  outwatd  sorrow  wrung  from  us  by  external  circumstances, 
but  the  message  of  celestial  peace,  the  Divine  communings  with  a  better  land,  the 
swift  heart-throbs  of  heaven-born  desire,  they  cannot  perceive:  the  carnal  see  but 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  183 

the  outer  manhood,  but  the  life  hidden  with  Christ  in  God,  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
discern.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  2.  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God. — A  present  religion : — The  word 
"now "is  to  me  the  most  prominent  word  in  the  text,  "Beloved,  now  are  we 
the  sons  of  God."  They  who  love  religion  love  a  present  thing.  The  Christian 
who  really  seeks  salvation  will  never  be  happy  unless  he  can  say,  "  Now  am  I  a 
child  of  God."  That  word  "  now  "  which  is  the  sinners  warning  is  to  the  Christian 
his  greatest  delight.  I.  I  shall  commence  by  endeavouring  to  show  that  religion  must 
be  a  thing  of  the  present,  because  the  present  has  such  intimate  connections  with 
THE  future.  We  are  told  in  Scripture  that  this  life  is  a  seed  time,  and  the  future 
is  the  harvest,  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption  ;  he 
that  soweth  to  the  spirit,  shall  of  the  spirit  reap  life  everlasting."  But  again,  this 
life  is  always  said  in  Scripture  to  be  a  preparation  for  the  life  to  come.  "  Prepare 
to  meet  thy  God,  0  Israel."  This  life  is  as  the  vestibule  of  the  king's  court,  we 
must  put  our  shoes  from  off  our  feet ;  we  must  wash  our  garments  and  make  our- 
selves ready  to  enter  into  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  How  are  we  saved  ? 
All  through  Scripture  we  are  told  we  are  saved  by  faith,  except  in  one  passage, 
wherein  it  is  said,  we  are  saved  by  hope.  Now  note  how  certain  it  is  that  religion 
must  be  a  present  thing  if  we  are  saved  by  faith,  because  faith  and  hope  cannot 
live  in  another  world.  "What  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for?  "  H.  In 
the  second  place,  as  I  have  shown  the  connection  between  the  present  and  the 
future,  let  me  use  another  illustration  to  show  the  importance  of  a  present  salva- 
tion. Salvation  is  a  thing  which  brings  present  blessings.  "  Unto  them  which  are 
saved,  Christ  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  He  does  not  say  to  them 
who  shall  be  saved,  but  to  them  which  are  saved.  We  know  too  that  justification  is 
a  present  blessing — "  there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation."  Adoption  is  a 
present  blessing,  for  it  says,  "  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,"  we  know  also  that 
sanctification  is  a  present  blessing,  for  the  apostle  addresses  himself  to  "  the  saints 
who  are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  called."  All  the  blessings  of  the  new 
covenant  are  spoken  of  in  the  present  tense,  because  with  the  exception  of  eternal 
glory  in  heaven,  they  are  all  to  be  enjoyed  here.  A  man  may  know  in  this  life, 
beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt,  that  he  is  accepted  in  Christ  Jesus.  Yet  I  am  in- 
clined to  think  that  the  worldly  man  most  of  all  objects  to  present  religion 
because  he  does  not  like  its  duties.  Men  wiU  not  direct  a  single  eye  to  religion, 
because  it  curtails  license  and  entails  duties.  And  this,  I  think,  proves  that 
rehgion  is  a  present  thing,  because  the  duties  of  religion  cannot  be  practised  in 
another  world,  they  must  be  practised  here.  Now,  what  are  the  duties  of  religion? 
In  the  first  place,  here  are  its  active  duties,  which  a  man  should  do  between  man 
and  man,  to  walk  soberly  and  righteously  and  uprightly  in  the  midst  of  an  evil 
generation.  Lightly  as  some  people  speak  about  morality,  there  is  no  true  religion 
where  there  is  no  morality.  You  have  hard  struggles  to  pass  through  life.  Some- 
times you  have  been  driven  to  a  great  extremity,  and  whether  you  would  succeed  or 
not  seemed  to  hang  upon  a  thread.  Has  not  your  religion  been  a  joy  to  you  in 
your  difficulties  ?  Has  it  not  calmed  your  minds  ?  When  you  have  been  fretted 
and  troubled  about  worldly  things,  have  you  not  found  it  a  pleasant  thing  to  enter 
your  closet,  and  shut  to  the  door,  and  tell  your  Father  in  secret  all  your  cares  ? 
And  oh,  ye  that  are  rich,  cannot  you  bear  the  same  testimony,  if  you  have  loved 
the  Master?  What  had  aU  your  riches  been  to  you  without  a  Saviour?  I 
fear  that  there  are  a  great  many  of  you  who  will  say,  "Well,  I  care  nothing 
at  aU  about  religion ;  it  is  for  no  avail  to  me  !  "  No,  and  it  is  very  probable 
that  you  wUl  not  care  about  it  until  it  shall  be  too  late  to  care.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Sonship  the  foreshadowing  of  heaven  : — In  every  true  economy  of  life 
there  is  a  concealed  side.  This  fact  grows  partly  out  of  the  nature  of  the  case,  and 
is  partly  a  dictate  of  wisdom.  This  fact  of  concealment,  and  these  two  reasons  for 
it,  are  both  apparent  in  God's  dealing  with  men.  Divine  revelation  is  the  exposed 
side  of  a  Divine  economy  which  reaches  back  into  darkness.  Some  things  God 
could  not  tell  us,  because  we  could  not  understand  them.  Other  things  are  equally 
hidden,  because  He  does  not  see  fit  to  reveal  them.  God  does  not  ignore  nor  for- 
bid men's  natural  curiosity  to  know  what  is  hidden.  In  many  cases,  indeed.  He 
uses  it  in  the  interest  of  wider  knowledge.  The  advancement  of  knowledge  would 
come  to  a  stop  if  all  men  were  simply  content  to  accept  the  unknown  as  unknow- 
able. At  the  same  time  He  does  set  a  limit  to  human  knowledge  in  certain  direc- 
tions :  but  in  all  such  cases  God  puts  His  revelation  in  such  a  relation  to  what  is 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   hi. 


unknown,  as  to  quiet  the  restlessness  of  the  curious  and  searching  spirit  when  it 
reaches  the  limit  of  knowledge.  He  assures  us  concerning  what  He  does  not  reveal 
by  what  He  does  reveal.  He  gives  us  certain  foreshadowings  of  our  future  in  our 
present,  i iist,  the  concealment.  What  we  are  to  be  hereafter  is  not  yet  mani- 
fested. Christ  reveals  the  fact  of  immortality  but  tells  us  little  or  nothing  about 
the  outward  conditions  of  immortality.  A  Christian  must  frankly  accept  this 
ignorance.  By  the  terms  of  his  Christian  covenant  he  engages  to  walk  by  faith  and 
not  by  sight.  Still,  there  is  revelation  as  well  as  concealment.  It  doth  not  yet 
appear,  but  we  know  something.  And  as  we  study  what  is  revealed  to  us,  we  begin 
to  see  that  the  concealment  and  ignorance  which  wait  on  this  subject  are  not 
arbitrary,  but  are  in  the  interest  of  our  knowledge  on  another  side,  and  are  intended 
to  direct  our  researches  into  another  and  more  profitable  channel.  "  It  doth  not 
yet  appear  " — not  where  we  shall  be,  or  in  what  circumstances  we  shall  be — but 
"  it  doth  not  appear  what  we  shall  be  "  :  only  we  know  that  we  shall  be  like  God. 
That  is  the  great,  the  only  point  which  concerns  us  as  respects  the  future  life.  To 
be  like  God  wiU  be  heaven.  To  be  unlike  God  will  be  perdition.  Character 
creates  its  own  environment.  On  this  side  we  know  something  of  the  heavenly 
world.  We  know  the  moral  laws  which  govern  it,  for  they  are  essentially  the  same 
laws  which  the  gospel  applies  here.  We  know  the  moral  sentiments  which  per- 
vade heaven.  They  are  the  very  sentiments  which  the  gospel  is  seeking  to  foster 
in  us  here.  We  know  that  holiness  which  is  urged  upon  us  here  is  the  character  of 
God ;  and  that  where  a  holy  God  reigns  the  atmosphere  must  be  one  of  holiness  : 
that  if  God  is  love,  love  must  pervade  heaven ;  that  if  God  is  truth,  truth  must 
pervade  heaven.  Now,  all  this,  you  see,  must  exert  a  tremendous  power  upon  the 
present  life,  viewed  as  a  prelude  and  preparation  for  the  life  to  come.  If  that 
future  life  is  to  have  its  essence  in  character  and  not  in  circumstance,  it  follows 
that  character  and  not  circumstance  is  the  great  thing  here.  The  apostle  strikes 
directly  into  this  track  of  thought.  In  the  first  place  he  states  the  fact  of  conceal- 
ment. Down  between  our  speculations  and  dreams  and  the  eternal  reality  falls 
an  impenetrable  veil.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  But  he  goes 
on  to  say,  "You  are  on  the  right  road  to  knowing.  You  are  on  the  right  road  to 
becoming.  Now  are  you  children  of  God :  that  fact  enfolds  all  that  is  to  come. 
It  is  a  matter  of  character  here  as  in  heaven.  The  true  goal  of  your  striving  la 
likeness  to  God."  Essentially  we  shall  not  be  other  there  than  here.  The  differ- 
ence will  be  in  degree,  in  maturity  of  development.  We  are  children  of  God  here, 
we  shall  be  children  of  God  there.  Why,  then,  with  all  this  promise,  does  it  not 
appear  what  we  shall  be  ?  Look  at  the  promise  itself  and  you  will  see  the  answer. 
The  essence  of  the  promise  is,  we  shall  be  like  God.  Understand,  not  equal  to  God, 
but  like  God,  as  the  finite,  under  the  highest  possible  conditions,  can  be  like  the 
infinite.  The  reason  for  this  Ukeness  to  God  is  given.  We  shall  see  Him  as  He 
is.  This  gives  us  the  reason  why  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be.  We  do 
not  see  Him  as  He  is.  We  cannot  so  see  Him  here,  any  more  than  a  child,  in  the 
weakness  of  infancy  and  the  ignorance  and  perverseness  of  childhood  can  under- 
stand and  appreciate  the  mind  and  character  of  a  noble  father.  We  cannot  know 
what  it  is  to  be  like  God,  because  we  cannot  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  never  shall, 
until  He  shall  be  manifested  as  pure  spirit  to  purified  spirits  freed  from  the  tram- 
mels of  the  flesh.  And  you  will  further  notice  the  truth  which  the  text  assumes,  that 
likeness  to  God  comes  through  vision  of  God.  We  assimilate  to  that  which  we 
habitually  contemplate,  and  especially  so  when  we  contemplate  lovingly  and 
enthusiastically.  Thus  we  come  to  the  last  point  of  our  text — the  practical  duty 
growing  out  of  this  mixed  condition  of  ignorance  and  promise.  For  if  the  promise 
is  to  be  fulfilled  in  likeness  to  God,  if  that,  in  short,  is  to  constitute  our  heaven,  and  if 
that  promise  is  enfolded  in  our  present  relation  as  children  of  God,  then  we  have 
in  that  fact  both  a  consolation  and  an  exhortation  to  duty.  You  shall  win  the  best 
of  heaven  by  getting  the  best  there  is  out  of  your  position  and  relation  as  a  child  of 
God  here.  This  is  the  logic  of  the  gospel.  Only  God  can  purify  the  heart,  but 
He  enlists  our  service  in  purifying  the  life.  In  the  same  breath  Paul  tells  us  that 
God  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  work  for  His  own  pleasure,  and  bids  us  carry  out 
our  own  salvation.  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  in  God  is  purified  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  yet  our  text  says  "purifieth  himself."  Personal  devotion  calls  out  personal 
effort.  (M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  The  glory  of  Divine  sonship  :—I.  The  present 
GLORY  OF  THIS  SONSHIP  IS  GREAT.  The  life  of  God  in  the  soul  is  intrinsically  great. 
HoUness  and  love  are  the  principal  elements  of  character  embodied  in  the  life  of  a 
believer :  these  constitute  his  dignity— his  present  glorious  inheritance.    II.  The 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  185 

FUTUEE  GLOKY  OF  THIS  soNSHip  IS  THE  GKEATEST.  The  model  is  Christ  in  His  en- 
throned majesty  and  splendour.  "  Behold  "  the  omnipotence  of  this  love.  For 
whom  was  it  displayed  ?  Angels  ?  No,  but  for  rebellious,  ruined  man — man 
scathed  by  sin,  and  an  enemy  to  his  Maker.  (J.  H.  Hill.)  The  possessions  and 
prospects  of  believers  : — I.  Here  is  true  unity.  "Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God." 
This  makes  a  true  Catholic  Church.  There  may  be  diversity  in  the  family  features 
— nay,  if  there  be  intellectual"  life  there  must  be  ;  but  withal  there  will  be  likeness 
in  the  King's  sons,  in  all  the  wide  extent  of  the  Great  Father's  household.  II. 
Here  is  true  fellowship.  This,  at  all  events,  is  the  ideal.  Till  the  world  lasts 
there  will  be  men  of  the  logical  temperament  of  St.  Paul,  the  mystical  tempera- 
ment of  St.  John,  the  practical,  sagacious  temperament  of  St.  James ;  but  there 
should  be  true  fellowship  for  all  that :  "  Sons  of  God  "  swallows  up  all  minor  diffi- 
culties, all  theoretical  diversities.  III.  Here  is  true  resemblance.  It  is  not  a 
mere  question  of  condition,  but  of  character.  All  the  lines  of  the  Gospel  are  laid 
along  the  lines  of  life.  IV.  Here  is  future  prospect.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear." 
No,  the  time  has  not  yet  come.  The  cradle  is  not  the  place  for  judging  of 
countenance  or  character  in  the  perfect  sense.  The  condition  of  the  development 
is  time.  Like  a  tree  made  strong  by  storms,  so  Ufe  means  contradiction,  hindrance, 
temptation.  We  are  waiting,  as  our  text  says,  to  appear.  Like  an  unblossomed 
flower,    the    glory    is    hidden  yet.       (W.    M.    Statham,    M.A.)  The  present 

condition  and  future  prospects  of  believers : — I.  What  we  now  are  —  sons  of 
God.  1.  We  were  restored  to  the  forfeited  honour  of  the  sons  of  God  by  "  being 
begotten  again  by  the  Father  ;  and  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh, 
nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  We  became  the  sons  of  God,  not  by  natural 
generation,  nor  in  virtue  of  any  inherent  power  or  tendency,  nor  in  consequence  of 
any  endeavour  on  the  part  of  others,  but  by  the  agency  of  His  Spirit.  2.  We  may 
know  it  by  the  faith  we  exercise,  if  it  leads  us  to  entire  dependence  on  Christ,  and 
to  the  utmost  diligence  in  duty.  We  may  know  it  by  the  repentance  we  have 
experienced,  if  it  has  been  heartfelt,  arising  from  a  true  sense  of  sin,  and  resulting 
in  its  entire  renunciations.  We  may  know  it  by  the  feelings  we  cherish  toward  our 
brethren  in  Christ,  if  we  love  them  sincerely.  We  may  know  it  by  the  state  of  our 
affections  toward  God,  if  they  are  set  on  "  those  things  which  are  above,  where 
Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  3.  We,  indeed,  may  be  of  no  account 
among  men.  II.  What  we  expect  to  become.  1.  The  confidence  with  which  we 
may  expect  future  happiness :  "  We  know  we  shall  be  like  Him."  Though  we 
are  not  favoured  with  such  evidence  as  John  enjoyed,  we  have  all  that  is  necessary 
to  sustain  our  hope  in  the  reality  of  that  blessedness  which  God  has  in  reserve  for 
His  children.  The  number  and  minuteness  of  these  predictions,  which  have  received 
accomplishment  in  the  history  of  Jesus  and  the  Church ;  the  sublime  nature  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel ;  the  holy  tendency  of  its  principles ;  the  pure  morality  of 
its  precepts  ;  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  first  promulgated,  and  the  success 
which  has  attended  its  ministrations,  convince  us  of  the  truth  of  that  record,  which 
reveals  to  us  life  and  immortality.  2.  The  peculiar  nature  of  the  happiness  of 
heaven,  "  We  shall  be  like  Him."  It  must  satisfy  the  most  enlarged  desires  of  the 
immortal  soul  to  be  assimilated  to  Him  who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 
Our  minds,  like  His,  shall  be  gloriously  constituted,  for,  vigorous  and  pure,  they 
shall  be  fitted  for  the  noble  pursuits  and  sublime  contemplations  of  the  heavens. 
Our  character,  like  His,  shall  be  glorious,  for,  freed  from  all  taint  of  impurity,  we 
shall  be  arrayed  in  the  robe  of  His  righteousness.  Our  stations,  like  His,  shall  be 
glorious,  for  we  shall  be  near  to  that  throne  on  which  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
His  Father.  Our  happiness,  like  His,  shall  be  glorious,  for  we  shall  possess  all  we 
can  desire  or  be  able  to  enjoy.  3.  The  means  by  which  this  assimilation  to  Christ 
shall  be  produced,  "  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  As  the 
earth  owes  all  that  diversity  of  light  and  shade  with  which  it  is  adorned,  and  all 
that  variety  of  flower  and  luxuriance  of  fruit  with  which  it  is  beautified  and 
enriched  to  the  agency  of  the  sun ;  so  shall  the  redeemed  in  heaven  derive  all  their 
beauty,  and  all  their  blessedness,  from  the  presence  of  Him  who  sits  upon  the 
throne.  4.  The  time  when  the  felicity  of  the  sons  of  God  shall  be  consummated, 
•'When  He  shall  appear."  5:  The  inconceivable  greatness  of  this  future  happiness, 
"  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  (W.  Welsh.)  The  present  and  the 
future  of  Christian  life  : — I.  That  which  is  positively  known  :  "  Beloved,  now  are 
we  the  sons  of  God."  1.  A  man  may  know  himself  a  Christian,  as  he  knows 
himself  a  living  soul — by  personal  consciousness.  The  fact  of  his  conversion  is 
the  starting-point  in  his  religious  history  ;  and  the  incidents  of  Christian  experience 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

are  the  indications  of  his  progress  lq  the  Divine  life.  2.  And,  beyond  the  personal 
evidence  arising  from  the  exercise  of  faith  in  the  soul,  there  is  the  witness  of  the  Spirit 
in  our  hearts.  11.  That  which  is  imperfectly  understood.  "It  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be."  1.  One  thing,  however,  is  quite  sure.  We  shall  not 
remain  as  we  are.  The  very  process  of  animal  life  is  fraught  with  decay. 
2.  Another  thing  is  equally  certain ;  and  that  is,  that  we  shall  stiU  exist.  3.  But 
amidst  all  the  information  which  God  has  given  us  on  that  subject,  we  know  not 
the  mode  of  our  future  existence,  nor  even  its  locality.  How  we  shall  see  without 
these  eyes,  hear  without  these  ears,  and  converse  without  these  organs  of  speech, 
we  cannot  tell.  Probably  we  shall  be  all  intelligence,  and  find,  to  our  surprise,  that 
the  senses  on  which  we  laid  so  great  a  stress,  and  considered  so  essential  to  our 
intellectual  being,  were  but  so  many  loopholes  in  our  prison-house  of  clay,  through 
which  we  could  sometimes  catch  a  glimpse  of  surrounding  objects,  but  by  means  of 
which  we  could  distinguish  nothing  perfectly.  III.  That  which  is  confidently 
anticipated.     (D.  E.  Ford.)         Noio  sons,  though  sufferers  : — I.  The  sons  of  God 

ABE  specially  LOVED  OF  GoD.   II.  ThE  SONS  OF  GOD  ARE  BORN  AGAIN  OF  GoD.   "  Of 

His  own  wiU  begat  He  us  by  the  word  of  His  truth,  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of 
first-fruits  of  His  creatures."  So  that  the  character  of  the  disciples  of  Christ  is  a 
special  Divine  workmanship.  It  matters  little  what  civilisation  may  be  in  a  country, 
or  what  it  may  do.    Every  man  needs  regeneration.     III.  The  sons  of  God,  as  such, 

ARE   BRETHREN   OF   JeSUS    ChRIST.      IV.    ThE    SONS    OF    GoD   ARE    RELATED    TO    ALL  THE 

TJNFALLEN  AND  REDEEMED  OP  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GoD.  Paul  makes  vcry  much  of  this, 
and  I  suppose  that  if  our  hearts  were  right  we  should  make  very  much  of  this. 
V.  The  sons  of  God  are  heirs  of  God,  joint-heirs  with  Christ,  heirs  to  the 
noblest  rank  and  title,  and  heirs  to  boundless  wealth.  The  reason  that  God  does 
not  give  us  more  of  every  kind  of  good  now,  is  that  we  need  the  discipline  of  want. 
And  untU  the  discipline  of  suffering  and  of  want  has  accomplished  its  end  we  have 
not  the  capacity  to  use  the  treasures  and  the  riches  which  God  waits  to  put  at  our 
disposal,  and  which  He  will  put  at  our  disposal  so  soon  as  we  are  educated  and 
ready.  VI.  The  sons  of  God  aee  being  educated  by  God.  Suitable  habits  are 
being  formed,  so  that  when  they  become  lords  of  the  inheritance  which  is  in  reserve 
for  them,  they  shall  appear  to  have  been  so  educated  as  to  be  thoroughly  fit  for  all  the 
duties,  and  responsibilities,  and  honours,  and  joys  of  that  position.  VII.  The  sons 
OP  God  have  access  to  God.  (S.  Martin.)  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall 
be. — Of  the  happiness  of  good  men  in  the  future  state : — I.  The  present  obscurity 
OF  OUR  FUTURE  STATE,  as  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  that  happiness  which 
good  men  shaU  enjoy  in  another  world.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be." 
If  one  should  come  from  a  strange  country,  never  known  before,  and  should  only 
tell  us,  in  general,  that  it  was  a  most  delightful  place,  and  the  inhabitants  a  bra/ve, 
and  generous,  and  wealthy  people,  under  the  government  of  a  wise  and  great  king, 
ruling  by  excellent  laws ;  and  that  the  particular  delights  and  advantages  of  it  were 
not  to  be  imagined  by  anything  he  knew  in  our  own  country.  If  we  gave  credit  to 
the  person  that  brought  this  relation,  it  would  create  in  us  a  great  admiration  of  the 
country  described  to  us,  and  a  mighty  concern  to  see  it,  and  hve  in  it.  But  it  would 
be  a  vain  curiosity  to  reason  and  conjecture  about  the  particular  conveniences  of  it ; 
because  it  would  be  impossible,  by  any  discourse,  to  arrive  at  the  certain  knowledge 
of  any  more,  than  he  who  knew  it,  was  pleased  to  tell  us.  This  is  the  case  as  to  our 
heavenly  country.  H.  Thus  much  we  know  of  it  in  general,  that  it  shall  consist 
IN  the  BLESSED  VISION  OF  GoD.  "  It  doth  uot  yct  appear  what  we  shall  be ;  but 
when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  1.  What  is  meant  by  seeing 
God.  As  to  see  the  king  includes  the  court,  and  all  the  glorious  circumstances  of 
his  attendance :  so  to  see  God,  does  take  in  all  that  glory,  and  joy,  and  happiness, 
which  flows  from  His  presence.  2.  What  is  here  meant  by  seeing  God  as  He  is : 
we  shaU  see  Him  as  He  is.  (1)  Our  perfect  knowledge  of  Him.  Not  that  we  are 
to  imagine  that  when  we  come  to  heaven,  our  understanding  can  or  shall  be  raised 
to  such  a  pitch  as  to  be  able  perfectly  to  comprehend  the  infinite  nature  and 
perfections  of  God.  But  our  knowledge  shall  be  advanced  to  such  degrees  of 
perfection  as  a  finite  and  created  understanding  is  capable  of.  (a)  We  shall  then  have 
an  immediate  knowledge  of  God,  that  which  the  Scripture  calls  seeing  Him  "  face  to 
face  " ;  not  at  a  distance,  as  we  do  now  by  faith  :  not  by  reflection,  as  we  do  now  see 
Him  in  the  creatures,  (h)  We  shall  have  a  far  clearer  knowledge  of  God  than  we  have 
now  in  this  Mfe  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  We  see  Him  now  many  times  as  He  is  not ;  that 
is,  we  are  liable  to  false  and  mistaken  conceptions  of  Him.  (c)  We  shall  then, 
likewise,  have  a  certain  knowledge  of  God,  free  from  all  doubts  concerning  Him 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  187 

(1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  As  God  now  knows  us,  so  shall  we  then  know  Hun,  as  to  the 
truth  and  certainty  of  our  knowledge.  (2)  To  see  God  "  as  He  is,"  does  imply  our 
perfect  enjoyment  of  Him.  It  can  be  no  mean  thing,  which  the  infinite  wisdom, 
and  goodness,  and  power  of  God  hath  designed  for  the  final  reward  of  those  who 
love  Him,  and  of  those  whom  He  loves.  3.  The  fitness  of  this  metaphor,  to  express 
to  us  the  happiness  of  our  future  state.  (1)  Sight  is  the  noblest  and  most  excellent 
of  all  our  senses  ;  and  therefore  the  frame  of  the  eye  is  the  most  curious  of  all  other 
parts  of  the  body,  and  the  dearest  to  us,  and  that  which  we  preserve  with  the 
greatest  tenderness.  It  is  the  most  comprehensive  sense,  hath  the  largest  sphere, 
takes  in  the  most  objects,  and  discerns  them  at  the  greatest  distance.  It  can  in  a 
moment  pass  from  earth  to  heaven,  and  survey  innumerable  objects.  It  is  the  most 
pure,  and  spiritual,  and  quickest  in  its  operations,  and  approacheth  nearest  to  the 
nature  of  a  spiritual  faculty.  (2)  The  primary  and  proper  object  of  this  sense  is 
the  most  delightful  and  of  the  most  spiritual  nature  of  any  corporeal  thing,  and 
that  is  light  (Prov.  xv.  30;  Eccles.  xi.  7).  It  is  the  purest  and  most  spiritual  of  aU 
corporeal  things,  and  therefore  God  chooseth  to  represent  Himself  by  it :  "  God  is 
light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  HI.  Wherein  our  likeness  and  contor- 
MiTT  to  God  shall  consist.  1.  In  the  immortality  of  our  nature.  In  this  mortal 
state  we  are  not  capable  of  that  happiness  which  consists  in  the  vision  of  God ;  that 
is,  in  the  perfect  knowledge  and  perpetual  enjoyment  of  Him.  The  imperfection  of 
our  state,  and  the  weakness  of  our  faculties,  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  so  glorious  and 
resplendent  an  object,  as  the  Divine  nature  and  perfections  are;  we  cannot  see  God 
and  live.  2.  In  the  purity  of  our  souls.  In  this  world  every  good  man  does 
"mortify  his  earthly  and  corrupt  affections,"  and  in  some  measure  "bring  them 
into  obedience  and  subjection  to  the  law  of  God."  But  stUl  there  are  some  relics  of 
sin,  some  spots  and  imperfections  in  the  holiness  of  the  best  men.  But  upon  our 
entrance  into  the  other  world  we  shall  quite  "  put  off  the  old  man  with  the  affections 
and  lusts  thereof " ;  we  shall  be  perfectly  "  deUvered  from  this  body  of  sin  and 
death,"  and,  together  with  this  mortal  nature,  part  with  all  the  remainders  of  sin 
and  corruption  which  cleave  to  this  mortal  state.      IV.  The  necessary  connexion 

BETWEEN  OUR  LIKENESS  AND  CONFORMITY  TO  GOD,  AND  OUR  SIGHT  AND  ENJOYMENT  OF  HiM. 

"We  know  that  we  shall  be  hke  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  1.  Likeness 
to  God  in  the  immortality  of  our  nature  is  necessary  to  make  us  capable  of  the 
happiness  of  the  next  life  ;  which  consists  in  the  blessed  and  perpetual  vision  and 
enjoyment  of  God.  2.  Our  likeness  to  God  in  the  purity  of  our  souls  is  necessary 
to  make  us  capable  of  the  blessed  sight  and  enjoyment  of  Him  in  the  next  life. 
(1)  It  is  necessary,  as  a  condition  of  the  thing  to  be  performed  on  our  part,  before 
■we  can  expect  that  God  should  make  good  the  promise  of  eternal  life  and  happiness  to 
us.  (2)  We  cannot  possibly  love  God,  nor  take  delight  in  Him,  unless  we  be  like 
TTim  in  the  temper  and  disposition  of  our  minds.  {Ahp.  Tillotson.)  Future 
state  of  Christians  : — I.  The  character  of  the  children  of  God.  It  is  this  filial 
spirit  which  forms  all  the  beautiful  and  amiable  traits  in  the  Christian  character. 

1.  It  disposes  the  children  of  God  to  love  Him  with  an  ardent  and  supreme  affection. 

2.  It  disposes  them  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity,  and  to  believe  in  Him 
alone  for  salvation.  8.  It  unites  all  the  children  of  God  to  one  another.  4.  It  is  a  spirit 
of  grace  and  of  supplication.  6.  It  disposes  His  children  to  obey  all  His  commands. 
n.  What  they  do  not  know  concerning  themselves  in  a  future  state.  1.  They 
are  wholly  unacquainted  with  the  means  by  which  they  shall  perceive  either  material 
or  spiritual  objects,  after  they  have  lost  their  bodily  senses.  2.  It  is  no  less  dark 
and  mysterious  how  they  wiU  converse  with  one  another,  and  with  the  heavenly 
hosts,  after  they  leave  these  mortal  bodies.  3.  They  must  remain  totally  ignorant 
in  this  life,  how  they  shall  arrive  in  heaven,  and  how  they  shall  move  from  place 
to  place  after  they  arrive  there.  IH.  What  the  children  of  God  do  know 
concerning  themselves  in  a  future  state.  1.  They  do  now  know  where  they  shall 
be  hereafter.  2.  They  know  in  this  world  what  manner  of  persons  they  shall  be  ia 
the  next.  3.  They  know  that  when  they  shall  leave  this  present  evil  world,  they 
shall  be  completely  blessed.  Lessons  :  1.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said,  that 
all  the  knowledge  which  Christians  have  of  themselves  in  a  future  state,  they  wholly 
derive  from  Divine  revelation.  2.  We  may  learn  from  what  has  been  said,  why 
some  Christians  die  in  so  much  light  and  joy,  and  some  in  so  much  darkness  and 
distress.  3.  Christians  may  and  ought  to  infer,  from  what  has  been  said,  the  great 
importance  of  making  their  calling  and  election  sure.  4.  The  preceding  observations 
leave  us  no  room  to  doubt,  that  death  is  always  a  happy  event  to  the  children 
of   God.      5.  This   subject   affords   a   source   of  great   consolation  to  those  who 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chab.  ui. 

have  been  bereaved  of  near  and  dear  Christian  friends.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
Our  ignorance  and  our  knowledge  of  the  future  state  : — I.  Oub  ignorance.  We  do  not 
suppose  that  God  has  designedly  kept  back  from  mankind  clear  and  full  intimations 
of  the  characteristics  of  future  happiness  ;  on  the  contrary,  revelation  is  abundant 
in  its  discoveries.  Parable  and  image  are  exhausted  with  the  effort  to  make  that 
portrait  worthy  the  original ;  and,  probably  we  do  not,  for  the  most  part  allow  our 
knowledge  to  keep  pace  with  God's  revelation  of  the  future.  But  when  you  come 
to  the  point  of  what  we  ourselves  shall  be,  we  frankly  admit  that  we  have  but 
scanty  information.  It  is  just  that  mystery,  for  coping  with  which  we  possess  no 
faculties.  Yea,  and  from  this  our  ignorance  of  what  a  spiritual  body  shall  be, 
arises  an  ignorance  just  as  total  of  a  vast  portion  of  the  occupations  of  believers. 
II.  Oub  knowledge.  "We  know  that,  when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like 
Him."  There  would  be  no  difficulty  in  bringing  forward  other  portions  of  Scripture 
to  corroborate  this  statement.  It  is,  for  example,  expressly  declared  by  St.  Paul, 
that  Christ  "  shall  change  our  vile  bodies,  that  they  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  His 
glorious  body."  But  St  John,  you  observe,  subjoins  a  reason  for  the  resemblance, 
"  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  We  can  hardly  venture  to 
suppose  that  the  excitement  of  desire,  and  the  consequent  offering  up  of  prayer  will 
constitute  the  connection,  as  they  do  a  present  connection,  between  seeing  Christ 
and  resembling  Christ.  We  must  rather  own,  that  whatever  the  future  connection, 
it  wiU  altogether  differ  from  the  present.  It  is  to  a  suffering  and  humiliated 
Christ  that  we  become  like  now ;  it  shall  be  to  an  exalted  and  glorified  Christ  that 
we  are  made  like  hereafter.  The  work  wrought  in  us  whilst  on  earth  is  conformity 
to  Christ  in  His  humiliation — the  work  wrought  in  us  when  we  start  up  at  the 
resurrection  shall  be  conformity  to  Christ  in  His  exaltation.  The  apostle  declares 
that  we  "  shall  see  Christ  as  He  is."  We  ask  you  whether,  with  the  most  vigorous 
actings  of  faith,  it  can  be  ever  said  of  us  that  we  "  see  Christ  as  He  is  "  ?  No,  the 
gaze  that  we  cast  on  Christ  here  must  be  a  gaze  upon  Christ  as  Christ  was,  more 
truly  than  a  gaze  upon  Christ  as  Christ  is.  We  look  upon  Jesus  as  delivered  for 
our  sins,  and  raised  again  for  our  justification.  We  look  towards  Christ  as  lifted 
up  Uke  the  brazen  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  as  presenting  in  His  office  of  Inter- 
cessor the  merits  of  His  atonement  in  our  behalf.  Even  those  who  obtain  a 
sight  of  Christ  as  Intercessor,  do  not  strictly  see  Christ  as  Christ  is.  They 
see  Him  as  perpetuating  His  crucifixion.  So  that,  sift  the  matter  as  closely 
as  you  will,  whilst  on  earth  we  see  Christ  as  He  was  rather  than  Christ 
as  He  is— and  in  exact  agreement  with  this  sight  of  Christ  is  the  likeness 
we  acquire.  But  when  in  place  of  travelling  back  I  would  spring  forward, 
when  I  would  contemplate  the  majesty  of  a  Being  administering  the 
business  of  the  universe,  and  drawing  in  from  every  spot  an  infinite  source  of 
revenue,  teeming  with  honour,  and  flashing  with  glory — oh  !  shall  I  not  be  forced 
to  confess  myself  amazed  at  the  very  outset  of  the  daring  endeavour  ?  Shall  I 
not  be  compelled  to  fall  back  from  the  scrutiny  of  what  Christ  is,  to  repose  more 
and  more  on  a  survey  of  what  Christ  was,  thankful  for  present  knowledge,  hopeful 
of  future  ?  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  unrevealed  future  of  the  so7is  of  God  : — The 
present  is  the  prophet  of  the  future,  says  my  text :  "  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God, 
and  "  (not  "  but  ")  "  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  A  man  may  say : 
"  Ah  !  now  are  we,  we  shall  be — we  shall  be — nothing  !  "  John  does  not  think  so. 
John  thinks  that  if  a  man  is  a  son  of  God  he  will  always  be  so.  I.  The  fact  of 
BONSHEP  MAKES  US  QUITE  SURE  OF  THE  FUTURE.  It  scems  to  me  that  the  strongest 
reasons  for  believing  in  another  world  are  these  two — first,  that  Jesus  Christ  was 
raised  from  the  dead  and  has  gone  up  there ;  and,  second,  that  a  man  here  can  pray 
and  trust  and  love  God,  and  feel  that  he  is  His  child.  "  We  are  the  children  of  God 
now  " — and  if  we  are  children  now,  we  shall  be  grown  up  some  time.  Childhood 
leads  to  maturity.  And  not  only  the  fact  of  our  sonship  avails  to  assure  us  of 
immortal  life,  but  also  the  very  form  which  our  religious  experience  takes  points  in 
the  same  direction.  "  The  child  is  father  of  the  man  " ;  the  bud  foretells  the 
flower.  In  the  same  way  the  very  imperfections  of  the  Christian  life,  as  it  is  seen 
here,  argue  the  existence  of  another  state  where  all  that  is  here  in  the  germ  shall 
be  fully  matured,  and  all  that  is  here  incomplete  shall  attain  the  perfection  which 
alone  will  correspond  to  the  power  that  works  in  us.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  every 
nature,  and  most  of  all  in  a  Christian  nature,  which  is  like  the  packages  that 
emigrants  take  with  them,  marked  "  Not  wanted  on  the  voyage."  These  go  down 
»Hto  the  hold,  and  they  are  only  of  use  after  landing  in  the  new  world.  If  I  am  a 
■on  of  God  I  have  got  much  in  me  that  is  "  not  wanted  on  the  voyage,"  and  the 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  189 

more  I  grow  into  His  likeness  the  more  I  am  thrown  out  of  harmony  with  the 
things  round  about  me  in  pr  ^portion  as  I  am  brought  into  harmony  with  the  things 
beyond.  11.  Sonship  leaver  ds  ignoeakt  of  much  in  the  future.  "  We  are 
the  sons  of  God,  and,"  just  because  we  are,  "  it  is  not  yet  made  manifest  what  we 
shall  be."  John  would  simply  say  to  us,  "  There  has  never  been  set  forth  before 
men's  eyes  in  this  earthly  life  of  ours  an  example,  or  an  instance,  of  what  the  sons 
of  God  are  to  be  in  another  state  of  being."  And  so  because  mer  'iave  never  had 
the  instance  before  them  they  do  not  know  much  about  that  state.  In  some  sense 
there  has  been  a  manifestation  through  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  the 
risen  Christ  is  not  the  glorified  Christ.  The  chrysalis's  dreams  about  what 
it  would  be  when  it  was  a  butterfly  would  be  as  reliable  as  a  man's  imagination 
of  what  a  future  life  will  be.  So  let  us  feel  two  things — let  us  be  thankful 
that  we  do  not  know,  for  the  ignorance  is  a  sign  of  the  greatness ;  and  then, 
let  us  be  sure  that  just  the  very  mixture  of  knowledge  and  ignorance  which 
we  have  about  another  world  is  precisely  the  food  whiuh  is  most  fitted  to  nourish 
imagination  and  hope.  III.  Our  sonship  flings  an  all-penetratino  beam  of 
LIGHT  on  that  FUTURE,  in  the  knowledge  of  our  perfect  vision  and  perfect  hkeness. 
*'  We  know  that  when  He  shall  be  manifested,  we  shall  be  like  Him  for  we  shall  see 
Him  as  He  is."  (A.  Maclai-en,  D.D.)  Future  Zi/e;— There  is  nothing  in  the 
actual  condition  of  mankind,  or  in  the  method  of  God's  dispensations  towards 
them,  more  surprising  than  the  fact  that,  while  the  very  constitution  of  the  mind 
impels  it  to  survey  the  future  with  intense  solicitude,  futurity  itself  is  hidden  by  a 
veil  which  can  neither  be  penetrated  nor  withdrawn.  We  have  only  to  look  back 
upon  our  progress  hitherto,  to  see  experimental  evidence,  which  we  at  least  must 
own  to  be  conclusive,  that,  in  hiding  from  us  that  which  was  before  us,  God  has 
dealt  with  us,  not  as  an  austere  master,  but  a  tender  parent,  knowing  well  how  His 
children  can  endure,  and,  in  the  exercise  of  that  omniscience,  determining  not 
only  how  much  they  shall  actually  suffer,  but  how  much  of  what  they  are  to  suffer 
BhaU  be  known  to  them  before  their  day  of  visitation  comes.  But  this  part  of  God's 
providential  government,  though  eminently  merciful,  is  not  designed  exclusively  to 
spare  men  a  part  of  the  suffering  which  sin  has  caused.  It  has  a  higher  end.  By 
the  partial  disclosure  and  concealment  of  futurity,  continually  acting  on  the  native 
disposition  to  pry  into  it,  the  soul  is  stiU  led  onward,  kept  in  an  attitude  of  expec- 
tation, and  in  spite  of  its  native  disposition  to  look  downward,  to  go  backward, 
or  to  lie  stagnant,  is  perpetually  stimulated  to  look  up,  to  exert  itself,  and  make 
advances  in  the  right  direction.  In  making  us  rational,  in  giving  us  the  power  of 
comparison  and  judgment,  and  in  teaching  us  by  the  constitution  of  our  nature  to 
infer  effect  from  cause  and  cause  from  effect,  God  has  rendered  us  incapable  of 
looking  at  the  present  or  remembering  the  past,  without  at  the  same  time  or  as  a 
necessary  consequence  anticipating  that  which  is  to  come,  and  to  a  great  extent 
with  perfect  accuracy,  so  that  all  the  knowledge  of  the  future  which  is  needed  for 
the  ordinary  purposes  of  human  life  is  amply  provided  and  inf aUibly  secured ; 
while,  far  beyond  the  limits  of  this  ordinary  foresight.  He  has  granted  to  some 
gifted  minds  a  keener  vision.  Nor  is  this  all,  for  even  with  respect  to  things  which 
neither  ordinary  reasoning  from  analogy,  nor  extraordinary  powers  of  forecast  can 
avail  to  bring  within  the  reach  of  human  prescience,  God  has  Himself  been 
pleased  to  make  them  known  by  special  revelation.  If  anything  is  certain  it  is  this, 
that  they  who  do  escape  perdition,  and  by  faith  in  the  omnipotence  of  grace  pursue 
this  upward  course,  shall  still  continue  to  ascend  without  cessation,  rising  higher, 
growing  better,  and  becoming  more  and  more  like  God  throughout  eternity.  This 
vagueness  and  uncertainty,  although  at  first  sight  it  may  seem  to  be  a  serious 
disadvantage,  is  nevertheless  not  without  important  and  beneficent  effects  upon  the 
subjects  of  salvation.  It  may  seem,  indeed,  that  as  a  means  of  arousing  the 
attention,  an  indefinite  assurance  of  transcendent  blessedness  hereafter  is  less 
likely  to  be  efficacious  than  a  distinct  and  vivid  exhibition  of  the  elements  which 
are  to  constitute  that  blessedness ;  but  let  it  be  remembered  that  no  possible 
amount,  and  no  conceivable  array  of  such  particulars,  would  have  the  least  effect  in 
originating  serious  reflection  or  desire  in  the  unconverted  heart.  This  can  be 
■wrought  by  nothing  short  of  a  Divine  power,  and  when  it  is  thus  wrought,  when  the 
thoughts  and  the  affections  are  once  turned  in  the  right  direction,  the  less  detailed 
and  more  indefinite  description  of  the  glory  which  is  yet  to  be  experienced  seems 
often  best  adapted  to  excite  and  stimulate  the  soul,  and  lead  it  onwards,  by  still 
presenting  something  that  is  yet  to  be  discovered  or  attained,  and  thus  experi- 
mentally accustoming  the  soui  to  act  upon  the  vital  principle   of  its  new-born 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

nature,  forgetting  that  which  is  behind,  and  reaching  forth  to  that  which  is  before. 
The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  indefinite  manner  in  which  the  doom  of  the 
impenitent  and  unbelieving  is  set  forth  in  Scripture.  In  this,  as  in  the  correspond- 
ing case  before  described,  if  the  mind  is  awakened,  such  details  are  needless,  and  if 
not  awakened,  they  are  unavailing.  But  is  it,  can  it  be,  a  fact,  that  rational, 
spiritual  beings,  Godlike  in  their  origin,  and  made  for  immortality,  with  faculties 
susceptible  of  endless  elevation  and  enlargement,  and  activity,  can  hesitate  to 
choose  life  rather  than  death,  and  good  in  preference  to  evil  ?  Because  you  now 
wish  to  repent,  and  to  believe,  and  to  be  saved  hereafter,  you  imagine  yourselves 
safe  in  your  impenitence,  and  unbelief,  and  condemnation.  Why,  the  very  dis- 
position which  is  now  made  the  pretext  for  procrastination  may  forsake  you.  The 
respect  you  now  feel  for  the  truth,  for  God's  law,  for  the  gospel,  may  be  changed 
into  a  cold  indifference,  contemptuous  incredulity,  or  malignant  hatred.  The 
faint  gleams  of  conviction  which  occasionally  light  up  the  habitual  darkness  of  the 
mind  may  be  extinguished.  (J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Heaven : — It  is  often 
asked,  if  the  great  object  of  the  gospel  be  to  fit  us  for  heaven,  why  is  not  a  fuller 
revelation  of  its  joys  made  to  us  ?  In  the  first  place,  were  the  future  life  fully  laid 
open  to  us,  its  brightness  would  throw  the  present  state  into  utter  eclipse,  and  make 
our  earthly  pilgrimage  irksome  and  grievous.  The  natural  shrinking  from  an 
unknown  condition  of  being  sustains  an  interest  in  the  present  life  in  the  hearts  of 
those  best  fitted  to  die,  while,  when  that  unknown  state  is  at  hand,  their  confidence 
in  the  Divine  mercy  enables  them  to  enter  upon  it  without  doubt  or  fear.  Again, 
the  representations  of  heaven  in  the  Bible  are  such  as  to  adapt  the  inspired  record 
to  the  needs  of  all  classes  of  minds.  We  doubt  not  that  the  life  of  heaven  is 
spkitual.  We  expect  there  pleasures,  not  of  sense,  but  of  soul.  But  the  gospel 
was  first  preached,  and  is  still  preached  every  year,  to  multitudes  who  occupy  the 
lowest  plane  of  intelligence  and  culture.  It  goes  to  them  in  their  coarseness  and 
degradation;  and  in  that  state  how  could  they  take  in  a  picture  of  spiritual  joy? 
Their  conceptions  of  heaven  grow  with  their  characters.  As  they  increase  in 
spirituality  it  becomes  less  a  place  and  more  a  state.  It  represents  to  them  at  every 
stage  the  highest  point  that  they  have  reached,  the  utmost  of  blessedness  that  they 
can  apprehend.  To  pass  to  another  topic,  I  would  ask.  Would  not  any  detailed 
description  of  the  life  to  come  raise  more  questions  than  it  answered — excite  more 
curiosity  than  it  gratified  ?  I  love  to  think  of  it  as  infinitely  diversified,  as,  though 
the  same,  yet  different  to  every  soul.  I  believe  that  every  direction  which  the  mind 
can  take,  every  bent  which  the  character  can  assume  under  the  guidance  of 
religion,  reaches  out  into  eternity.  If  this  be  the  case,  how  could  the  whole  be 
written  out  in  a  volume  ?  Or,  had  some  portions  of  this  blessed  life  been  revealed, 
and  some  threads  of  our  earthly  existence  shown  us  as  they  are  woven  into  the  web 
of  eternity,  it  could  only  have  awakened  doubt  and  despondency  in  those  minds  on 
whose  favourite  departments  of  thought  and  duty  no  light  from  heaven  was  shed. 
But  while  for  these  reasons  a  specific  revelation  with  regard  to  the  heavenly  life 
was  not  to  be  expected,  does  not  the  very  idea  of  immortality  include  the  answers 
to  many  of  the  questions  which  we  might  ask  the  most  anxiously  ?  If  we  are  the 
same  bemgs  there  as  here,  we  must  carry  with  us  the  tastes,  affections,  and  habits 
of  thinking  and  feeling,  with  which  we  depart  this  life,  and  those  of  them  which 
can  find  scope  for  exercise  and  space  for  growth  in  heaven  must  unfold  and  ripen 
there.  In  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  I  would  suggest  that  much  may  have 
been  left  unrevealed  with  regard  to  heaven  in  order  to  furnish  room  for  the  highest 
exercise  of  the  imagination.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  Scriptural  representations  of 
the  life  to  come  are  precisely  adapted  to  make  fancy  the  handmaid  of  devotion. 
There  may  be  yet  another  reason  why  we  have  so  little  detailed  information  with 
regard  to  heaven.  There  is  no  doubt  much  which  we  could  not  know^for  which 
human  speech  furnishes  no  words.  Language  is  the  daughter  of  experience.  It 
can  give  the  blind  no  idea  of  colours,  or  the  deaf  of  sounds.  Now  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  in  the  future  life  our  mode  of  being,  of  perception,  of  recognition,  of 
communication,  will  be  essentially  different  from  what  it  is  here,  and  perhaps  so 
different  that  nothing  within  our  earthly  experience  could  furnish  terms  for  its 
description.  But,  with  all  our  ignorance,  we  have  fuU  assurance  on  one  point,  and 
that  the  most  essential  to  our  present  unprovement  and  happiness.  "  When  God 
shall  appear,"  shall  draw  near  the  soul  in  death  and  judgment,  "  we  shall  be  like 
Him."  And  if  like  Him,  like  Jesus,  His  express  image,  whose  heart  is  all  laid 
open  to  us,  whose  traits  of  spiritual  beauty  and  excellence  are  within  our  clear 
view.     To  be  like  Christ — need  we  know,  could  we  ask  more?     {A.  P.  Peabody.) 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  191 

Progress  of  manhood  ; — There  is  enough  of  progress  and  development  in  our  present 
existence  to  justify  the  belief  that  man,  living  in  God  and  loving  Him,  shall  pass 
on  to  capacities,  services,  and  enjoyments  of  which  he  can  have  now  only  the  most 
imperfect  conception.  Look  at  the  little  child  in  his  mother's  arms :  its  eyes 
beautiful  but  vacant,  or  just  sharpening  into  attention  and  wonder ;  its  head  at  all 
points  of  the  compass  in  five  minutes.  Now  look  at  that  man  who,  with  eye  of  fire 
and  voice  of  thunder,  binds  an  army  together,  and  rules  the  will  of  a  hundred 
thousand  men  with  a  word  :  the  little,  comely,  helpless  infant  has  grown  into  that 
mighty  soldier,  whose  look  is  equal  to  a  hundred  swords,  whose  voice  is  equal  to  a 
cannonade.  Who  could  have  predicted  such  a  man  from  such  a  child  ?  Say,  then, 
to  every  child,  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  "  ;  we  must  wait ;  we  must 
live  and  work  in  the  spirit  of  hope  ;  this  chUd,  or  that,  may  move  the  world  to  God 
and  heaven !  Look  at  the  child  beginning  his  letters  and  forming  words  of  one 
syllable.  See  him  hesitating  between  C  and  G,  not  exactly  knowing  which  is  which, 
and  being  utterly  confounded  because  he  is  not  sure  whether  the  word  to  should  have 
two  o's  or  one  !  Now  look  at  the  student  shut  up  in  the  museum  deciphering  and 
arranging  the  most  learned  and  difficult  writings  in  all  literature,  vindicating  his 
criticism  in  the  face  of  an  enlightened  continent.  The  two  are  one.  The  little 
puzzled  learner  has  grown  into  the  accomplished  and  authoritative  scholar.  "  It 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  !  "  If  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord  and  do 
His  will,  our  strength  shall  be  equal  to  our  day,  and  we  shall  be  to  ourselves  a 
continual  surprise,  and  to  the  dignity  of  life  a  constant  witness,  and  a  memorial  not 
to  be  gainsaid.  Fancy  a  child  born  under  the  most  corrupting  and  discouraging 
circumstances  :  parents  immoral ;  poverty,  desolation,  discomfort  of  every  kind,  the 
characteristics  of  the  house.  No  reverence,  no  chivalry,  no  pretence  even  of 
religious  form  ;  to  be  born  under  such  circumstances  is  surely  to  be  doomed  to  a 
continual  depravity,  wickedness,  and  despair.  Yet  even  there  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
may  mightily  operate,  and  out  of  that  pestilent  chaos  may  order  come,  and  music, 
and  beautiful  utilities.  This  has  been  done  ;  it  is  being  done  now ;  it  is  the  daily 
Christian  miracle  ;  it  constrains  us  by  glad  compulsion  to  exclaim,  "  It  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be."  It  is  the  joy  of  the  Christian  missionary  to  be  able  to 
point  to  villages  once  the  scene  of  cannibalism,  and  of  wickedness  of  every  name, 
where  there  was  no  conscience,  no  law,  no  mercy,  no  honour,  and  to  show  you 
houses  of  Christian  prayer,  and  to  point  out  men  who  were  cannibals  singing 
Christian  psalms  and  crying  like  children  under  the  pathos  of  Christian  appeals. 
What  wonder,  then,  if  within  view  of  transformations  so  vital  and  astounding,  we 
exclaim  with  thankful  and  hopeful  surprise,  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall 
be  "  !  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Our  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  future  : — If  a  child  had 
been  born,  and  spent  all  his  life  in  the  Mammoth  Cave,  how  impossible  would  it  be  for 
him  to  comprehend  the  upper  world  !  Parents  might  tell  him  of  its  life,  its  light,  its 
beauty,  and  its  sounds  of  joy  ;  they  might  heap  up  the  sands  into  mounds,  and  try 
to  show  him  by  stalactites  how  grass,  flowers,  and  trees  grow  out  of  the  ground ;  till 
at  length,  with  laborious  thinking,  the  child  would  fancy  he  had  gained  a  true  idea 
of  the  unknown  land  :  and  yet,  though  he  longed  to  behold  it,  when  it  came  that  he 
was  to  go  forth,  it  would  be  with  regret  for  the  familiar  crystals  and  rock-hewn 
rooms,  and  the  quiet  that  reigned  therein.  But  when  he  came  up  some  May 
morning,  with  ten  thousand  birds  singing  in  the  trees,  and  the  heavens  bright  and 
blue,  and  full  of  sunlight,  and  the  wind  blowing  softly  through  the  young  leaves, 
all  a-glitter  with  dew,  and  the  landscape  stretching  away  green  and  beautiful  to  the 
horizon,  with  what  rapture  would  he  gaze  about  him,  and  see  how  poor  were  all  the 
f  ancyings  and  interpretations  which  were  made  within  the  cave  of  the  things  which 
grew  and  lived  without  !  and  how  he  would  wonder  that  he  could  ever  have 
regretted  to  leave  the  sUence  and  dreary  darkness  of  his  old  abode  !  So,  when  we 
emerge  from  this  cave  of  earth  into  that  land  where  spring-growths  are,  and  where  is 
eternal  summer,  how  shall  we  wonder  that  we  could  have  clung  so  fondly  to  this 
dark  and  barren  life !  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Lovers  ultimate  intentions  : — It  is  not 
merely  for  what  we  are  to-day  that  our  Father  loves  us  so.  It  is  for  what  He 
means  to  make  us  when  we  have  done  with  mortality  and  sin.  See  that  tiny  boy  in 
his  cradle,  over  whom  his  parents  watch  with  such  doting  fondness.  Say,  over 
and  above  the  instinctive  fondriess  of  parents  for  their  children,  are  there  not  big 
hopes  that  gather  round  that  little  one's  head  ?  It  is  not  merely  because  of  what  he 
is  to-day  that  his  parents  love  him  so,  but  because  of  what  he  is  to  be  when  he 
becomes  a  man,  filling  some  place  of  honour  in  this  busy  world.  Ah !  and  so  it  is 
with  the  love  of  God.      It  is  not  merely  because  of  what  we  are  now,  in  our  frailty 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

and  weakness,  that  our  Father  loves  us  thus,  but  because  of  what  He  means  to 
make  us  when  He  has  received  us  home  and  has  divested  us  of  this  dull  mortality, 
and  has  crowned  us  with  His  own  ineffable  glory  !     (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)         Our 
knmcledge  of  heaven  small : — Oh  !  when  we  meet  in  heaven,  we  shall  see  now  little 
we  knew  about  it  on  earth.     (G.  Payson.)        But  we  know  that  when  He  shall 
appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him  ;  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is. — The  eternal  future 
clear  only  in  Christ : — The  apostle  admits  that  there  is  obscurity  hanging  over 
much  of  our  eternal  future.      1.  The  first  step  of  the  soul  into  another  state  of 
being  is  a  mystery.     The  existence  of  the  soul  separate  from  the  body,  and  from  all 
material  organs,  is  incomprehensible.     2.  The  place  of  our  future  life  is  obscure. 
How  there  can  be  relation  to  place  without  a  body  we  do  not  know,  and  even  when 
the  body  is  restored,  we  cannot  tell  the  locality  of  the  resurrection- world.     3.  The 
outward  manner  of  our  final  existence  is  also  uncertain.     Whether  we  may  possess 
merely  our  present  faculties,  enlarged  and  strengthened,  as  a  child's  mind  expands 
into  a  man's,  or  whether  new  faculties  of  perception  may  not  be  made  to  spring 
forth,  as  if  sight  were  given  a  blind  man,  we  find  it  impossible  to  affirm.  4.  Many  of 
the  modes  of  thought  and  feeling,  in  that  life  to  come,  perplex  us.  Truth  must  for  ever 
continue  truth,  and  goodness  eternally  commend  itself  to  the  soul,  else  our  training  for 
the  future  life  would  be  valueless,  and  our  confidence  in  the  reality  of  things  shaken. 
But  there  may  be  large  modifications,  through  the  extension  and  elevation  of  our 
thoughts.  We  shall  see  the  same  spiritual  objects,  but  from  other  positions,  and  with 
higher  powers  of  judging.    How  far  this  may  affect  our  views  we  cannot  say.     5.  It 
would  be  unsatisfactory  enough  if  this  were  all  that  could  be  said  and  done.   But  the 
apostle  puts  this  dark  background  upon  the  canvas,  that  he  may  set  in  relief  a 
central  scene  and  figure — Christ  and  our  relation  to  Him.     It  matters  little,  the 
apostle  says,  what  may  be  our  ignorance  about  other  things,  what  doubts  may 
agitate  us,  what  darkness  lie  on  the  edge  of  our  horizon,  if  we  can  abide  in  the 
centre  with  this  great  Enlightener.     He  casts  His  illumination  upon  our  future 
destiny  as  well  as  upon  our  present  duty.     I.  The  first  thing  promised  is  the 
MANIFESTATION  OF  Christ — "  Christ  shall  appear."  It  is  not  merely  that  Christ  shall 
be  seen,  but  seen  as  never  before.     1.  The  first  thought  of  the  apostle  was  no  doubt 
the  human  nature  of  Christ  as  appearing  again  to  the  eyes  of  His  friends.     He  left 
with  that  nature,  and  promised  so  to  return — "  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart 
shall  rejoice."   His  first  disciples  are  not  to  be  the  only  favoured  men  who  ever  saw 
Christ  after  the  flesh.     They  wiU  regain  the  view  they  lost,  and  we,  if  we  are  of 
them  who  love  His  appearing,  shall  share  it  with  them.     The  likeness  of  sinful  flesh 
will  be  removed — the  marred  visage  and  form  of  suffering, — but  the    look  that 
turned  on  Peter — the  face  that  rejoiced  in  that  hour  when  He  said,  "I  thank  Thee, 
0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  " — the  hands  that  blessed  the  children — these 
shall  remain,  with  all  the  soul  of  pity  that  was  in  them,  and  the  beating  heart  which 
went  forth  through  them.     The  only  difference  will  be  that  they  shall  appear.     In 
this  world  they  were  hidden,  seen  only  by  the  few,  seen  obscurely,  realised  feebly; 
but  when  He  is  made  manifest  they  shall  be  the  centre  and  the  sunlight  of  a 
ransomed  world,  the  heritage  of   an  innumerable  company,  and  yet  each  one, 
as  if  by  himself,  shall  have  His  view  of,  and  portion  in,  the  true  human  fellowship  of 
the  Son  of  God.     2.  In  the  manifestation  of  Christ  the  apostle  must  have  thought 
also  of  His  Divine  nature.     His  first  appearance  in  this  nature  was  dim  and  over- 
cast, both  for  the  sake  of  the  weak  vision  of  fallen  humanity,  and  because  suffering 
and  sacrifice  were  necessary  for  the  work  He  had  to  perform.     Before  He  could 
raise.  He  needed  to  redeem.    When  He  became  man  "  He  emptied  Himself  "  of  Hia 
Divinity,  as  far  as  this  was  possible — gathered  the  attributes  of  the  Infinite  within 
the  limits  of  the  finite,  and  shut  up  the  rays  of  His  uncreated  glory  in  the  likeness 
of    sinful  flesh.       When  He  shall  appear  there  may  be  expected  a  clear  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Divine  nature  through  the  human.     The  glory  that  He  had  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was  shall  be  resumed,  and,  if  we  may  venture  to  say  it, 
raised,  for  the  glory  of  the  Divine  shall  have  added  to  it  the  grace  of  the  human. 
The  majesty,  the  power  and  wisdom  which  belong  to  Him  as  the  Son  of  God  shall 
go  forth  unrestrained,  in  union  with  the  tenderness  and  sympathy  which  fill  His 
heart  as  the  Son  of  Man.     II.  The  second  thing  promised  at  the  appearance  of 
Christ  is  a  full  vision  on  our  part — "  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."     1.  There  must 
certainly  be  a  change  in  our  material  frame  before  we  can  sustain  the  view  of 
Christ's  exalted  humanity.     When  men  are  brought  to  see  Him  as  He  is,  the  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  would  crush  them  to  the  dust,  without 
that  change  which  will  make  their  bodies  incorruptible  and  glorious  as  His  own.    2. 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  193 

With  this  change  on  the  body,  thei'e  must  be  a  corresponding  one  upon  the  soul, 
before  there  can  be  the  full  vision  of  Christ.  If  we  were  allowed  to  conjecture,  we 
might  suppose  that  this  education  is  part  of  the  history  of  souls  in  the  separate 
state.  The  body  can  rise  at  once  to  its  highest  perfection,  but  the  law  of  spirit  is 
that  of  advance  by  slow  degrees.  It  is  consolatory,  also,  to  think  that  the  great  day 
shall  not  startle  the  blessed  dead,  if  we  may  so  speak  of  them,  with  affright.  It 
shall  dawn  to  them  as  the  summer  sun  dawns.  But  however  the  preparation  takes 
place,  we  may  be  confident  that  the  soul's  vision  will  be  at  last  perfectly 
fitted  to  its  object — "  Christ  as  He  is."  It  will  be  a  vision  free  from  all 
sin  in  the  soul.  This  will  make  it  free  from  error,  and  from  the  doubt 
which  has  pain  with  it.  It  will  be  free  from  partiality — from  that  fruitful  source  of 
misconception  and  division,  taking  a  portion  of  Christ  and  His  truth  for  the  whole. 
It  will  be  a  vision  intense  and  vivid,  not  coldly  outlined  by  the  understanding,  but 
veined  and  coloured  by  the  heart — a  sight  in  which  the  soul  goes  out  to  rejoice  with 
a  joy  that  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  And  it  will  be  a  vision  close  and 
intimate.  They  shall  gain  their  knowledge  of  God  and  Christ  by  quicker  processes 
and  shorter  paths  than  here  we  do.  III.  The  third  thing  promised  is  completk 
ASSIMILATION  TO  Christ — "  wc  shall  be  like  Him."  It  is  the  perfect  view  of  Christ 
which  gives  perfect  likeness  to  Him.  To  look  on  one  we  love  brings  a  measure  of 
similitude,  and  looking  on  Christ,  even  here,  however  dimly  we  may  see  Him, 
produces  a  degree  of  likeness.  But  it  is  when  Christ  appears  that  the  last  great 
step  is  taken.  However  pure  and  happy  may  be  the  state  of  separate  spirits,  the 
Scripture  teaches  us  that  it  is  incomplete,  and  that  they,  as  well  as  the  whole 
creation,  "wait  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God."  1.  Taking  the  order 
hitherto  observed,  we  may  think  first  of  our  material  frame.  It  will  be  made 
like  to  Christ's  glorious  body.  This  assures  us  that  we  shall  have  eternal  relations 
to  God's  material  universe.  It  fixes  a  central  home  for  our  nature — we  shall  be 
where  Christ  is.  It  makes  us  feel  that  there  will  be  a  fitness  in  our  frame  for  our 
future  dwelling-place.  All  that  world  forms  itself  into  a  harmony  with  Christ,  and 
when  we  are  like  Him  we  shall  be  in  harmony  with  it.  When  the  material  frame 
is  made  like  Christ's,  it  indicates  to  us  something  not  only  of  the  forms  of  the 
future  life,  but  of  its  active  employments.  The  body  in  this  present  world  serves 
two  great  purposes.  It  lets  in  God's  external  creation,  with  all  its  lessons  of  know- 
ledge, upon  the  soul ;  and  it  gives  the  soul  power  to  go  forth  and  imprint  upon 
God's  creation  its  own  thoughts  and  volitions.  When  the  Bible  assures  us  that  a 
body  shall  still  be  associated  with  man's  soul,  it  leads  us  to  infer  that  God's 
material  universe  will  be  open  to  him  in  all  its  teachings  ;  and  that  he  will  be  able  to 
impress  it  in  some  way  with  the  marks  of  his  own  mind  and  will.  Only  it  will  be 
after  a  higher  manner.  The  lordship  of  man  over  creation,  which  was  granted  him 
at  first,  will  be  heightened  when  it  is  restored  through  Christ  (Heb.  ii.  7).  2. 
Besides  the  assimilation  of  the  material  frame,  we  cannot  forget  that  there  wiU  be 
a  likeness  of  the  spiritual  nature.  The  source  of  heaven's  blessedness  and  power 
is  the  likeness  of  the  soul  to  Christ.  When  He  shall  appear  "  we  shall  see  His  face, 
and  His  name  shaU  be  on  our  foreheads."  It  shall  be  deeper — in  our  souls ;  and 
all  of  God's  truth  and  grace  that  can  be  communicated  to  a  creature  shall  enter  into 
the  depth  of  the  spiritual  nature  through  Christ.  If  the  active  soul  finds  scope  for 
work  in  God's  material  universe,  the  Mary-hke  spirit  which  dehghts  to  sit  at  the 
feet  of  Christ  and  hear  His  word,  shall  have  unrebuked  leisure  in  the  heavenly 
home.  We  may  trust  that  in  some  way  the  sisters.  Service  and  Meditation,  will 
interchange  gifts,  and  be  perfectly  at  one  when  they  reach  His  higher  presence.  3. 
We  have  pursued  the  order  of  presenting  first  the  human  side  of  Christ,  and  then 
the  Divine ;  but  we  trust  it  has  been  made  clear  that  the  knowledge  of  Christ  comes 
to  us  through  the  soul-side  in  ourselves.  We  must  begin  by  knowing  Him  spiritu- 
ally as  the  source  of  pardon  and  purity — commencing  a  new  life  within,  which 
goes  forward,  strengthening  and  rising — a  Ufe  of  which  heaven  is  not  the  reward, 
but  the  natural  and  necessary  continuation.  {John  Ker,  D.D.)  Future  blessed- 
ness:— I.  The  nature  OF  THIS  blessed  and  glorious  estate — "we  shall  be  like 
Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  A  transforming  vision,  or  such  a  vision  as 
changeth  us  into  the  likeness  of  God,  is  the  true  blessedness  of  the  saints.  There 
are  three  things  considerable  in  our  happiness — (1)  The  vision  of  God ;  (2)  A 
participation  of  His  likeness  ;  (3)  The  satisfaction  or  delectation  thence  resulting. 
Two  of  them  are  in  the  text :  "we  shall  be  hke  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He 
is."  The  third  is  fetched  from  a  parallel  place  (Psa.  xvii.  15).  First,  for  vision; 
that  begirmeth  the  happiness,  and  maketh  way  for  all  the  rest—"  we  shall  see  Him 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

as  He  is."  This  sight  is  either  ocular  or  mental.  1.  Ocular ;  for  our  senses  have 
their  happiness  as  well  as  our  souls,  and  there  is  a  glorified  eye  as  weU  as  a  glorified 
mind  (Job  xix.  26,  27).  But  you  will  say.  How  is  this  so  great  a  privilege  to  the 
godly,  since  the  wicked  shaU  see  Him  ?  (Matt.  xxvi.  64).  (1)  That  sight  they  have 
of  Christ  shaU  be  but  a  short  gUmpse  of  His  glory  ;  for  after  their  doom  and 
sentence  is  passed,  they  shall  be  immediately  banished  out  of  His  presence  (Matt.xxv. 
41).  (2)  They  shall  see  Him  with  shame  and  terror,  looking  upon  Him  as  to 
receive  their  just  punishment  (chap.  ii.  28).  (3)  The  consideration  of  the  object 
is  different;  the  one  look  upon  Him  as  their  inexorable  judge,  the  other  as  their 
merciful  saviour ;  their  interest  in  Him  maketh  Him  dear  to  their  souls.  2.  Mental 
vision  or  contemplation.  The  angels,  which  have  not  bodies,  are  said  to  behold 
the  face  of  our  heavenly  Father  (Matt,  xviii.  10)  ;  and  when  we  are  said  to  see  God, 
it  is  not  meant  of  the  bodily  eye,  for  a  spirit  cannot  be  seen  with  bodily  eyes ;  so 
He  is  still  the  invisible  God  (Col.  i.  15).  And  seeing  face  to  face  is  opposed  to 
knowing  in  part.  And  therefore  it  implieth  a  more  complete  knowledge  than  now 
we  have.  The  mind  is  the  noblest  faculty,  and  must  have  its  satisfaction.  Now 
three  things  are  necessary — (1)  A  prepared  faculty  ;  (2)  A  suitable  object ;  and  (3) 
The  conjunction  of  both  these.  Now  in  the  state  of  glory  all  these  concur.  The 
faculty  is  more  capacious,  the  object  is  more  fully  represented,  and  the  conjunction 
and  fruition  is  more  intimate  and  close  than  it  can  be  elsewhere.  Secondly, 
assimilation  or  transformation  into  the  image  of  God  and  Christ.  1.  What  this 
likeness  is.  This  was  man's  first  ruin,  this  aspiring  to  be  like  God  (Gen.  iii.  5) ;  not 
in  a  blessed  confoi-mity,  but  in  a  cursed  seK-sufficiency.  This  was  the  design  of  the 
first  transgression  (Isa.  xiv.  14).  The  men  of  the  world  aspire  to  be  like  God  in 
greatness  and  power,  but  not  in  goodness  and  holiness.  We  affect  or  usurp  Divine 
honour,  and  to  sit  upon  even  ground  with  God.  Christ  came  not  to  gratify  our  sin, 
but  to  make  us  like  unto  God,  not  equal  with  God.  (1)  In  holiness  and  purity ; 
for  that  is  the  chief  thing  wherein  God  will  be  resembled  by  His  creatures.  We 
are  made  holy  as  He  is  holy.  (2)  We  are  like  Him  in  happiness  and  glory,  that  is, 
in  a  glorious  condition  (1  Cor.  xv.  49).  (1)  A  relative  and  adherent  glory,  as  the 
saints  are  admitted  into  a  participation  of  His  judicial  power  (1  Cor.  vi.  2).  (2) 
Internal  and  inherent,  viz.,  the  glory  revealed  in  us,  put  into  us.  Now  it  is 
revealed  to  us,  then  in  us.  Our  ear  hath  received  a  little  hereof,  but  then  it  shall 
be  fully  accomplished  in  our  persons,  in  our  bodies  and  souls.  2.  How  it  is  the 
fruit  of  vision  ?  for  so  it  is  given  as  a  reason,  "  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is."  I  answer— there  is  between  light  and  hkeness  a  circular 
generation,  as  there  is  in  most  moral  things ;  and  on  the  one  side  it  may  be  said 
■we  shall  be  Uke  Him,  therefore  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  also  on  the  other 
side,  as  in  the  text,  "  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is." 
Thirdly,  the  third  thing  is  satisfaction,  not  mentioned  in  the  text,  but  implied  from 
a  parallel  place ;  for  we  having  the  sight  and  presence  of  God,  must  needs  be 
ravished  with  it  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  Our  great  business  will  be  to  love  what  we  see, 
and  our  great  happiness  to  have  what  we  love.  This  will  be  a  full,  perpetual,  and 
never-failing  delight  to  us.  II.  The  season  when  we  shall  enjoy  this — "  when 
He  shall  appear."  1.  I  take  it  for  granted  that  the  soul  before  is  not  only  in  the 
hand  of  God,  which  all  assert,  but  admitted  into  the  sight  and  presence  of  the  Lord, 
and  to  see  His  blessed  face.  2.  Then  we  have  our  solemn  absolution  from  aU  sins 
(Acts  iii.  19).  And  our  pardon  is  pronounced  by  the  judge  sitting  upon  the  throne. 
3.  Then  shall  we  have  glorified  bodies  restored  unto  us,  wherein  Christ  shall  be 
admired  (2  Thess.  i.  10).  4.  Then  Christ  wiU  present  us  to  God  by  head  and  poll, 
and  give  an  account  of  all  that  God  hath  given  him,  that  they  may  be  introduced 
into  their  everlasting  estate,  not  one  wanting  (John  vi.  40).  III.  The  apprehen- 
sion  THAT  WE    SHOULD    HAVE    OF   IT   FOR    THE    PRESENT "  WC   knOW."         1.   It    is  HOt 

a  bare  conjecture,  but  a  certain  knowledge ;  it  is  not  only  we  think,  we  hope 
well,  but  we  know.  2.  It  is  not  a  probable  opinion,  but  an  evident  and  infallible 
truth,  as  sure  as  if  we  saw  it  with  our  eyes.  An  unseen  world  is  an  unknown  world  ; 
how  can  we  be  so  sure  of  it  ?  It  is  set  before  us  by  His  precious  promises  who 
cannot  lie.  8.  It  is  not  a  general  belief,  but  a  particular  confidence.  He 
speaketh  upon  the  supposition  that  we  are  God's  children.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
Man's  capability  of  future  glory  and  blessedness  : — I.  That  strong,  unappeasablk 

DESIRE,  THAT  LONGING  AFTER  A  HIGHER  GOOD  THAN  THIS  WORLD  AFFORDS,  WHICH 
SEEMS   INHERENT    IN    THE    NATURE   OF  MAN,  POINTS    TO   SOMETHING  GREAT    AND  GLORIOUS 

IN  HIS  FUTURE  DESTINY.  This  was  wout  to  be  appealed  to  by  the  ancient  heathen 
philosophers   as   among  the  strongest  proofs   of  the   soul's   immortality.      And 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  195 

plainly  there  is  much  force  in  the  argument.  For,  assuming  the  wisdom  and 
goodness  of  the  Creator,  it  may  be  asked,  why  should  He  implant  in  the  nature  of 
man  a  desire  after  immortality,  if  He  did  not  mean  to  gratify  that  desire ;  or  why 
awaken  in  Him  longings  after  unearthly,  eternal  happiness,  if  He  has  made  no 
provisions  to  appease  those  longings  ?  Place  man  in  any  earthly  situation ;  give 
him  wealth,  give  him  power,  give  him  honour,  pleasure,  all  that  the  world  can 
afford ;  still  there  will  be  a  void  within,  still  he  will  travail  in  pain,  and  look  and 
sigh  after  enjoyments  which  the  fleeting  objects  of  time  and  sense  can  never  afford 
him.  His  thoughts  and  his  hopes  stretch  beyond  the  shadows  of  earth  and  time 
and  fasten  on  the  skies.  These  facts  clearly  show  that  this  world  was  never 
designed  to  be  the  final  abode  of  man.     H.  If  we  consideb  the  capacities  of 

MAN,  WB  SHALL  PERCEIVE  STILL  STRONGEB  EVIDENCE  THAT  HE  18  DESTINED  TO  SOME- 
THING  INCONCEIVABLY   GRAND   AND   GLORIOUS   IN   THE   PROGRESS   OF    HIS   FUTURE   BEING. 

Though  fallen  from  his  original  dignity  and  degraded  by  sin,  man  is  still  noble  in 
ruins.  He  is  now,  most  plainly,  but  in  the  infancy  of  his  being.  Still  we  perceive 
in  him  capacities  for  high  and  noble  attainments ;  capacities  which  stamp  on  hia 
existence  the  seal  of  eternity.  1.  Man  possesses  an  immortal  nature ;  is  made  for 
an  endless  existence.  The  body  soon  decays.  But  this  affects  not  the  existence  of 
the  living,  thinking  spirit.  2.  Man  has  a  capacity  for  endless  progress  in  know- 
ledge. The  great  law  of  mind  is  expansion,  and  we  know  of  no  assignable  limits 
to  this  law.  3.  Man  has  a  capacity  for  endless  improvement  in  moral  excellence  or 
holiness.  He  is  qualified  to  be  perfectly  conformed  to  the  will  of  God,  to  be  holy 
even  as  He  is  holy.  4.  Man  has  a  capacity  for  great  and  noble  actions,  and  for 
constant  and  evergrowing  usefulness  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  5.  Man  has  a 
capacity  for  endless  advancement  in  happiness.  Happiness  in  a  rational  being  is 
the  necessary  result  of  the  right  and  useful  exercise  of  aU  His  powers.    HI.  What 

PROVISIONS     God    has     made     to     satisfy    the     wants    op   man,    and   FILL   THE    LARGE 

CAPACITIES  of  the  SOUL  WITH  GOOD.  Evcr  since  the  morning  of  creation,  when  God 
made  man  in  His  image,  and  gave  him  dominion  over  His  works,  He  has  been 
continually  operating  for  his  good.  Behold  this  world  in  all  its  magnificence  and 
beauty,  appointed  to  be  his  habitation,  and  to  minister  to  his  improvement  and 
happiness.  Turn  next  to  the  wonders  of  redeeming  love,  and  see  how,  from  age  to 
age,  God  has  been  operating  for  the  salvation  of  our  race.    IV.  Let  us  turn  to 

THE  OBACLES  OF  GOD,  AND  LEARN  WHAT  THEY  REVEAL  ON  THIS  SUBJECT.   1.  COU- 

clusion  :  How  truly  wise  is  it  to  be  religious !  What  is  religion  ?  It  is  to  act  up  to 
the  dignity  of  our  nature  as  made  in  the  image  of  God,  rational  and  immortal 
beings ;  is  to  look  beyond  the  scenes  of  earth  and  time  to  those  invisible  realities 
which  the  Word  of  God  presents  for  our  consideration,  and  prepare  to  meet  them ; 
it  is  to  love,  reverence  and  serve  the  great  Being  who  holds  our  destiny  in  His 
hand.  2.  How  degrading  is  a  life  of  irreligion,  a  life  spent  in  neglect  of  God  and 
the  soul ;  devoted  to  the  cares  and  pursuits  of  the  world !  Of  what  value,  in  a 
little  time,  will  all  those  things  be  which  now  most  interest  and  absorb  men  of  the 
world  ?  (j.  Halves,  D.D.)  The  manifestations  of  Christ : — ^Both  St.  Paul  and 
St.  John  dwell  largely  upon  the  "  sonship  "  of  believers,  but  they  approach  the 
subject  from  different  points  of  view.  To  the  mind  of  the  former  of  these  two 
apostles,  this  sonship  assumes  the  appearance  of  a  position  of  privilege.  A  boy 
running  wild  in  the  streets — untaught  and  uncared  for,  and  in  danger  of  utter 
destruction — is  adopted  into  a  benevolent  and  wealthy  itamily.  He  has  had  no 
reason  to  expect  such  an  advancement.  The  other  apostle  pushes  the  matter  a 
step  further,  and  opens  up  what  perhaps  we  inay  venture  to  call  a  profounder  view 
of  the  subject.  Looking  beyond  the  question  of  privilege.  He  speaks  of  the  dis- 
ciple as  deriving  his  spiritual  existence  from  the  Great  Being  into  whose  family  he 
has  been  introduced.  The  man,  according  to  the  apostle,  is  born  of  God.  You 
will  see  at  once  what  a  lofty  idea  of  Christian  discipleship  the  apostle  St.  John 
presents  to  us.  "  Beloved  I  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  This  is  the  starting- 
point  ;  and  when  we  have  reached  it  there  emerge  to  the  view  three  thoughts. 
First,  that  there  is  something  difficult  to  comprehend  about  the  present  spiritual 
position  of  the  believer.  It  is  seen,  as  it  were,  through  a  mist.  In  the  next  place, 
that  this  difficulty  will  be  removed.  The  mist  wUl  melt  away,  and  all  be  made 
plain  when  Christ  appears.  And  lastly,  that  if  we  are  reaUy  looking  forward  to 
the  clearing  up  or  manifestation,  which  is  coming,  the  effect  of  the  expectation  will 
be  seen  in  the  conduct  of  our  daily  lives.  We  shall  purify  ourselves  even  as  He  is 
pure.  1.  As  to  the  first  of  the  three  thoughts,  it  is  plain  enough  that  the  true 
disciple  of  Christ  is  misunderstood,  and  must  be  misunderstood  by  the  world  at 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.iii. 

large,  and  just  because  the  world  cannot  possibly  put  itself  at  his  point  of  view. 
St.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  spiritual  man  judgeth  all  things,  whilst  the  natural  man 
knoweth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  Christian  disciple  is  more  or 
less  of  a  puzzle  to  those  who,  not  being  born  again  of  the  Spirit,  do  not  really 
belong  to  the  family  of  God.  Sometimes  they  will  question  his  motives,  and  set 
him  down  as  hypocritical,  or  fanatical,  or  as  seeking  his  own  advantage  under 
pretence  of  regard  for  the  glory  of  God.  But  the  more  kindly  and  generous  portion 
of  them — and  these  will  probably  constitute  the  majority — will  content  themselves 
with  expressing  surprise,  or,  it  may  be  amusement,  at  his  devotion  to  Christ.  And 
the  reason  of  this  is  plain  enough.  You  must  sympathise  with  a  man  in  order  to 
be  able  to  understand  him.  But  there  is  more  than  this  to  be  said.  The  disciple 
himself — to  put  the  opinion  of  the  world  aside — the  disciple  himself  can  only  very 
dimly  and  imperfectly  apprehend  the  future  which  lies  before  him.  Partly 
because  he  is  engaged  in  the  tug  and  strain  of  a  spiritual  conflict.  You  may  have 
your  misgivings  sometimes  as  to  how  the  battle  is  going  on  with  you.  When  men 
express  a  doubt  about  the  reality  of  your  faith  and  the  sincerity  of  your  religion, 
you  may  at  times  be  inchned  to  suspect  that  their  judgment  is  correct,  and  that 
your  estimate  of  yourself  has  all  along  been  in  error.  But  though  the  confusion 
may  arise — in  part — from  the  fact  of  your  being  placed  in  the  thick  of  a  spiritual 
struggle,  it  may  be  attributed  still  more  to  the  difficulty  of  realising  the  things  of 
the  eternal  world  :  a  difficulty  for  experiencing  which  we  are  surely  not  altogether 
to  blame.  2.  There  will  be  a  time  when  all  difficulties  and  confusions  shaU  be 
removed,  and  that  time  is  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  Day  of 
Judgment  is  simply  a  day  of  manifestation,  in  which  every  one  of  us,  every  human 
being,  is  seen  to  be  what  he  really  is.  At  present  we  are  muffled  up  in  various 
disguises.  More  or  less,  we  are  hidden  from  each  other,  and  perhaps  from  our- 
selves. The  mean  spirit  is  sometimes  clothed  in  dignity,  whilst  solid  worth,  not 
unfrequently,  is  clothed  in  rags.  Sometimes,  too,  the  true  Christian  is  misunder- 
stood. But  we  must  go  a  little  further  with  Him.  "  When  Christ,"  he  says,  ''  is 
manifested,"  i.e.,  in  His  resurrection-glory,  "  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is." 
It  is  possible  to  see  Christ  and  yet  not  to  see  Him  "  as  He  is."  There  are 
few,  I  suppose,  in  Christendom,  who  do  not  form  any  idea  of  Christ ;  but  in 
some  cases  it  is  unhappily  a  mistaken  one.  To  some  persons  He  is  a  mere  man. 
To  others  a  great  teacher  and  nothing  more.  To  others,  again,  a  hard  and 
exacting  taskmaster.  But  to  see  Christ  as  He  is,  is  to  contemplate  Him  with 
sympathy  and  love.  We  have  been  taught  by  the  Spirit  to  understand  Him.  This 
I  suppose  to  be  seeing  Christ  as  He  is,  so  far  as  this  present  world  is  concerned. 
And  they  who  are  thus  accustomed  to  see  Christ  are  ready  to  gaze  upon  Him  with 
unspeakable  joy  when  He  shall  come  again  to  earth.  III.  Our  last  point  remains 
yet  untouched.  An  illustration  somewhat  resembling  that  with  which  I  started, 
must  serve  me  to  place  this  part  of  our  subject  before  you.  A  young  prince, 
stolen  away  in  childhood  from  his  father's  palace,  and  brought  up  amidst 
unworthy  surroundings,  has  been  recovered  and  brought  back  again.  By  degrees 
he  comes  to  understand  his  position — he  did  not  quite  understand  it  at  first — and 
he  is  fuU  of  gratitude  when  he  contrasts  what  he  is  now  with  what  he  was  some 
months  or  years  ago.  Yet  he  has  difficulties.  The  habits  of  years  of  depraved  life 
are  not  easily  shaken  off.  But  he  contends  manfully  against  the  difficulties,  and  is 
climbing  up  slowly,  but  surely,  to  a  fitness  for  the  position  in  which  he  has  been 
60  happily  reinstated.  Now,  two  distinct  considerations  will  influence  the  young 
man.  First,  he  will  desire  to  act  worthily  of  his  present  princely  state;  and  then, 
because  he  knows  he  is  to  inherit,  at  some  time  or  other,  his  father's  sceptre,  and 
because  wide  dominions  and  large  populations  will  then  be  placed  under  his  sway, 
he  will  wish  to  qualify  himself  for  the  task  and  responsibility  of  ruling,  whenever 
he  shall  be  called  upon  to  ascend  the  throne.  You  see  the  application.  We  who 
are  Christians  have  a  present  position  to  maintain.  Christ  says  to  each  of  us, 
"  Be  what  I  have  made  you  I  I  have  placed  you  where  you  are.  I  have  made  you 
children  of  God.  Be  children  of  God !  "  And  then  there  is  the  future  to  look 
iorward  to — the  future  kingdom — the  future  glory,  upon  which  we  shall  have  one 
day  to  enter  with  Christ.  And  what  is  the  result  of  our  expectation  of  these  things 
if  we  really  entertain  the  expectation ?  Let  St.  John  tell  us:  "Every  man  that 
hath  this  hope  in  Him,  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.) 
By  and  by  : — I.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  At  present  we 
are  veiled,  and  travel  through  the  world  incognito.  1.  Our  Master  was  not  made 
manifest  here  below.      (1)  His   glory   was   veiled   in  flesh.      (2)  His  Deity  wa» 


CHAP.  III.]  J.  JOHN.  197 

concealed  in  infirmity.  (3)  His  power  was  hidden  under  sorrow  and  weakness. 
(4)  His  riches  were  buried  under  poverty  and  shame.  2.  We  are  not  fit  to  appear 
in  full  figure  as  yet.  (1)  The  son  is  treated  as  a  servant  while  under  age.  (2)  The 
heir  is  kept  a  pensioner  till  his  majority.  (3)  The  prince  serves  as  a  soldier  before 
he  reaches  the  throne.  3.  This  is  not  the  world  to  appear  in.  (1)  There  are 
more  to  appreciate  us,  and  it  would  be  as  though  kings  showed  their  royalty  at  a 
wake,  or  wise  men  discoursed  philosophy  before  fools.  (2)  A  warring  and  waiting 
condition  like  the  present  would  not  be  a  fit  opportunity  for  unveiling,  (a)  The 
winter  prepares  flowers,  but  does  not  call  them  forth,  {h)  The  ebb-tide  reveals  the 
secrets  of  the  sea,  but  many  of  our  rivers  no  gallant  ship  can  then  sail,  (c)  To 
everything  there  is  a  season,  and  this  not  the  time  of  glory.  II.  "  But  we  know 
THAT  when  He  shall  appeak."  1.  We  shall  speak  of  our  Lord's  manifestation 
without  doubt.  "  We  know."  2.  Our  faith  is  so  assured  that  it  becomes  know- 
ledge. (1)  HewiU  be  manifest  upon  this  earth  in  person.  (2)  He  will  be  manifest 
in  perfect  happiness.  (3)  He  will  be  manifest  in  highest  glory.  (4)  He  will  appear 
surely,  and  so  we  speak  of  it  as  a  date  for  our  own  manifesting — "when  He  shall 
appear."  III.  "  We  shall  be  like  Him."  We  shall  then  be  as  manifested  and  as 
clearly  seen  as  He  will  be.  The  time  of  our  open  presentation  at  court  will  have 
come.  1.  Having  a  body  like  His  body  :  sinless,  incorruptible,  painless,  spiritual, 
clothed  with  beauty  and  power,  and  yet  most  real  and  true.  2.  Having  a  soul  like 
His  soul :  perfect,  holy,  instructed,  developed,  strengthened,  active,  delivered  from 
temptation,  conflict,  and  suffering.  3.  Having  such  dignities  and  glories  as  He 
wears :  kings,  priests,  conquerors,  judges,  sons  of  God.  IV.  "  We  shall  see  Him 
AS  He  is."  1.  This  glorious  sight  will  perfect  our  likeness.  2.  This  will  be  the 
result  of  our  being  like  Him.  3.  This  will  be  evidence  of  our  being  like  Him,  since 
none  but  the  pure  in  heart  can  see  God.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  What  we  shall 
be  : — Surely  a  wholly  new  interest  creeps  over  this  poor  human  world  of  ours  if  we 
once  see  in  it  the  germ  of  possibility,  the  suggestion  of  all  we  shall  be  hereafter. 
So  seen,  it  is  no  aged  and  weary  traveller  tottering  slowly  down  to  his  end  ;  but  it 
is  a  child  still,  with  the  fascination  of  a  child  aU  about  it,  the  fascination  of  a  life 
which  is  feeling  its  way  forward  by  start,  by  gleam,  by  sudden  intuition,  by 
experiment,  by  tentative  trial,  by  flashes  of  insight,  by  glances,  by  glimpses — yes, 
and  by  stumbles  and  falls  and  shocks  and  jolts,  from  out  of  which  it  still  pulls 
itself  together  and  runs  on  yet  ahead.  That  is  human  life  in  the  believer's  eye,  in 
its  best  and  wisest  form — still  the  child-life,  wistful,  prophetic,  marvellous,  sug- 
gestive ;  a  child-life  so  full  of  strange  dreams,  but  with  all  its  achievements  yet  to 
come,  to  come  in  that  great  after-world  for  which  the  whole  round  of  this  age-long 
story  of  man  is  but  a  nursery,  but  a  preparation,  but  a  rehearsal,  but  an  education. 
Let  us  recount  our  gains  from  such  a  belief  in  respect  of  the  world  at  our  feet, 
before  our  eyes.  1.  Cheerfulness  in  the  face  of  change.  Change  is  so  wearisome 
when  it  insists  on  going  beyond  what  we  want.  There  is  such  a  sense  of  disap- 
pointment when  we,  perhaps,  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  goal,  and  then  have 
to  discover  that  the  moment  the  end  is  touched  it  has  already  begun  to  change,  to 
move,  to  go  further.  In  politics,  especially,  we  note  how  we  are  suffering  from 
this  cheerless  disappointment.  Good  things,  from  which  men  thirty  years  ago 
hoped  so  much,  have  been  done  only  to  show  how  much  more  remains  to  be  done. 
We  thought  ourselves  in  the  van — lo !  we  are  already  lagging  in  the  rear,  we  are 
passe,  we  have  lost  the  cue.  That  is  what  damps  the  spirit.  But  what  if  this  life 
is  all  of  it  not  an  end,  but  only  a  beginning  ;  all  of  it  a  suggestion  of  more  beyond, 
none  of  it  a  goal  attained  ?  Our  political  fabric  is  to  us  precious  and  sacred.  It 
suggests  something  which  we  shall  find  hereafter.  It  gives  a  hint,  a  shadow,  of 
that  heavenly  citizenship  which  shall  complete  all  that  is  well  begun  here :  we 
shall  find  it  all  there.  Here  no  suggestion  of  that  vast  society  in  heaven  exhausts 
its  meaning.  As  soon  as  we  have  understood  one,  and  seen  our  way  to  its  realisa- 
tion, we  see  our  way  to  another ;  each  is  but  a  fragment  of  the  great  kingdom  to 
be.  Now  let  it  go.  God  sweeps  it  out  of  sight ;  not  in  contempt,  but  because  He 
prepares  for  us  another  and  yet  another  picture  of  that  immeasurable  glory  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  We  gain  cheerfulness  in  the  face  of  change,  and  we  gain 
hope  just  where  we  most  need  it.  For  if  the  ideal,  if  completion,  is  to  be  sought 
here  on  earth,  then  we  know  how  despairing  is  our  view  of  those  who  are  born  in 
thousands  in  dark  and  low  dens,  born  out  of  the  seed  of  sin,  out  of  the  fires  of  lust 
and  of  drink,  born  into  a  life  that  must  be  stricken  and  stunted,  blind  with 
ignorance  and  cursed  with  a  loveless  doom.  Those  so  born  can  make  but  a  pitiful 
fight  of  it  here ;  at  their  very  best  they  can  attain  very  little,  and  they  are  swept  so 


\ 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

lightly  down  the  dark  waters  of  crime  and  sorrow.  If  this  earth  of  ours  be  all, 
how  can  we  close  our  eyes  to  that  nightmare  ?  But  we  who  believe  that  this  life  is 
at  its  best  but  a  germ,  a  start,  a  discipline,  can  afford  to  broaden  our  hope  beyond 
all  our  seeing.  Behind  the  fumes  of  drink,  behind  the  cloud  of  crime,  each  may 
have  made  his  start  and  fought  his  fight,  and  have  proved  the  possibihty,  and 
have  manifested  some  germ  of  possible  growth.  Kindness,  purity,  may  have  been 
touched  at  least.  And  if  this  is  so  there  is  hope.  God  may  yet  do  gi'eat  things 
with  them,  so  long  as  He  can  secure  in  them  some  seed  of  future  life.  3.  We  gain 
cheerfulness  in  the  face  of  change  and  hope  in  face  of  base  and  bad  tuition,  and 
then  we  gain  what  is  near  akin  to  the  last — joy  in  the  face  of  failure.  The  fruit  is 
not  here,  but  fruit  may  come  hereafter  in  abundance  out  of  those  very  failures 
which  prune  and  curtail  and  sharply  discipline  us  here.  Hereafter  it  may  be  our 
failures  that  we  shall  most  bless,  as  we  see  all  they  taught  us.  Who  knows  what 
is  going  on  in  secret  behind  those  very  failures  in  others  which  most  provoke  us  ? 
It  will  not  be  the  failure  which  distresses,  but  only  the  failure  to  use  the  failure  for 
good  purposes.  Our  failures  (above  all,  of  course,  our  noble  failures)  are  part  and 
parcel  of  our  spu'itual  history  and  growth.  When  we  go  before  our  God  the 
failures  wUl  go  to  the  account,  they  will  be  elements  in  the  judgment,  they  wiU  be 
as  instrumental  and  effective  as  any  of  our  successes  in  determining  our  eternal 
lot.  "Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  but  it  doth  not  appear  what  we 
shall  be."  Not  yet,  but  the  root  of  what  we  shall  be  hereafter  is  here  embodied  in 
the  soul.  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  now  are  we  the  germ  of  what  we  shall  find 
ourselves  in  that  fair  land.  Now  all  that  we  can  learn  of  what  we  shaU  be  here- 
after is  to  be  sought  here  and  now,  in  our  human  lot,  amid  our  fellows,  in  our 
common  brotherhood.  The  hints,  the  glimpses  of  the  glory  which  is  to  follow,  the 
begioning,  the  omen,  the  voice — all  are  here  close  about  us  in  human  nature  and 
in  flesh  and  blood.  How,  then,  shall  we  not  turn  to  this  poor  life  of  ours  with 
hope,  with  zeal,  with  tenderness,  with  love ;  how  shall  we  not  clasp  it  tight  and 
fast,  and  cling  about  it,  and  busy  ourselves  with  its  services?  (Canon  Scott 
Holland.)  The  spirituality  of  the  beatific  vision : — As  vain  and  troublesome 
a  world  as  this  is,  and  as  short  and  uncertain  as  our  abode  is  in  it,  yet  are  we  so 
strangely  charmed  with  the  glittering  appearances  in  our  way  as  to  forget  the 
crown  of  glory  at  our  journey's  end.  To  wean  us,  therefore,  from  the  place  of  our 
pilgrimage,  and  to  set  our  affections  on  a  better  country,  we  must  send  out  our 
minds,  as  Moses  did  his  spies,  to  search  the  promised  Canaan,  and  to  bring  of  the 
fruit  of  that  good  land  we  are  travelling  to.  Such  Divine  contemplations  wiU  give 
a  new  turn  of  thought  and  quite  another  taste  and  relish  of  things ;  they  will  be 
of  great  use  to  cure  a  downward  disposition  of  soul,  and  to  raise  us  above  the 
world.  I.  The  meaning  and  extent  of  this  phrase,  of  seeing  God  as  He  is. 
The  vision  here  intended  must  be  intellectual — a  vision  of  the  mind  and  not  of  the 
eye,  a  clear  perception  or  sight  of  God  in  the  souls  of  just  men  made  perfect. 
In  this  life  we  feel  after  God,  as  it  were,  in  the  dark,  we  trace  Him  out  by  the  foot- 
steps of  infinite  power  and  wisdom,  we  see  Him  in  His  works  but  not  in  Him- 
self ;  but  when  we  commence  angel  life  this  veil  shall  be  taken  away,  then  we  shall 
be  no  longer  under  the  pedagogy  of  types  and  shadows  but  admitted  into  the 
immediate  possession  of  original  truth.  II.  The  mode  ok  manner  of  this 
beatific  vision.  The  manner  of  our  seeing  God  in  this  life  is  either  by  a  long 
train  of  consequences,  by  climbing  up  gradually  from  the  effects  to  the  cause, 
from  the  things  that  are  made  to  the  invisible  things  of  the  Maker,  even  His 
eternal  power  and  Godhead ;  or  by  way  of  eminence,  by  inferring  that  the 
perfections  we  see  in  the  creatures  must  of  necessity  centre  all  more  eminently  in 
the  Creator ;  or  negatively,  by  denying  everything  of  God  we  conceive  unbecoming 
the  Divine  nature,  for  at  present  we  rather  know  what  God  is  not  than  what  He 
is ;  or  else  we  see  Him  by  faith,  by  believing  upon  the  testimony  He  has  given  us 
of  Himself  by  Moses  and  the  prophets,  Christ  and  His  apostles.  In  the  vision 
reserved  for  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  there  will  be  nothing  dark  or  enigmatical, 
nothing  of  cloud,  or  representation,  of  faith  or  reasoning,  or  intermediate  ideas  to 
inform  the  understanding,  nothing  between  God  and  the  glorified  soul,  the  know- 
ledge intuitive,  the  vision  naked,  full,  and  perfect  according  to  the  quality  of  the 
recipient,  and  the  mind  directly  irradiated  from  the  fountain  of  light,  from  the 
Divine  essence  itself.  III.  Wheukin  the  happiness  of  this  beatieic  vision  does 
PBiNCiPALLY  consist.  Now  by  seeing  God  we  are  not  to  conceive  a  bare  intuitive 
knowledge  only  of  the  Divine  essence,  but  a  vision  most  lively  and  operative, 
warmed  with  all  the  affections  of  the  heart,  and  an  entire  conformity  of  our  wills 


CHAP.  HI.]  I.  JOHN.  199 

to  the  will  of  God.  For  then,  then  alone,  are  just  men  completely  blessed,  when 
their  spirits  are  made  so  perfect  that  they  clearly  contemplate  all  truth  and  f uUy 
enjoy  eHU.  good ;  that  is,  when  the  whole  orb  of  the  soul  is  filled  with  perfect  hght 
and  perfect  love.  To  see  God,  therefore,  is  to  enjoy  Him.  First,  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  now  given  but  in  part,  in  proportion  to  the  exigencies  of  a  state  of  trial,  and 
consequently  our  communion  must  be  in  part  also ;  but  in  heaven,  the  place  of 
reward,  we  shall  all,  to  the  utmost  extent  of  our  capacity,  so  be  filled  with  all  the 
fulness  of  God,  and  most  perfectly  joined  to  the  ever-blessed  Trinity  in  a  most 
intimate,  immediate,  and  ineffable  union.  For,  secondly,  God  communicates 
Himself  in  this  world  not  immediately,  but  by  inferior  instruments  and  secondary 
causes :  He  feeds  the  soul  with  the  graces  of  His  Spirit,  by  the  ministry  of  His  Word 
and  sacraments,  and  preserves  the  body  by  the  help  of  His  creatures.  But  in  the 
other  world  all  we  can  want  or  wish  for  shall  be  supplied  directly  from  the 
Fountain  of  Happiness,  and  God  Himself  shall  be  to  us  all  in  all  without  any 
second  causes.  Thirdly,  the  mean,  or  condition  on  our  part,  whereby  we  are 
incorporated  into  Christ  at  present,  is  our  faith,  but  in  the  life  to  come  faith  shall 
be  swallowed  up  in  perfect  vision,  we  shall  see  God  as  He  is,  and  the  sight  of 
infinite  perfection  shall  set  us  on  fire  and  make  our  hearts  bum  with  love  as  pure 
and  bright  as  our  knowledge ;  and  it  being  the  property  of  love  to  clasp  the  object 
beloved  into  the  closest  union,  we  shall  enjoy  all  things  possible  in  common  with 
the  ever-blessed  Trinity.  From  the  nature  of  our  communion  with  God  in  heaven 
thus  explained,  I  proceed  more  particularly  to  the  blessed  effects  of  it.  I  begin 
with  the  perfection  of  our  knowledge.  Then  shall  we  know,  not  in  part,  not  by 
wearisome  steps  and  deductions,  but  clearly  and  all  at  once ;  we  shall  know  in  the 
same  manner  as  God  knows,  that  is,  by  His  immediate  self,  for  in  Himself  only 
can  we  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  in  His  infinite  mind  we  shall  see  the  hidden  forms 
of  His  creatures  and  the  ideas  of  all  perfection.  But  there  is  a  fond  inquiry 
whether  we  shall  know  our  relations  and  acquaintances  in  the  other  world.  To 
which  I  answer,  that  if  such  knowledge  will  add  to  our  happiness  we  shaU  surely 
enjoy  it.  But  then,  seeing  everything  in  God,  we  shall  be  affected  only  as  God  is 
affected ;  we  shall  love  one  another  for  our  relation  and  Ukeness  to  Him  only,  and 
as  we  are  members  of  Christ  united  and  informed  by  the  same  Spirit,  which  will  be 
both  the  bond  of  our  union  and  the  cause  of  our  love.  Lastly,  from  this  perfection  of 
knowledge  will  arise  a  perfect  conformity  of  our  wills  and  affections.  (W.  Reeves,  M.A.) 
The  beatific  vision  .-—It  is  one  of  the  most  natural  desires  in  all  the  world,  that 
when  we  hear  of  a  great  and  a  good  man  we  should  wish  to  see  his  person.  I  am 
sure  you  will  all  confess  that  this  strong  desire  has  arisen  in  your  minds  concerning 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  owe  to  none  so  much ;  we  talk  of  none  so  much,  we  hope, 
and  we  think  of  none  so  much  :  at  any  rate,  no  one  so  constantly  thinks  of  us.  We 
have  a  strong  desire  to  see  Him.  Nor  do  I  think  that  that  desire  is  wrong.  Moses 
himself  asked  that  he  might  see  God.  Had  it  been  a  wrong  wish  arising  out  of  vain 
curiosity  it  would  not  have  been  granted,  but  God  granted  Moses  his  desire.  Yea, 
more ;  the  earnest  desire  of  the  very  best  of  men  has  been  in  the  same  direction. 
Job  said,  "  I  know  that  my  Eedeemer  liveth,  and  though  worms  devour  this  body, 
yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God":  that  was  his  desire.  The  holy  Psalmist  said,  "I 
shall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  in  Thy  likeness " ;  "I  shall  behold  Thy  face  in 
righteousness."  We  are  rejoiced  to  find  such  a  verse  as  this,  for  it  tells  us  that  our 
curiosity  shall  be  satisfied,  our  desire  consummated,  our  bliss  perfected.  "  We  shaU 
see  Him  as  He  is."  I.  The  globious  position.  Our  minds  often  revert  to  Chi-ist  as 
He  was,  and  as  such  we  have  desired  to  see  Him.  We  shall  never  see  Him  thus ; 
Bethlehem's  glories  are  gone  for  ever;  Calvary's  glooms  are  swept  away;  Geth- 
semane's  scene  is  dissolved ;  and  even  Tabor's  splendours  are  quenched  in  the  past. 
We  cannot,  must  not,  see  Him  as  He  was ;  nor  do  we  wish,  for  we  have  a  larger 
promise,  "  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  1.  Consider,  first  of  all,  that  we  shall  not  see 
Him  abased  in  His  incarnation  but  exalted  in  His  glory.  We  shall  see  the  hand, 
and  the  nail-prints  too,  but  not  the  nail ;  it  has  been  once  drawn  out,  and  for  ever. 
We  shall  see  Him,  not  with  a  reed  in  His  hand,  but  grasping  a  golden  sceptre. 
2.  Eemember,  again :  we  are  not  to  see  Christ  as  He  was,  the  despised,  the  tempted 
one.  We  shall  see  Him  beloved,  not  abhorred,  not  despised  and  rejected,  but 
worshipped,  honoured,  crowned,  exalted,  served  by  flaming  spirits  and  worshipped  by 
cherubim  and  seraphim.  "  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  3.  We  shall  not  see  the 
Christ  wrestling  with  pain,  but  Christ  as  a  conqueror.  We  shall  not  see  Him  fight ; 
but  we  shall  see  Him  return  from  the  fight  victorious,  and  shall  cry,  "  Crown  BQm  ! 
Crown  Him!"     We  shall  never  see  our  Saviour  under  His  Father's  displeasure; 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

but  we  shall  see  Him  honoured  by  His  Father's  smile.  Perhaps  I  have  not  shown 
clearly  enough  the  difference  between  the  two  visions — the  sight  of  what  He  was  and 
what  He  is.  The  believer  will  be  as  much  astonished  when  he  sees  Jesus'  glories  as 
He  sits  on  His  throne  as  He  would  have  been  to  have  seen  Him  in  His  earthly 
sufferings.  The  one  would  have  been  astonishment,  and  horror  would  have 
succeeded  it;  but  when  we  see  Jesus  as  He  is  it  will  be  astonishment  without 
horror.  If  we  could  see  Jesus  as  He  was,  we  should  see  Him  with  great  awe.  If  we 
had  seen  Him  raising  the  dead  we  should  have  thought  Him  a  most  majestic  Being. 
So  we  shall  feel  awe  when  we  see  Christ  on  His  throne ;  but  it  will  be  awe  without 
fear.  We  shall  not  bow  before  Him  with  trembling,  but  it  will  be  with  joy ;  we  shall 
not  shake  at  His  presence,  but  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable.  Furthermore,  if  we  had 
seen  Christ  as  He  was,  we  should  have  had  great  love  for  Him  ;  but  that  love  would 
have  been  compounded  with  pity.  We  shall  love  Him  quite  as  much  when  we  see 
Him  in  heaven,  and  more  too,  but  it  will  be  love  without  pity ;  we  shall  not  say 
"Alas!"  but  we  shall  shout — "All  hail  the  power  of  Jesu's  name,"  &c.  If  we  had 
seen  Jesus  Christ  as  He  was  here  below,  there  would  have  been  joy  to  think  that  He 
came  to  save  us ;  but  we  should  have  had  sorrow  mingled  with  it  to  think  that  we 
needed  saving.  But  when  we  see  Him,  there  it  will  be  joy  without  sorrow  ;  sin  and 
sorrow  itself  will  have  gone;  ours  will  be  a  pure,  unmingled,  unadulterated  joy. 
Yet  more.  If  we  had  seen  our  Saviour  as  He  was,  it  would  have  been  a  triumph 
to  see  how  He  conquered,  but  still  there  would  have  been  suspense  about  it.  We 
should  have  feared  lest  He  might  not  overcome.  But  when  we  see  Him  up  there  it 
win  be  triumph  without  suspense.  Sheathe  the  sword ;  the  battle's  won.  II.  Per- 
sonal IDENTITY.  Perhaps  while  I  have  been  speaking  some  have  said,  "  Ah  !  but  I 
want  to  see  the  Saviour,  the  Saviour  of  Calvary,  the  Saviour  of  Judea,  the  very  one 
that  died  for  me.  I  do  not  so  much  pant  to  see  the  glorious  Saviour  you  have  spoken 
of ;  I  want  to  see  that  very  Saviour  who  did  the  works  of  love,  the  suffering  Saviour ; 
for  Him  I  love."  You  shall  see  Him.  It  is  the  same  one.  There  is  personal  identity. 
"We  shall  see  Him."  We  shall  be  sure  it  is  He;  for  when  we  enter  heaven 
we  shall  know  Him  by  His  manhood  and  Godhead.  We  shall  find  Him  a  man, 
even  as  much  as  He  was  on  earth.  Have  you  never  heard  of  mothers  having 
recognised  their  children  years  after  they  were  lost  by  the  marks  and  wounds 
upon  their  bodies  ?  Ah !  if  we  ever  see  our  Saviour,  we  shall  know  Him  by  His 
wounds.  But  then,  Christ  and  we  are  not  strangers ;  for  we  have  often  seen  Him  in 
this  glass  of  the  Word.  We  shall  know  Him,  because  He  will  be  so  much  like  the 
Bible  Jesus,  that  we  shall  recognise  Him  at  once.  Yet  more,  we  have  known  Him 
better  than  by  Scripture  sometimes — by  close  and  intimate  fellowship  with  Him. 
Why,  we  meet  Jesus  in  the  dark  sometimes ;  but  we  have  sweet  conversation  with 
Him.  Oh  !  we  shall  know  Him  well  enough  when  we  see  Him.  You  may  trust  the 
believer  for  knowing  his  Master  when  he  finds  Him.  III.  The  positive  nature  of 
VISION.  "  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  This  is  not  the  land  of  sight;  it  is  too  dark 
a  country  to  see  Him,  and  our  eyes  are  not  good  enough.  We  walk  here  by  faith. 
It  is  pleasant  to  believe  His  grace,  but  we  had  rather  see  it.  Well,  "  we  shall  see 
Him."    How  different  that  sight  of  Him  will  be  from  that  which  we  have  here  I 

1.  For  here  we  see  Him  by  reflection.  Just  as  sometimes,  when  you  are  looking  in 
your  looking-glass,  you  see  somebody  going  along  in  the  street.  You  do  not  see  the 
person,  you  only  see  him  reflected.  Now  we  see  Christ  reflected;  but  then  we  shall 
not  see  Him  in  the  looking-glass;  we  shall  positively  see  His  person.  Not  the 
reflected  Christ,  not  Christ  in  the  sanctuary,  not  the  mere  Christ  shining  out  of  the 
Bible,  not  Christ  reflected  from  the  sacred  pulpit;  but  "we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is." 

2.  Again :  how  partially  we  see  Christ  here !  The  best  believer  only  gets  half  a 
glimpse  of  Christ.  There  we  shall  see  Christ  entirely,  when  "  we  shall  see  Him  as 
He  is."  3.  Here,  too,  how  dimly  we  see  Christ!  Have  you  never  stood  upon  the 
hilltops  when  the  mist  has  played  on  the  valley  ?  You  have  looked  down  to  see  the 
city  and  the  streamlet  below;  you  could  just  ken  yonder  steeple  and  mark  that  pin- 
nacle ;  but  they  were  all  so  swathed  in  the  mist  that  you  could  scarcely  discern  them. 
Suddenly  the  wind  has  blown  away  the  mist  from  under  you,  and  you  have  seen  the 
fair,  fair  valley.  Ah  !  it  is  so  when  the  believer  enters  heaven.  Here  he  stands  and 
looks  upon  Christ  veiled  in  a  mist — upon  a  Jesus  who  is  shrouded ;  but  when  he 
gets  up  there,  on  Pisgah's  brow,  higher  still,  with  his  Jesus,  then  he  shall  not  see  Him 
dimly,  but  he  shall  see  Him  brightly.  4.  Here,  too,  how  distantly  we  see  Christ ! 
Almost  as  far  off  as  the  farthest  star !  But  then  we  shall  see  Him  closely  ;  we  shall 
see  Him  face  to  face ;  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend,  even  so  shall  we  then  talk  with 
Jesus.    5.  And  oh!  how  transitory  is  our  view  of  Jesus  !    It  is  only  a  little  while  we 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  201 

get  a  glimpse  of  Christ,  and  then  He  seems  to  depart  from  us.   But,  Christians,  there 
will  be  no  hidings  of  faces  in  heaven !     Then,  do  you  know,  there  will  be  another 
difference — when  "  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."   How  much  better  that  sight  will  be 
than  what  we  have  here !    When  we  see  Christ  here,  we  see  Him  to  our  profit;  when 
we  see  Him  there,  we  shall  see  Him  to  our  perfection.     I  bear  my  Master  witness,  I 
never  saw  Him  yet  without  being  profited  by  Him.      But  then  it  will  not  be  to 
improve  us,  it  will  be  to  perfect  us,  when  we  see  Him  there.     "  We  shall  be  like 
Him ;  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."     IV.  The  actual  persons — "  we  shall  see 
Him  as  He  is."    Come,  let  us  divide  that  "  we  "  into  "  I's."    How  many  "  I's  "  are 
there  here  that  will  "  see  Him  as  He  is  "  ?     Brother,  with  snow  upon  thy  head,  wilt 
thou  "  see  Him  as  He  is" ?    Thou  hast  had  many  years  of  fighting,  and  trying,  and 
trouble  :  if  thou  ever  dost  "  see  Him  as  He  is,"  that  will  pay  for  all.    But  are  thy 
grey  hairs  full  of  sin  ?   and  doth  lust  tarry  in  thy  old  cold  blood  ?    Ah !  thou  shalt 
"  see  Him,"  but  not  nigh ;  thou  shalt  be  driven  from  His  presence.    God  save  thee ! 
And  thou,  who  hast  come  to  middle  age,  struggling  with  the  toils  of  life,  mixed  up  with 
all  its  battles,  enduring  its  ills,  thou  art  asking,  it  may  be,  shalt  thou  see  Him?   The 
text  says,  "  We  shall ";  and  can  you  and  I  put  our  hands  on  our  hearts  and  know  our 
union  with  Jesus?    If  so,  "we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."    Young  man,  the  text  says, 
"  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."    Young  man,  you  have  got  a  mother  and  her  soul 
doats  upon  you.    Could  your  mother  come  to  you  this  morning,  she  might  take  hold 
of  your  ai'm,  and  say  to  you,  "  John,  we  shall  '  see  Him  as  He  is  ' ;  it  is  not  I,  John, 
that  shall  see  Him  for  myself  alone,  but  you  and  I  shall  see  Him  together ;  'we  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is.'  "     Oh!  bitter,  bitter  thought  that  just  now  crossed  my  soul !  0 
heavens !  if  we  ever  should  be  sundered  from  those  we  love  so  dearly  when  the  last  day 
of  account  shall  come !    That  were  sad  indeed.    But  we  leave  the  thought  with  you, 
and  lest  you  should  think  that  if  you  are  not  worthy  you  will  not  see  Him — if  you 
are  not  good  you  will  not  see  Him — if  you  do  not  do  such-and-such  good  things  you 
will  not  see  Him — let  me  just  tell  you,  whosoever,  though  he  be  the  greatest  sinner 
under  heaven — whosoever,  though  his  life  be  the  most  filthy  and  the  most  corrupt — 
whosoever  believeth  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  have  everlasting  life ;  for  God  will 
blot  out  his  sins,  will  give  him  righteousness  through  Jesus,  accept  him  in  the  beloved, 
save  him  by  His  mercy,  keep  him  by  His  grace,  and  at  last  present  Him  spotless  and 
faultless  before  His  presence  with  exceeding  great  joy.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        The 
two  transfigurations  (with  2  Cor.  iii.  18) : — The  transfigurations  of  Moses  and  Christ 
were  events  that  did  more  than  accredit  their  Divine  missions.      The  facts  were 
typical,  and  suggestive  of  principles  that  were  operating  beyond  the  range  of  these 
special  instances,  and  as  such  helped  to  colour  the  thought  and  speech  and  hope  of 
the  founders  of  the  coming  Church.     Paul  and  John  take  hold  of  these  inscrutable 
and  stupendous  transfiguration  forces,  and  trace  the  effect  of  their  working  upon  a 
man's  moral  life  and  character  here,  and  upon  his  person  and  destiny  hereafter. 
Christ  not  only  so  acts  upon  us  as  to  conform  us  to  His  holy  and  exalted  pattern 
now ;  when  He  comes  again  it  shall  be  to  reflect  His  glory  into  the  persons  of  His 
believing  followers.     1.  It  may  help  the  weak  faith  of  some  who  stumble  at  the 
supernatural,  if  we.recognise  that  assimilation  forces  are  already  at  work  which  change 
into  finv  quality,  nobler  form,  more  subtle  function  that  which  is  gross,  inert, 
unshaped.     The  earth,  in  its  noiseless  flight,  gathers  to  itself  cosmic  dust,  just  as  a 
miller  in  going  to  and  fro  amidst  the  revolving  wheels  of  his  mill  draws  to  himself 
fine  grains  of  flour ;  and  the  earth  then  conforms  that  dust  to  its  own  likeness.     It 
pulls  the  pliant  stuff  into  its  own  range,  and  then  refines  and  exalts  it  into  those 
living  organisms  that  are  the  glory  of  the  earth.     2.  It  is  by  the  law  of  assimilation 
that  men  are  bound  together  into  homogeneous  communities  and  nations.   3.  Trans- 
figurations go  on  in  the  social  realm  that  are  more  or  less  consciously  mimetic  in 
their  character.     It  is  because  of  this  fact  that  the  different  parts  of  our  common 
life  at  least  match  themselves  into  a  congruous  and  harmonious  whole.   The  mould- 
ing forces  of  society  tend  to  bring  men  into  conformity  with  ruling  types  rather  than 
to  make  them  separatists.     And  there  is  an  assimilation  to  Christ's  pattern  that  is 
more  or  less  conscious,  corresponding  to  these  processes  in  the  social  realm  around 
us.     The  transcendent  beauty  of  Jesus  Christ  casts  a  spell  over  us,  and  we  long  to 
copy  Him.      And  within  certain  limits  we  do  find  ourselves  possessed  of  power 
through  which  we  approximate,  in  external  conduct  at  least,  to  His  standard  of 
truth  and  righteousness  and  compassion.      4.  In  ways  unknown  to  us  these  assimi- 
lative forces  work  deep  down  amidst  the  elemental  mysteries  of  life.     The  nervous 
system  seems  curiously  responsive  to  the  environment,  and  accommodates  itself  to 
the  forms  and  hues  that  predominate  in  it.    In  a  stream  near  Ivybridge,  into  which 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

white  clay  was  poured,  the  fish  soon  became  perceptibly  lighter  in  colour.  A  Syrian 
shepherd,  by  putting  peeled  rods  of  hazel  before  his  flocks  and  herds  in  the  breeding 
season,  found  that  he  could  almost  mark  at  will  the  skins  and  fleeces  of  the  unborn 
young.  And  the  law  holds  in  human  life.  The  organisation  passes  through  plastic 
stages  of  sensibility,  in  which  it  is  pecuharly  susceptible  to  the  imprint  of  any  new 
object  that  may  be  presented  to  it.  The  deep  mental  impressions  of  the  mother  often 
infix  themselves  legibly  upon  the  young  life  she  brings  into  the  world.  Probably  the 
traditions  of  saints  who  had  set  themselves  to  meditate  on  the  agonies  of  the  pierced 
hands  and  feet,  and  at  last  received  naU-marks  in  their  own  persons,  are  not  simple 
myths,  but  have  a  basis  of  scientific  fact.  And  if  there  be  a  law  of  this  sort,  it  must 
surely  run  out  into  higher  and  more  momentous  forms.  Shall  God  give  to  the 
frail,  mute,  unreasoning  weaklings  of  the  animal  creation  around  us  the  power  of 
assimilating  themselves  to  the  hues  of  their  environments,  so  as  the  better  to  equip 
them  for  a  hfe  which  is  but  a  short  spasm  of  sensations,  and  shall  He  deny  the 
benefit  of  that  catholic  law  to  us  who  have  come  to  the  assembly  and  church  of  the 
firstborn,  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  and  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of 
the  New  Covenant,  so  that  we  may  be  transformed  and  fitted  for  the  high  distinction 
that  is  before  us  ?  Shall  this  mysterious  law  work  through  our  fears  and  terrors,  and 
conform  us  to  the  disease  of  which  we  may  think  and  work  towards  death,  and  shall 
it  not  also  operate  through  hope  and  admiration  and  worship,  and  assimilate  us 
to  the  ideal  of  health,  and  be  fruitful  for  glory  and  honour  and  immortaUty  ?  We 
are  even  now  in  conditions  in  which  we  are  being  attracted  more  or  less  swiftly  into 
the  image  of  Christ's  spiritual  loveliness,  but  ere  long  we  shall  be  attracted  into 
conformity  to  the  unknown  splendour  which  invests  the  humanity  enshrined  and 
enthroned  in  the  highest  heaven.  5.  Both  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly  transfigura- 
tions rest  upon  a  common  act  of  contemplation.  The  monks  of  Mount  Athos 
hypnotise  themselves  into  trance  conditions  by  gazing  at  their  own  bodies.  In  some 
of  the  Buddhist  monasteries  of  Eastern  Asia  devotees  are  pointed  out  who  have  sat 
facing  blank  walls  for  years,  and  have  gazed  themselves  into  mysterious  ecstasies. 
We  find,  as  a  matter  of  experience,  that  we  can  absorb  and  assimilate  that  on  which 
we  succeed  in  detaining  the  attention  of  our  concentrated  powers.  Now,  if  men  by 
projecting  themselves  into  moods  of  abstraction  discover  new  powers  of  mind,  find 
unknown  fires  begin  to  burn  within  them,  and  rise  into  worlds  of  spiritual  ecstasy, 
what  change,  think  you,  ought  to  effect  itself  within  us  if  with  the  same  steadfastness. 
we  contemplate  the  personality  of  Him  who  is  the  Leader  and  Consummator  of  our 
faith?  We  cannot  look  with  sympathy  upon  His  moral  loveliness  here,  or  with 
worship  upon  His  glorious  majesty  hereafter,  without  realising  some  amazing 
approximation  to  His  likeness.  6.  Another  analogy  worthy  of  our  notice  is  that 
these  transfiguration  processes  effect  themselves  upon  a  new  and  impressionable 
life.  It  is  the  unborn  babe  which  is  responsive  to  the  image  presented  to  the  brain 
of  the  mother,  rather  than  the  mother  herself.  The  chrysalis  is  no  longer  affected  by 
the  colour  of  its  surroundings  when  it  reaches  the  last  stages  of  its  development. 
And  in  the  spiritual  realm  this  fact  has  its  counterpart.  The  transcendent  beauty  of 
Christ  imparts  itself  only  in  natures  made  tender  by  the  Spirit.  Till  the  Holy 
Ghost  comes  to  brood  within  us,  the  material  of  which  we  consist  does  not  lend 
itself  to  these  high  spiritual  transformations.  A  man  may  try  and  look  at  Christ  for 
a  lifetime.  He  may  have  an  adequate  intellectual  conception  of  this  ideal  character. 
Every  grace  may  be  discriminated  and  may  command  its  due  meed  of  homage,  but 
all  in  vain  unless  there  be  a  new  and  tender  life  to  receive  the  imprint  of  the  perfect 
personality  thus  presented  to  the  thought  and  emotion.  This  process  is  not  human 
and  ethical  only.  The  life  dawning  in  that  birth  mediated  through  the  Spirit  ia 
alone  susceptible  of  these  sublime  modifications  and  perfectings;  and  in  the 
heavenly  transfiguration  there  is  the  same  parallel  or  analogy.  If  man's  nature  is 
to  be  photographically  sensitive  to  the  celestial  splendour  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  Hia 
last  glorious  manifestation,  the  quickening  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of 
righteousness,  must  be  followed  by  a  new  birth  of  man's  sentient  life  from  the 
dust  of  death.  7.  But  in  these  transfigurations  there  are  contrasts  as  well  as 
analogies.  These  arise,  not  from  the  fact  that  different  forces  are  brought  into 
use  to  effect  these  «hanges,  but  from  the  different  degrees  of  aptitude  which  appear 
in  the  early  and  late  stages  of  the  religious  history  of  the  soul.  (1)  The  first  trans- 
formation is  brought  to  pass  by  contemplating  the  reflected  image  of  Christ;  the 
second,  by  contemplating  the  direct  glory  of  His  essential  nature.  If  the  broken 
gleams  of  Christ's  life,  the  fragments  of  His  tradition,  the  piecemeal  presentation  of 
His  character  and  personality  to  the  world  by  His  followers,  can  effect  such  sublime 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  203 

changes  amongst  men,  how  much  richer  will  be  the  transfigurations  effected  by  Hia 
direct  personal  manifestation  at  His  second  coming  "without  spot  unto  salvation"? 
(2)  In  the  first  transfiguration  the  Spirit  is  the  agent  of  the  change ;  in  the 
second  the  ministry  of  the  Spirit  is  superseded,  or  at  least  falls  into  the  background. 
The  righteous  burst  forth  at  once  into  the  zenith  of  their  destinies  like  stars  into  the 
swift-kindling  splendour  of  the  firmament.  The  Son  creates  them  at  once  to  new 
majesty  as  He  once  created  worlds,  for  His  power  is  dealing  with  an  entirely  obedient 
material,  a  material  ruled  by  regenerated  wills  promptly  and  absolutely  responsive  to 
His  sovereignty.  (3)  The  present  transfiguration  is  gradual,  whilst  the  future  is 
instantaneous.  "  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,"  and  pass  at  once  into  the  distinctions 
of  His  sovereignty.  Quick  as  the  kindhng  of  light  His  exalted  humanity  will  I 
implant  itself  in  us.  In  that  life  of  unknown  blessedness  there  wUl  be  scope  for  ever- ' 
enlarging  knowledge,  strength,  dignity  of  nature ;  but  men  will  rise  at  once  into 
participation  with  the  privileges  of  Christ's  enthronement  and  conformity  to  His 
Divine  kingliness.  8.  These  two  blessed  changes  are  so  vitally  related  to  each  other  > 
that  one  is  a  pledge  and  forecast  of  the  other.  Princely  beauty  hides  itself  away  in 
the  sons  of  God  everywhere,  and  if  we  only  suiJer  the  Spirit  of  God  to  come  to 
us  and  assimilate  our  characters  to  the  Christlike  ideal,  that  beauty  will  adorn 
even  the  bodies  of  our  humiliation,  and  will  at  last  clothe  our  quickened  and 
recreated  flesh  for  ever.  Guard  unhurt  the  germ.  See  that  the  law  of  approxi- 
mation to  Christ  is  at  work  in  all  the  occasions  of  common  life.  That  wUl 
guarantee  the  rest.  If  we  are  absorbed  into  Christ,  and  Christ  into  us,  when 
He  is  manifested  we  also  shall  be  manifested  with  Him  in  glory.  He  is  in 
ns  the  hope  of  glory,  and  such  a  hope  maketh  not  ashamed.  (T.  G.  Selby.) 
The  final  transfiguration  : — There  is  a  very  lofty  sentiment  in  these  words.  They 
labour  with  meaning  and  soar  with  aspiration.  We  notice — I.  A  change  of  the 
MOST  MAEKED  CHARACTER  IS  ALKEADT  suPEEiNDUCED.  Something  is  already  accom- 
plished ;  an  effect  is  secured.  Things  are  placed  in  a  course  of  progression  even 
now.  n.  This  change  is  preparatory  to  another  in  a  future  state  of  existence. 
Lite  is  the  school,  the  arena,  the  watch-tower.  Here  holy  principle  is  imbibed  and 
holy  habit  formed ;  but  the  scope  and  aim  are  always  prospective.  The  premoni- 
tions of  our  future  are  afforded  by  the  nature  of — (1)  Our  present  states.  There  is 
rapture  in  devotion.  Holiness  now  is  clothed  with  beauty.  Love,  obedience, 
fellowship,  are  sweetest  flowers  of  earth,  but  they  aU  look  heavenward.  (2)  Our 
characteristic  principles.  HI.  Of  that  sublimer  change  the  present  one  is  a  very  / 
imperfect  specimen  and  presage.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear,"  &c.  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  J 
LL.D.)  The  transforming  power  of  the  revelation  of  God : — John,  looking  back, 
sees  what  great  spaces  have  been  covered  in  his  spiritual  history;  he  also  looks 
forward,  and  sees  greater  changes  in  store  for  him.  He  has,  in  truth,  become  a  son 
of  God,  but  it  is  not  manifest  what  he  will  become  ;  he  is  only  sure  that  as  all  the 
transformations  in  his  character  have  been  in  the  direction  of  likeness  to  God,  they 
■will  go  on  in  the  same  direction.  To  believe  in  future  change  is  very  different  from 
believing  in  past  change.  It  is  not  easy  to  realise  that  we  shall  ever  be  much 
different  from  what  we  are  at  present— that  we  shall  become  wiser,  that  we  shall 
feel  older,  that  we  shall  hold  other  opinions,  that  we  shall  develop  new  powers.  Our 
future  self  is  commonly  the  simple  projection  of  our  present  self.  The  wondrous 
changes  since  infancy,  with  the  development  of  hidden  powers,  do  not  effectually 
teach  us  that  changes  as  great  await  us,  or  may  be  achieved.  And  yet  these  natural 
changes  in  the  past  ought  to  teach  us  that  as  great  changes  may  await  us  in  the 
future,  and  also  that  there  may  be  spiritual  changes  and  developments  corresponding 
to  the  physical  changes.  The  limit  of  physical  development  may  be  reached,  but 
the  mental  and  moral  development  may  go  on  long  after,  and,  for  aught  we  know, 
for  ever,  and  the  fact  that  we  draw  our  life  from  God  makes  it  probable  that  it  wiU 
be  so.  Origin  in  an  infinite  being  is  a  pledge  not  only  of  an  infinite  life,  but  of 
endless  development  in  the  direction  of  the  unattainable  source.  This  natural 
history  should  open  our  minds  to  the  possibility  of  a  like  spiritual  history.  We 
may  be  sure  that  God  has  not  put  all  the  wonders  of  His  creation  into  our  early 
physical  life,  and  left  the  moral  life  bare  and  fixed.  The  natural  comes  first,  then 
the  spiritual,  but  it  is  no  less  full  of  germinant  seeds  and  possibilities  than  the 
natural.  This  is  high  probability;  the  Christian  faith  makes  it  a  certainty.  It 
enters  into  its  nature  and  purpose  to  open  before  us  great  changes  and  developments. 
And  it  also  seeks  to  produce  them.  It  sets  before  us  the  duty  of  ourselves  striving 
to  make  these  changes.  "  Grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour."     Let  us   give  ourselves  to  this  thought  for   awhile.     Under  natural 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

conditions  character  does  not  show  a  tendency  to  change  its  type  or  direction; 
it  simply  grows  after  its  type,  and  sets  steadily  in  its  native  direction  and  toward 
some  permanent  form.  Hereditary  qualities  take  the  lead,  and  the  character  moves 
on  in  their  direction.  The  main  quality  asserts  itself  more  and  more  strongly, 
shapes  the  features,  gives  tone  to  the  voice,  and  gesture  to  the  body,  directs  the 
conduct  and  becomes  the  spirit  of  the  life.  If  selfish  or  lustful  or  proud,  these 
qualities  tend  simply  to  go  on  and  harden  into  fixed  form.  We  call  the  result 
habit ;  it  is  rather  the  natural  tendency  of  character,  aided  by  habit,  to  consolidate ; 
it  is  the  loss  of  native  freedom,  for  habit  is  the  absence  of  freedom.  But  there  is 
even  a  better  prospect  than  this.  It  is,  indeed,  a  pleasant  thought  that  if  I  cultivate 
a  spirit  of  patience,  or  sympathy,  or  self-control,  it  will  become  a  fixed  habit  in  me. 
It  points  to  an  end  of  strife,  to  rest  and  peace ;  but  there  is  something  better  than 
that.  I  do  not  want  merely  to  become  fixed  in  these  habits,  but  to  grow  in  them  ; 
and  I  also  want  to  be  carried  on  and  lifted  up  into  higher  ranges  of  character  than 
I  now  know  ;  I  cannot  be  satisfied  with  any  condition  that  is  stationary.  Therefore 
■we  hope  to  come  upon  other  duties,  and  so  to  enter  into  other  feelings  than  any  we 
now  know.  Just  as  a  little  child  knows  nothing  of  the  passions  that  sweep  through 
the  heart  of  the  youth,  so  there  may  be  lofty  spiritual  passions  and  experiences,  and 
even  qualities  of  character,  of  which  we  now  know  nothing.  One  thing  is  sure,  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  does  not  leave  us  alone  with  a  law  of  heredity,  and  the  bare 
hope  that  we  may  become  confirmed  in  goodness ;  it  opens  before  us  a  vista  of 
endless  growth  and  change.  And  therefore  it  begins  with  a  call  to  regeneration. 
Its  first  work  is  to  lift  us  out  of  the  order  of  nature  where  character  tends  simply  to 
solidify  and  habits  become  fixed,  and  to  carry  us  into  another  sort  of  world. 
Eegeneration  means,  not  that  we  are  to  be  developed,  but  that  we  are  to  be 
changed,  to  live  in  other  ways,  with  other  motives  and  for  other  ends.  Now  see 
how  Christian  requirement  works  in  with  regeneration  and  helps  it  on.  The  gospel 
is  constantly  putting  a  man  upon  moral  choices,  and  so  it  acts  against  the  solidifying 
tendency  of  habit  or  native  inclination  ;  i.e.,  it  keeps  a  man  constantly  in  the  world 
of  freedom  and  out  of  the  region  of  fixed  habit.  When  I  begin  the  day,  I  have  not 
only  to  keep  on  in  the  good  habits  of  yesterday,  but  I  have  fresh  choices  to  make. 
New  questions  come  up ;  life  varies  its  phases ;  I  am  myself  not  quite  the  same 
being  as  yesterday ;  I  see  more,  feel  more ;  duty  is  a  little  broader ;  time  presses 
upon  me  a  little  more  heavily  ;  eternity  becomes  more  real.  Thus  I  am  summoned 
to  new  exercises  of  my  nature.  We  are  not  to  think  that  this  transforming  process 
belongs  only  to  the  life  beyond.  God  is  appearing  all  the  while  to  those  who  have 
eyes  to  see  Him.  We  touch  here  a  most  vital  fact — the  revelations  of  God  and  their 
effect  upon  us.  I  do  not  refer  to  the  everyday  manifestations  of  God — the  sunlight, 
the  blessed  order  of  nature,  the  daily  food  and  daily  joy  of  home,  but  to  those  occa- 
sions when  life  becomes  momentous,  when  it  gathers  itself  up  in  a  crisis  and  all  is 
changed  for  us.  It  may  be  good  or  evil  fortune,  the  birth  or  death  of  love,  a  loss  or 
a  gain ;  all  such  things  are  revelations  of  God,  for  God  is  in  our  lives  and  not  outside 
of  them ;  but  when  He  thus  appears  it  is  for  purposes  of  transformation.  That  is 
the  use  to  be  made  of  such  events  as  they  touch  us.  St.  John  doubtless  had  in 
mind  the  effect  of  the  revelation  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  That  was  almost  the  only 
revelation  to  which  he  gave  much  heed ;  the  effect  of  it  was  the  only  spiritual  effect 
of  which  he  was  conscious.  Christ  had  come  into  his  life  ;  and  from  a  mere  child 
of  this  world,  a  simple  fisherman,  he  had  been  made  a  veritable  son  of  God.  Christ 
had  drawn  him  out  of  his  old,  worldly,  natural  self  up  into  this  high  sense  and 
relation,  so  that  he  could  say,  "  Now,  I  am  a  son  of  God  " — a  tremendous  change, 
the  greatest  a  human  being  can  undergo.  St.  John  had  experienced  this  change 
under  the  influence  of  Christ — a  change  so  great  that  he  can  scarcely  realise  what 
he  was  at  the  beginning.  A  new  creation  ;  born  again  ;  a  son  of  God  ;  transformed 
—these  phrases  are  too  weak  to  express  it.  But  it  will  go  on,  he  says.  We  shall 
see  Christ  again,  and  see  Him  as  He  is ;  see  Him  with  clearer  eyes  than  we  now 
have ;  and  so  mightier  transformations  will  take  place  within  us ;  we  cannot  tell 
nor  even  imagine  what  we  shall  be.  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  this — that  great 
changes  are  still  to  go  on  in  us  under  the  transforming  power  of  Christ.  Let  us  not 
think  meagrely  on  such  a  subject,  but  under  high  analogies.  See  how  Christ  has 
transformed  the  world  ;  how  His  spirit  has  stolen  into  the  hearts  of  nations;  how 
civilisation  has  taken  on  His  name  and  is  doing  His  work.  See  how  the  tide  of 
progress  sets  steadily  Christward — more  peace  and  less  war,  more  justice,  more 
equality,  more  mercy  and  kindness  and  goodwill.  No  matter  how  they  come;  they 
aje  coming  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  they  are  coming  in  ways  not  to  be  turned  aside. 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  205 

What  the  end  of  this  social  change  will  be  we  do  not  know,  but  there  is  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  society  will  make  as  great  gains  as  it  has  made  in  the  past.  But  if 
society  is  capable  of  such  transformations,  much  more  must  the  individual  be 
capable  of  them.  All  men  are  as  one  man ;  one  is  the  whole  and  the  whole  are  but 
one.  And  the  final  condition  !  who  can  imagine  it  ?  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
this  human  world  will  become.  All  we  can  sr.y  is  that  the  holy  city  of  the  saved 
world,  the  new  Jerusalem  of  the  perfected  humanity,  is  slowly  but  steadily  coming 
down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  and  will  in  time  appear  four-square  upon  the  earth. 
Thus  these  great  hopes  that  enfold  the  world  are  yours  and  mine ;  we  can  take  them 
into  the  secrecy  of  our  sorrowing  hearts,  into  our  disappointed  lives,  into  the  vanishing 
away  of  our  strength  and  years,  and  through  them  claim  and  find  a  place  in  the 
world  of  joy  and  peace.  (T.  T.  Hunger. )  Life  and  character  in  God's  children : — • 
Loved  ones,  now  are  we  the  children  (rsKva)  of  God.  We  are  His  children  even 
now.  "  Amidst  all  the  mistakes  on  the  part  of  the  world  we  are  nevertheless  really 
now  the  children  of  God,"  however  unworthy  we  may  appear  and  however  little  we 
may  be  appreciated.  The  soil  may  dwarf  the  Divine  life  and  prevent  its  perfect 
development ;  nevertheless,  we  have  that  life  in  germ.  But  the  infinite  future  lies 
before  us :  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear."  The  lily-life  is  subject  to  hostile  climate,  and 
hence  is  imperfect.  The  life  in  us  is  an  exotic  from  a  celestial  clime,  "  and  "  hence 
"  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  There  will  be  no  difficulty  in  recog 
nising  our  unfolding  of  His  life  in  the  future.  "  When  He  shall  appear  "  all  will  be 
well ;  the  life  will  unfold  itself  in  divinest  forms  under  the  immediate  sunlight  of 
His  countenance.  "We  shaU  be  Uke  Him."  The  life  will  have  reached  its  type. 
For  the  present  our  "  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  but  "  when  Christ  who  is  our  life 
shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory  " ;  yes,  "  with  Him  in  glory," 
because  "  like  Him."  What  is  the  explanation  of  that  perfect  likeness?  "For  we  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is."  The  sight  of  Him  makes  us  like  Him.  Our  life  begins  with  a  look 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God."  In  the  same  way  that  life  develops :  •'  We  all,  with  open 
face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image 
from  glory  to  glory."  So  at  last  in  the  heavenly  city  we  are  made  perfectly  like  Him, 
and  seas  of  bhss  begin  to  roll  through  our  souls,  because  "  we  see  Him  as  He  is."  What 
heaven  in  such  a  look!  (A.  R.  Cocke,  D.D.)  The  blessed  vision  of  Christ : — "Oh, 
blessed  vision ! "  was  the  apostrophe  of  an  ancient  confessor.  "  Oh,  blessed  vision !  to 
which  all  others  are  penal  and  despicable !  Let  me  go  into  the  mint  house  and  see  heaps 
of  gold,  and  I  am  never  the  richer ;  let  me  go  to  the  pictures  and  see  goodly  faces,  I  am 
never  the  fairer ;  let  me  go  to  the  court,  where  I  see  state  and  magnificence,  and  I  am 
never  the  greater ;  but  oh.  Saviour  !  I  cannot  see  Thee  and  not  be  blessed.  I  can  see 
Thee  here  through  symbols  ;  if  the  eye  of  my  faith  be  dim,  yet  it  is  sure.  Oh,  let  me 
be  unquiet  till  I  shall  see  Thee  as  I  am  seen  !  "  {Quoted  by  Dr.  Hanford.)  Trans- 
formations : — Mr.  Buskin,  in  his  "  Modern  Painters,"  tells  that  the  black  mud  or  slime — 
from  a  footpath  in  the  outskirts  of  a  manufacturing  town — the  absolute  type  of  im- 
purity— is  composed  of  four  elements — clay,  mixed  with  soot,  a  little  sand,  and  water. 
These  four  may  be  separated  each  from  the  other.  The  clay  particles,  left  to  follow 
their  own  instinct  of  unity,  become  a  clear,  hard  substance  so  set  that  it  can  deal  with 
light  in  a  wonderful  way,  and  gather  out  of  it  the  loveliest  blue  rays  only,  refusing  the 
rest.  We  call  it  then  a  sapphire.  The  sand  arranges  itself  in  mysterious,  infinitely 
fine  parallel  lines,  which  refiect  the  blue,  green,  purple,  and  red  rays  in  the  greatest 
beauty.  We  call  it  then  an  opal.  The  soot  becomes  the  hardest  thing  in  the 
world,  and  for  the  blackness  it  had  obtains  the  power  of  reflecting  all  the  rays  of 
the  sun  at  once  in  the  vividest  blaze  that  any  solid  thing  can  shoot.  We  call  it  then 
a  diamond.  Last  of  all,  the  water  becomes  a  dewdrop,  and  a  crystalline  star  of 
snow.  Thus  God  can  and  does  transform  the  vilest  sinners  into  pure  and  shining  .^ 
jewels  fit  for  His  home  in  heaven.  Transfiguration  by  sight  of  Christ : — Among  ' 
some  reminiscences  of  the  sweet  singer,  Jenny  Lind,  communicated  by  Canon  Scott 
Holland  to  Murray's  Magazine,  occurs  the  following: — "  She  had  gone  to  look  on 
the  face  of  her  friend,  Mrs.  Nassau  Senior,  after  death.  The  son  of  her  friend  had 
shown  her  the  stairs,  and  pointed  out  the  door  of  the  room  where  the  body  lay,  and 
put  a  candle  in  her  hands,  and  left  her.  She  pushed  open  the  door  and  entered 
alone,  and  there,  before  her,  lay  the  face,  fine  and  clear-cut,  encompassed  about 
with  a  mass  of  white  flowers.  On  it  was  peace,  and  a  smile,  with  her  lips  parted ; 
but  that  was  not  aU.  I  must  tell  the  rest  in  her  own  words.  '  It  was  not  her  own 
look  that  was  in  her  face.  It  was  the  look  of  another,  the  face  of  another,  that  had 
passed  into  hers.  It  was  the  shadow  of  Christ  that  had  come  upon  her.  ^^gb»>hf>dh-  -  - 
seen  Christ.    And  I  put  down  my  candle,  and  I  said,  " Let  me  see  thijtfimg.  ,  1^  f  ^  ^         ^ 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

me  stop  here  always.  Let  me  sit  and  look.  Where  are  my  children  ?  Let  them 
come  and  see.  Here  is  a  woman  who  has  seen  Christ." '  I  can  never  forget  the 
dramatic  intensity  of  her  manner  as  she  told  me  all  this,  and  how  she  at  last  had 
to  drag  herself  away,  as  from  a  vision,  and  to  stumble  down  the  stairs  again," 

Yer.  3.  And  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifleth  himself,  even  as  He 
is  pure. — The  Divine  hope  perfecting  the  sinless  family  likeness  : — I.  We  must  look 
HEBE,  AS  ALWAYS,  TO  Christ.  He  had  a  hope  in  God,  or  upon  God ;  a  hope  having 
God  for  its  object,  and  God  for  its  ground  and  warrant.  And  it  was  substantially 
the  same  hope  that  we  have  as  children  that  He  had  as  the  Son.  True,  He  could 
not  say,  with  reference  to  Himself,  and  His  own  knowledge  or  consciousness,  "  It 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  I  shall  be";  at  least  not  exactly  as  we  say  it.  He  knew 
better  what  He  was  to  be  than  we  can  know  what  we  are  to  be.  But  even  He,  in 
His  human  nature  and  human  experience,  did  not  adequately  know  this  ;  for  even 
He  walked  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.  It  really  did  not  yet  appear  what  He  was  to 
be.  One  thing,  however.  He  did  know,  that  whatever  the  future  discovery  or 
development,  to  Himself  or  others,  of  His  Sonship  was  to  be,  it  would  be  all  in  the 
line  of  His  being  like  the  Father ;  and  being  like  the  Father  through  seeing  Him  as 
He  is.  To  see  God  as  He  is,  when  the  present  strange  problem — a  dispensation  of 
long-suffering  patience,  subservient  to  a  dispensation  of  present  mercy  and  salvation, 
and  preparatory  to  a  dispensation  of  retribution  and  reward — is  at  ]ast  solved — to 
see  God  as  He  is,  when  the  shifting  shadows  of  time  flee  away,  and  the  repose  of 
the  final  settlement  of  aU  things  come ; — that  was  to  Christ  a  matter  of  hope ; 
exactly  as  it  is  to  us.  It  must  have  been  so.  And  if  it  was  so,  is  it  too  much  to 
say  that  this  included,  even  in  His  case,  the  idea  of  His  hoping  to  be  like  God, 
when  He  was  thus  to  see  Him  as  He  is,  in  a  sense  and  to  an  extent  not  within  the 
reach  and  range  of  His  human  experience,  when  it  was  among  the  ordinary  con- 
ditions of  humanity  here  on  earth  that  He  had  to  see  Him  ?  That  was  His  trial, 
as  it  is  ours ;  to  be  in  a  position  in  which,  seeing  God  as  He  is,  and  being 
consequently  thoroughly  Mke  Him,  in  respect  of  full  and  ultimate  contentment, 
complacency,  satisfaction,  and  joy,  is  "a  thing  hoped  for."  It  is  in  such  a  position 
that  our  purifying  of  ourselves  is  to  be  wrought  out,  even  as  it  was  in  such  a  position 
that  His  being  pure  was  manifested  and  approved.  We  have  to  realise  our  sonship, 
as  He  had  to  realise  His  Sonship,  in  a  world  that  knows  not  God  ;  and  we  have  to 
realise  it,  like  Him,  in  hope.  So  realising  it,  and  having  this  joint  hope  with 
Him  in  God,  we  purify  ourselves  as  He  is  pure.  JI.  With  all  this  the  commission 
OF  SIN  IS  incompatible.  "He  that  doeth  righteousness,"  and  he  alone,  "  is  bom  of 
God  "  (chap.  ii.  29).  The  doing  of  sin  is  inconsistent  with  so  righteous  a  parentage ; 
for  it  is  the  doing  of  that  which  is  against  law  (ver.  4).  Sin  is  lawlessness; 
insubordination  to  law.  It  is  to  be  so  regarded ;  especially  by  us  who,  on  the  one 
hand,  being  born  of  God,  make  conscience  of  doing  righteousness  as  God  is 
righteous  (chap.  ii.  29)  ;  and  who,  on  the  other  hand,  having  this  hope  in  God — 
that  we  are  to  be  like  Him  when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is — make 
conscience  of  purifying  ourselves,  as  our  model.  His  own  beloved  Son,  is  pure 
(chap.  iii.  2,  3).  We  are  to  look  upon  sin  as  a  breach  of  law.  That  is  our  security 
against  committing  sin,  and  so  compromising  the  righteousness  which  we  do,  and 
the  purity  to  which  we  aspire.  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Purifying  hope  : — I. 
That  evert  true  Christian  is  animated  by  the  hope  of  being  with  Christ.  We 
make  three  remarks  relative  to  this  hope.  1.  It  is  well-founded.  2.  It  is  soul- 
sustaining.  Great  is  the  power  of  genuine  hope.  3.  It  is  increasingly  active.  II. 
That  the  possession  of  this  hope  tends  to  promote  personal  holiness.  "  Every 
man  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  puritieth  himself."  He  not  only  feels  obliged  to 
cultivate  personal  purity,  but,  stimulated  by  this  hope,  he  makes  every  effort  to 
become  pure.  We  shall  make  two  or  three  inquiries  relative  to  personal  purity.  1. 
What  is  its  nature  ?  2.  How  is  it  promoted  ?  3.  What  are  its  evidences  ?  "  He 
purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  {J. H. Hughes.)  The  self-purifying  hope: 
— I.  The  work  of  self-puruication.  1.  This  is  a  personal  work,  not  only  accom- 
plished in  us  but  by  us.  2.  It  includes  such  things  as — (1)  Purity  of  imagination. 
This  is  the  very  fount  of  our  hearts.  The  issues  of  life  are  from  hence.  Beware 
what  books  we  read,  &c.  (2)  Purity  of  word.  Our  Lord  teaches  this.  Watchful- 
ness is  needed.  (3)  Purity  of  conduct.  Struggles  with  the  flesh,  especially  in 
youth.  "  Keep  thyself  pure."  II.  Tue  motives  to  the  work  of  self-purifica- 
tion. 1.  Hope  of  the  coming  of  Christ — "  when  He  shall  appear."  2.  Hope 
of  likeness    to    Christ— "  we   shall   be   like    Him."     III.  The    pattern    of   this 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  207 

WORK — "  as  He  is  pure."  What  a  height !  But  the  higher  we  aLm  the  higher  we 
reach.  A  painter,  a  sculptor,  a  poet,  all  work  to  some  ideal.  (Family  Churchman.) 
Christian  hope  : — Hope  is  a  feeling  that  animates  every  human  bosom ;  that  forms 
the  motive  power  to  active  exertion,  is  the  soul  of  enterprise,  and  is  one  of  the  main 
springs  that  keep  the  world  itself  in  motion.  Is  the  morning  of  life  fair  and 
promising  ?  Hope  gives  freshness  to  the  scene,  and  buoyancy  to  the  spectator.  Is 
the  meridian  of  life  bright  and  prosperous  ?  Hope  casts  its  radiant  glories  over 
life's  pathway,  and  infuses  its  sweet  ingredients  into  life's  enjoyments.  In  a  word, 
hope  is  the  great  cordial  of  human  life,  the  lightener  of  all  our  cares,  "  the  sweetener 
of  all  our  joys,  and  the  soother  of  all  our  sorrows."  I.  The  nature  of  Christian 
HOPE.  1.  The  points  of  resemblance,  or  rather  of  agreement,  it  bears  to  hope  in 
general,  are  the  three  following :  (1)  Like  every  other  hope,  "  this  hope  "  has 
reference  to  what  is  good.  In  this  respect  hope  differs  from  fear,  which  is  the  dread 
of  evil,  present  or  prospective,  real  or  imaginary.  (2)  Like  every  other  hope,  this 
hope  has  reference  to  good,  yet  future  in  its  realisation  and  enjoyment.  In  this 
respect  hope  differs  from  both  faith  and  possession — (a)  It  differs  from  faith,  which 
credits  things  that  are  past  as  well  as  things  that  are  future,  threatened  evils  as  well 
as  promised  blessings  ;  (b)  It  differs  also  from  possession.  "  But  hope  that  is  seen 
is  not  hope  " — that  is,  the  thing  hoped  for,  when  realised,  is  no  longer  hope,  but 
possession  and  enjoyment.  (3)  Like  every  other  hope,  this  hope  has  reference  to 
what  is  attainable.  And  in  this  respect  hope  differs  from  desire.  We  may  desire 
some  future  good,  real  or  imaginary,  which  is  far  beyond  the  reach  of  attainment ; 
but  we  cannot  be  said  to  hope  for  what  is  unattainable.  And  just  in  proportion  as 
the  possibility,  and  especially  the  probability  of  its  attainment,  seems  great  or 
small,  certain  or  uncertain,  will  hope  or  expectation  be  strong  or  weak,  lively  or 
languid.  2.  The  points  of  contrast  are  chiefly  two.  (1)  That  hope  is  a  mere 
natural  emotion,  "  springs  eternal  in  the  human  breast,"  is  produced  by  natural 
objects,  and  common  to  all  natural  men  ;  this  hope  is  a  Christian  grace,  is  produced 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  through  faith  in  the  gospel  is  fixed  on  the  things  of  the  spirit, 
and  is  common  to  all  that  are  spiritual.  (2)  The  future  and  attainable  good  things, 
on  which  that  hope  is  fixed  are  aU  earthly  and  material,  "  seen  and  temporal  "  ; 
the  future  and  certain  good  things  on  which  this  hope  is  fixed  are  all  spiritual  and 
heavenly,  "  unseen  and  eternal."  11.  The  foundation  of  this  hope.  In  this  the 
goodness  of  this  hope  consists,  and  appears  stUl  more  manifest  than  in  its  nature. 
Christ,  in  His  person,  in  His  mission  and  mediation,  and  especially  in  His  work  of 
propitiation,  finished  on  the  Cross  and  accepted  by  the  Father,  is  the  true  and  only 
foundation  of  a  sinner's  hope.  Jesus  Christ,  in  His  propitiatory  work,  is  not  merely 
the  foundation,  but  the  only  foundation  of  a  sinner's  hope  toward  God.  The  mere 
mercy  of  God,  apart  from  the  mediation  of  Christ ;  their  comparative  goodness,  as 
not  being  so  bad  as  some  other  men  ;  then-  descent  from  godly  parents ;  their 
Christian  profession  ;  the  soundness  of  their  faith  and  the  orthodoxy  of  their 
creed  ;  their  many  prayers  and  their  great  charity — these  are  some  of  the  countless 
foundations  which  deluded  mortals  have  tried  on  which  to  build  their  hopes  for 
eternity.  What  are  they,  but  the  sandy  foundation  of  the  foolish  builder  ?  Not 
only  must  the  foundation  be  revealed  to  faith,  the  revelation  must  be  received  by 
faith,  in  order  to  have  this  hope  on  Him.  Every  man  must  have  faith  in  Christ 
before  he  can  have  this  hope  on  Him.  "  Christ  must  be  in  him  "  before  Christ  can 
be  to  him  "  the  hope  of  glory."  And  every  man  must  "  be  in  Christ "  ere  he  can 
have  or  exercise  this  hope  on  Christ.  III.  The  object  or  this  hope.  1.  Perfect 
likeness  to  Christ.  The  many  sons  whom  He  has  brought  unto  glory  shall  be 
perfectly  like  Him,  not  only  in  immortality,  but  also  in  moral  excellence  ;  not  only 
in  holiness,  but  also  in  happiness.  Their  minds,  like  His,  shall  be  fiUed  with 
heavenly  light ;  their  imaginations,  like  His,  shall  be  filled  with  heavenly  purity  ; 
their  wills,  like  His,  shall  be  filled  with  heavenly  righteousness  ;  their  consciences, 
like  His,  shall  be  filled  with  heavenly  peace  ;  their  hearts,  like  His,  shall  be  filled 
with  heavenly  love ;  and  their  bodies,  like  His,  shaU  be  clothed  with  heavenly  glory. 
2.  The  full  enjoyment  of  Christ.  We  shall  see  Him  in  aU  His  glory,  in  the  glory 
of  His  Father,  and  in  the  glory  of  all  the  holy  angels  with  Ham.  IV.  The 
INFLUENCE  OF  THIS  HOPE.  Everyman  having  this  hope  on  Christ  is  not  only  the 
subject  of  sanctification,  but  likewise  the  agent  of  its  progressive  advancement  in 
his  own  soul  and  life.  1.  This  hope  is  a  Christian  grace ;  and,  hke  every  Christian 
grace,  forms  part  of  sanctification,  and  contributes  to  its  increase  and  advancement 
to  perfection.  For  it  is  influenced  by  means  and  by  motives  felt,  by  arguments 
adduced,  by  examples  exhibited,  by  goodness  experienced,  and  by  promises  given 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

unto  us.  2.  This  hope  forms  an  essential  element  of  their  new  nature  ;  it  is  the 
constant  attendant  and  efficient  assistant  in  their  spiritual  life.  What  assistance 
does  it  give  to  them  in  its  course  ?  Is  the  Christian  life  compared  to  a  race  ?  This 
hope  casts  aside  every  incumbrance,  braces  every  limb,  strains  every  nerve,  and  puts 
forth  every  energy  to  reach  the  goal  and  gain  the  prize.  3.  This  hope  furnishes 
the  best  counteractive  of  the  adverse  and  conflicting  influences  of  the  world.  It  is 
the  ship's  best  ballast  during  the  voyage  of  life.  It  is  its  subject's  best  reminder  of 
what  he  is,  whither  he  is  going,  and  how  he  is  to  occupy  his  Lord's  talents  till  He 
comes.  4.  This  hope  is  the  chief  prompter  to  life's  activities,  in  whatever  state  its 
possessor  may  be  found.  For  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  knows,  delights  in, 
and  seeks  after,  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  which  is  our  sanctification.  He 
knows  also  that  indolence  and  inaction  are  among  the  chief  incentives  to  "  the 
pleasures  of  sin,"  which  are  contrary  to  the  will  of  God  and  inimical  to  our 
sanctification.  But  this  hope  which  he  has,  is  not  the  dead  hope  of  the  formalist, 
or  the  hypocrite,  nor  the  dying  hope  of  the  worldling,  but  the  Uvely  hope  of  the 
sons  of  God.  It  makes  them  all  aUve  to  God's  requnements,  and  lively  in  His 
service,  in  His  House,  in  His  cause,  and  in  His  kingdom  in  the  world.  V.  The 
PATTERN  OF  EVERY  MAN  HAVING  THIS  HOPE.  Christ  is  at  ouce  the  foundation  on 
which  he  builds  his  hope  for  eternity,  and  the  pattern  of  purity  he  imitates  in 
purifying  himself.  He  has  not  yet  attained,  neither  is  he  already  perfect.  But  it  is 
the  present  pursuit,  the  daily,  habitual  practice  of  every  man  having  this  hope :  he 
purifieth  himself,  and  he  will  continue  to  purify  himself,  as  certainly  as  he  will  hope, 
to  the  end ;  when  the  purifying  process  will  be  perfected,  and  the  conformity  to  the 
perfect  pattern  of  purity  will  be  complete.  1.  A  warning  to  sinners.  You  too  have  a 
hope.  Granted.  But  your  hope  is  not  "  this  hope,"  yourselves  being  judges.  It  is  of 
nature,  not  "through  grace."  Being  a  mere  natural  emotion,  it  is  subject  to 
incessant  fluctuation  and  sudden  extinction.  Your  hope,  besides,  exerts  a  baneful, 
corrupting  influence  over  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body.  It  blinds  the 
mind  to  the  truths,  the  promises,  and  blessings  of  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  alienates 
the  heart  from  the  life  of  God ;  and  by  stimulating  to  the  exclusive  pursuit  of  the 
things  of  the  world,  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  the  pleasures  of  sin,  the  whole 
faculties  and  feelings  of  the  inner  man  become  contracted,  corrupted,  and  defiled. 
And  if  the  influence  of  your  hope  be  so  baneful,  what  must  be  the  end  of  it  ?  The 
end  of  these  things  is  death — to  the  body,  and  to  the  soul.  2.  An  incentive  to 
saints.  Having  this  hope  on  Christ,  see  that  ye  purify  your  souls  in  obeying  the 
truth  through  the  Spirit,  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren.  The  Holy  Spirit, 
by  whom  this  hope  is  inspired,  that  dwelleth  in  you,  is  its  best  supporter  and  friend. 
Therefore  "  quench  not  the  Spirit."  Sin  is  the  greatest  enemy  -to  this  hope  and 
to  its  purifying  influence.  Therefore,  "  stand  in  awe  and  sin  not."  (Geo.  Robson.) 
The  purifying  influence  of  hope  : — That  is  a  very  remarkable  "  and  "  with  which  this 
verse  begins.  The  apostle  has  just  been  touching  the  very  heights  of  devout 
contemplation.  "  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  And  now 
without  a  pause,  and  linking  his  thoughts  together  by  a  simple  "  and,"  he  passes 
from  the  imaginable  splendours  of  the  beatific  vision  to  the  plainest  practical  talk. 
Mysticism  has  often  soared  so  high  above  the  earth  that  it  has  forgotten  to  preach 
righteousness,  and  therein  has  been  its  weak  point.  But  here  is  the  most  mystical 
teacher  of  the  New  Testament  insisting  on  plain  morality  as  vehemently  as  his  friend 
James  could  have  done.  The  combination  is  very  remarkable.  Like  the  eagle  he 
rises,  and  like  the  eagle,  with  the  impetus  gained  from  his  height,  he  drops  right 
down  on  the  earth  beneath  1  I.  If  we  are  to  be  pure,  we  must  purify  ourselves. 
There  are  two  ways  of  getting  like  Christ,  spoken  about  in  the  context.  One  is  the 
blessed  way,  that  is  more  appropriate  for  the  higher  heaven,  the  way  of  assimilation 
and  transformation — by  beholding  :  "  If  we  see  Him  "  we  shall  be  "  like  Him." 
That  is  the  blessed  method  of  the  heavens.  Ah !  but  even  here  on  earth  it  may  to 
some  extent  be  reaUsed.  Love  always  breeds  likeness.  And  there  is  such  a  thing, 
here  on  earth  and  now,  as  gazing  upon  Christ  with  an  intensity  of  affection  and 
simplicity  of  trust,  and  rapture  of  aspiration,  and  ardour  of  desire  which  shall 
transform  us  in  some  measure  unto  His  own  likeness.  But  the  law  of  our  Uves 
forbids  that  that  should  be  the  only  way  in  which  we  grow  like  Christ.  The  very 
word  "  purify  "  speaks  to  us  of  another  condition  ;  it  implies  impurity,  it  implies  a 
process  that  is  more  than  contemplation,  it  implies  the  reversal  of  existing 
conditions,  and  not  merely  the  growth  upwards  to  unattained  conditions.  And  so 
growth  is  not  all  that  Christian  men  need  ;  they  need  excision,  they  need  casting 
out  of  what  is  in  them  :  they  need  change  as  well  as  growth.     Then  there  is  the 


CHAP,  ra.]  I.  JOHN.  209 

other  consideration,  viz.,  if  there  is  to  be  this  purifying  it  must  be  done  by  myself. 
To  take  a  very  homely  illustration,  soap  and  water  wash  your  hands  clean,  and  what 
you  have  to  do  is  simply  to  rub  the  soap  and  water  on  to  the  hand,  and  bring  them 
into  contact  with  the  foulness.  And  so  when  God  comes  and  says,  "  Wash  you, 
make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings,  your  hands  are  full  of  blood," 
He  says  in  effect,  "  Take  the  cleansing  that  I  give  you  and  rub  it  in,  and  apply  it : 
and  your  flesh  will  become  as  the  flesh  of  a  little  child,  and  you  shall  be  clean." 
That  is  to  say,  the  very  deepest  word  about  Christian  eiJort  of  self -purifying  is  this — 
keep  close  to  Jesus  Christ.  You  cannot  sin  as  long  as  you  hold  His  hand.  11. 
This  purifying  of  oukselves  is  the  link  or  bridge  between  the  present  and  the 
FUTURE.  The  act  of  passing  from  the  limitations  and  conditions  of  this  transitory 
life  into  the  solemnities  and  gi-andeurs  of  that  future  does  not  alter  a  man's 
character,  though  it  may  intensify  it.  You  take  a  stick  and  thrust  it  into  water ; 
and  because  the  rays  of  light  pass  from  one  medium  to  another  of  a  different 
density,  they  are  refracted,  and  the  stick  seems  bent ;  but  you  take  the  human  life 
out  of  the  thick,  coarse  medium  of  earth  and  lift  it  up  into  the  pure  rarefied  air  of 
heaven,  and  there  is  no  refraction ;  it  runs  straight  on  1  The  given  direction 
continues ;  and  where'er  my  face  is  turned  when  I  die,  there  my  face  will  be  turned 
when  I  live  again.  Don't  you  fancy  that  there  is  any  magic  in  coffins,  and  graves, 
and  shrouds  to  make  men  different.  The  man  is  the  same  man  through  death  and 
beyond.  Death  wiU  take  a  great  many  veUs  off  men's  hearts.  It  will  reveal  to 
them  a  great  deal  that  they  do  not  know,  but  it  wUl  not  give  the  faculty  of  beholding 
the  glorified  Christ  in  such  fashion  as  that  the  beholding  will  mean  transformation. 
"  Every  eye  shaU  see  Him,"  but  it  is  conceivable  that  a  spirit  shall  be  so  immersed 
in  self-love  and  in  godlessness  that  the  vision  of  Christ  shall  be  repellent  and  not 
attractive  ;  shall  have  no  transforming  and  no  gladdening  power,  ni;  This  belf- 
CLEANSiNG  IS  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  HOPE.  There  is  nothing  that  makes  a  man  so 
down-hearted  in  his  work  of  self -improvement  as  the  constant  and  bitter  experience 
that  it  seems  to  be  all  of  no  use  ;  that  he  is  making  so  httle  progress.  Slowly  we 
manage  some  little  patient  self-improvement ;  gradually,  inch  by  inch  and  bit  by 
bit,  we  may  be  growing  better,  and  then  there  comes  some  gust  and  outburst 
of  temptation  ;  and  then  the  whole  painfuUy-reclaimed  soil  gets  covered  up  by  an 
avalanche  of  mud  and  stones,  that  we  have  to  remove  slowly,  barrow-load  by 
barrow-load.  To  such  moods  then  there  comes,  like  an  angel  from  heaven,  that 
holy,  blessed  message,  "  Cheer  up,  man  !  '  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see 
Hun  as  He  is.'  "  A  great  deal  of  the  rehgious  contemplation  of  a  future  state  is 
pure  sentimentality,  and  like  all  pure  sentimentahty  is  either  immoral  or  non- 
moral.  But  here  the  two  things  are  brought  into  clear  juxtaposition,  the  bright 
hope  of  heaven  and  the  hard  work  done  here  below.  Now,  is  that  what  the  gleam 
and  expectation  of  a  future  life  does  for  you  ?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  purify- 
ing power  of  hope : — A  great  hope,  a  great  duty,  a  great  example  are  here  put  before 
us.  I.  What  is  the  hope  ?  An  agnostic  would  say  there  is  none  ;  for  the  apostle 
plainly  teUs  us  that  though  "  we  are  now  the  children  of  God,  it  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be."  But  then  "  hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope;  for  what  a 
man  seeth,  why  does  he  yet  hope  for  ?  "  This  hope,  of  which  St.  John  teUs  us,  is 
set  on  Jesus  our  Lord.  It  is  not  the  hope  of  the  Pharisee,  trusting  in  himself  apart 
from  Christ.  It  is  not  the  hope  of  the  man  of  the  world,  who  considers  that  he  is 
no  worse  than  others,  though,  like  them,  he  does  neglect  Christ.  It  is  the  hope  of 
the  penitent  and  faithful  follower  of  Christ,  who  walks  by  faith  in  the  unseen 
Saviour,  and  casts  himself  for  pardon,  acceptance,  and  strength  on  Him.  And  this 
hope,  as  he  learns  it  in  Holy  Scripture  and  in  holy  living,  becomes  gradually  clear 
and  definite  to  him.  11.  Weu^t  a  duty  is  laid  upon  us  !  The  hope  is  so  glorious 
that  it  fires  us  to  seek  its  fulfilment.  It  is  a  long  and  difficult  task,  this  of  purifying 
ourselves.  In  many  of  us  it  needs  a  deep  thinking  on  old,  forgotten  ways.  In  aU 
of  us  the  field  to  be  cleansed  is  very  wide,  and  the  roots  of  the  vicious,  deadly  weeds 
are  far  down  below  the  surface.  How  much  it  means — to  purify  oneself !  There 
must  be  purity  of  heart,  but  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  aU  things,"  and  how  shall 
we  know  it  ?  There  must  be  purity  in  the  affections ;  but,  even  in  our  highest 
relationship,  we  are  prone  to  selfishness.  There  must  be  purity  for  our  body ;  but 
fleshly  lusts  keep  warring  against  the  soul.  There  must  be  purity  of  speech ;  but 
certain  companionships,  and  our  own  forgetfulness  of  God's  presence,  make  this 
very  difficult :  and  one  word  of  uncleanness  may  "  set  on  fire  the  whole  course  of 
nature"  in  us,  and  destroy  our  growth  in  grace.  There  must  be  purity  in  the  eye, 
turning  it   away  from  beholding  vanity ;  purity  in  the  ear,  casting  out  as  evil  th(» 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

filthy  communication  of  the  thoughtless  and  the  profligate  ;  purity  in  the  mind,  lest 
it  absorb  the  things  it  hears,  or  take  delight  in  the  writings  of  hell,  or  pervert  even 
holy  teaching  to  the  purposes  of  sin.  Yes,  and  there  must  be  purity  of  intention — " 
a  high  aim  in  dealing  with  all  men,  the  setting  of  a  guard  over  ourselves  when 
danger  is  near,  a  resolute  acting  on  that  Divine  and  comfortable  saying,  that  "  to 
the  pure  all  things  are  pure."  Oh,  may  we  all  go  forward  in  this  holy,  difficult, 
blessed  duty,  while  we  have  the  Light  to  walk  by,  and  the  Cross  to  be  our  guide  ! 
III.  And  remember,  once  more,  whose  Light  this  is,  and  whose  Cross.  It  is  His 
glorious  example  which  should  help  us  most — the  example  of  Him  who  died  for  us, 
who  liveth  for  us.  (G.  E.  Jelf,  M.A.)  The  lost  purity  restored  : — Let  us  see — I.  If  we 
CAN  FORM  A  FIT  CONCEPTION  OF  WHAT  PURITY  IS.  If  wc  refer  to  cxamplcs,  it  is  the 
character  of  angels  and  of  God — the  simplicity,  the  unstained  excellence,  the 
undimmed  radiance,  the  spotless  beauty.  Or  it  is  God,  as  represented  here  on 
earth,  in  the  sinless  and  perfect  life  of  Christ.  If  we  go  to  analogy,  purity  is,  in 
character,  what  transparency  is  in  crystal.  It  is  water  flowing,  unmixed  and  clear, 
from  the  mountain  spring.  Or  it  is  the  white  of  snow.  Or  it  is  the  clear  open 
heaven,  through  which  the  sparkling  stars  appear,  hidden  by  no  mist  of  obstruction. 
Or  it  is  the  pure  light  itself  in  which  they  shine.  A  pure  character  is  that,  in  mind, 
and  feeling,  and  spirit  of  Mfe,  which  aU  these  clear,  untarnished  symbols  of  nature, 
image,  in  their  lower  and  merely  sensible  sphere,  to  our  outward  eye.  Or,  if  we 
describe  purity  by  reference  to  contrasts,  then  it  is  a  character  opposite  to  all  sin, 
and  so  to  most  of  what  we  see  in  the  corrupted  character  of  mankind.  It  is 
innocent,  just  as  man  is  not.  It  is  incorrupt,  as  opposed  to  passion,  self-seeking, 
foul  imaginations,  base  desires,  enslaved  affections,  a  bad  conscience,  and  turbid 
currents  of  thought.  It  is  the  innocence  of  infancy  without  the  stain — that  inno- 
cence matured  into  the  spotless,  positive,  and  eternally-established  holiness  of  a 
responsible  manhood.  Or  we  may  set  forth  the  idea  of  purity  under  a  reference  to 
the  modes  of  causes.  In  the  natural  world,  as,  for  example,  in  the  heavens,  causes 
act  in  a  manner  that  is  unconfused  and  regular.  All  things  proceed  according  to 
their  law.  Hence  the  purity  of  the  firmament.  In  the  world  of  causes,  it  is  the 
scientific  ideal  of  purity  that  events  transpire  normally,  according  to  the  constitutive 
order  and  original  law  of  the  creation.  Or,  finally,  we  may  describe  purity  abso- 
lutely, as  it  is  when  viewed  in  its  own  positive  quality.  And  here  it  is  chastity  of 
soul,  that  state  of  the  spiritual  nature  in  which  it  is  seen  to  have  no  contacts  or 
affinities  but  such  as  fall  within  the  circle  of  unforbidden  joy  and  uncorrupted 
pleasure.  In  all  these  methods  we  make  so  many  distinct  approaches  to  the  true 
idea  of  spiritual  purity.  11.  Distant  as  the  character  is  from  anything  we  know  in 
this  sad  world  of  defilement  and  corrupted  life,  still  it  is  the  aim  and  purpose  of 
Christian  redemption  to  raise  us  up  into  the  state  of  complete  purity  before 
God.  The  call  of  the  Word  is,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the 
Lord  :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they 
be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  It  would  seem,  on  looking  at  the 
manifold  array  of  cleansing  elements,  applications,  gifts,  and  sacraments,  as  if  God 
had  undertaken  it  as  the  great  object  and  crowning  mercy  of  His  reign,  to  effect  a 
solemn  purgation  of  the  world.  But  a  question  rises  here  of  great  practical 
significance,  viz.,  whether,  by  a  due  improvement  of  the  means  offered  in  Christ,  or 
by  any  possible  faith  in  Him,  it  is  given  us  to  attain  to  a  state  which  can  fitly 
be  called  purity,  or  which  is  to  itself  a  state  consciously  pure  ?  To  this  I  answer 
both  "  Yes,"  and  "  No."  There  may  be  a  Christian  purity  that  is  related  to  the 
soul  as  investiture,  or  as  a  condition  superinduced,  which  is  not  of  it,  or  in  it,  as 
pertaining  to  its  own  quality  or  to  the  cast  of  its  own  habit.  The  point  may  be 
illustrated  by  a  supposition.  Let  a  man,  habitually  narrow  and  mean  in  his 
dispositions,  fall  into  the  society  of  a  great  and  powerful  nature  in  some  one 
distinguished  for  the  magnanimity  of  his  impulses.  Let  this  nobler  being  be 
accepted  as  his  friend,  trusted  in,  loved,  admired,  so  as  virtually  to  infold  and 
subordinate  the  mean  person,  as  long  as  he  is  with  him,  to  his  own  spirit.  This,  at 
least,  we  can  imagine,  whether  any  such  example  ever  occurred  or  not.  Now  it 
will  be  seen  that,  as  long  as  this  nobler  nature  is  side  by  side  with  the  other, 
it  becomes  a  kind  of  investiture,  clothes  it,  as  it  were,  with  its  own  impulses,  and 
even  puts  it  in  the  sense  of  magnanimity.  Consciously  now  the  mean  man  is  all 
magnanimous,  for  his  mean  thoughts  are,  by  the  supposition,  drunk  up  and  lost  in 
the  abysses  of  the  nobler  nature  he  clings  to.  He  is  magnanimous  by  investiture  ; 
that  is,  by  the  occupancy  of  another,  who  clothes  him  with  his  own  character.  But 
if  you  ask  what  he  is  in  his  own  personal  habit,  cast,  or  quality,  he   is   little 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  211 

different  possibly  from  what  he  was  before.  He  has  had  the  consciousness  waked 
up  in  him  of  a  generous  life  and  feeling,  which  is  indeed  a  great  boon  to  his  meagre 
nature,  and  if  he  could  be  kept  for  long  years  in  the  mould  of  this  superinduced 
character  he  would  be  gradually  assimilated  to  it.  But  if  the  better  nature  were  to 
be  soon  withdrawn  by  a  separation,  he  would  fall  back  into  the  native  meanness 
of  his  own  proper  person,  and  be  what  he  was  with  only  slight  modifications.  Now 
Christ,  in  His  glorious  and  Divine  purity,  is  that  better  nature,  which  has  power,  if 
we  believe  in  Him  with  a  total,  all-subjecting  faith,  to  invest  us  with  a  complete 
consciousness  of  purity — to  bring  every  thought  into  captivity  to  His  own  incorrup- 
tible order  and  chastity.  To  illustrate  how  far  it  is  possible  for  this  purifying  work 
to  go  on  in  the  present  life,  I  will  simply  say  that  the  very  currents  of  thought, 
as  it  is  propagated  in  the  mind,  may  become  so  purified  that,  when  the  will  does 
not  interfere,  and  the  mind  is  allowed,  for  an  hour,  to  run  in  its  own  way,  without 
hindrance,  one  thing  suggesting  another,  as  in  reverie,  there  may  yet  be  no  evil, 
wicked,  or  foul  suggestion  thrust  into  it.  Or  in  the  state  of  sleep,  where  the  will 
never  interferes,  but  the  thoughts  rush  on  by  a  law  of  their  own,  the  mixed  causes 
of  corruption  may  be  so  far  cleared  away,  and  the  soul  restored  to  such  simplicity 
and  pureness,  that  the  dreams  will  be  only  dreams  of  love  and  beauty — peaceful, 
and  clear,  and  happy ;  somewhat  as  we  may  imagine  the  waking  thoughts  of 
angels  to  be.  HI.  Having  this  view  of  Christ  and  His  gospel  as  the  plan  of  God 
for  restoring  men  to  a  complete  spiritual  purity,  seeing  that  He  invites  us  to  this, 
gives  us  means  and  aids  to  realise  this,  and  yields  to  them  that  truly  desire  it  a 
hope  so  high  as  this,  I  inquire  in  what  manner  we  may  promote  our  advance- 
ment   TOWARD  THE  STATE    OF    PURITY,  AND  FINALLY  HAVE    IT  IN  COMPLETE  REALISATION  ? 

And,  first  of  all,  we  must  set  our  heart  upon  it.  We  must  see  the  degradation, 
realise  the  bitterness,  confusion,  disorder,  instability,  and  conflict  of  a  mixed  state, 
where  all  the  causes  of  internal  action  are  thrown  out  of  God's  original  law.  We 
must  learn  to  conceive,  on  the  other  hand — and  what  can  be  more  diflicult  ? — the 
dignity,  the  beauty,  the  infinitely  peaceful  and  truly  Divine  elevation  of  a  pure  soul. 
St.  Francis  de  Sales  had  been  able,  in  his  knowledge  of  the  cloistered  men  and  the 
cloistered  life,  to  see  how  necessary  it  is  for  the  soul  to  be  aired  in  the  outward 
exposures  of  the  world  ;  and,  if  we  do  not  stop  to  question  the  facts  of  his  illustra- 
tions, no  one  has  spoken  of  this  necessity  with  greater  force  and  beauty  of  concep- 
tion. "  Many  persons  believe,"  he  says,  "  that  as  no  beast  dares  taste  the  seed  of  the 
herb  Pahna  Christi,  so  no  man  ought  to  aspire  to  the  palm  of  Christian  piety  as  long 
as  he  lives  in  the  bustle  of  temporal  affairs.  Now,  to  such  I  shall  prove  that,  as 
the  mother-pearl  fish  lives  in  the  sea  without  receiving  a  drop  of  salt  water,  and  as, 
toward  the  Chelidonian  Islands,  springs  of  fresh  water  may  be  found  in  the  midst 
of  the  sea,  and  as  the  fire-fly  passes  through  the  flames  without  burning  its  wings, 
so  a  vigorous  and  resolute  soul  may  live  in  the  world  without  being  infected  with 
any  of  its  humours,  may  discover  sweet  springs  of  piety  amidst  its  salt  waters,  and 
fly  among  the  flames  of  earthly  concupiscence  without  burning  the  wings  of  the  holy 
desires  of  a  devout  life."  Having  this  determined — that  he  who  will  purify  himself, 
as  Christ  is  pure,  must  live  in  the  world — then  one  thing  more  is  needed — viz.,  that 
we  live  in  Christ,  and  seek  to  be  as  closely  and  intimately  one  with  Him  as  possible. 
And  this  includes — First,  a  willingness  wholly  to  cease  from  the  old  man,  as 
corrupt,  in  order  that  a  completely  new  man  from  Christ  may  be  formed  in  you. 
Secondly,  the  life  must  be  determined  implicitly  by  the  faith  in  Christ.    IV.  Some 

OF    THE    SIGNS    BY   WHICH    OUR   GROWTH   IN   PURITY   MAY   BE    KNOWN.      FastidiOUSnCSS,  I 

will  first  of  aU  caution  you,  is  not  any  evidence  of  purity,  but  the  contrary.  No, 
the  true  signs  of  purity  are  these — That  we  abide  in  the  conscious  light  of  God, 
while  living  in  a  world  of  defilement,  and  know  Him  as  a  presence  manifested  in 
the  soul.  "Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  Purity  sees 
God.  A  good  conscience  signifies  the  same ;  for  the  conscience,  like  the  eye,  is 
troubled  by  any  speck  of  defilement  and  wrong  that  falls  into  it.  A  growing 
sensibility  to  sin  signifies  the  same ;  for,  if  the  conscience  grows  peacefid 
and  clear,  it  will  also  grow  tender  and  delicate.  If  you  are  more  able  to 
be  singular  and  think  less  of  the  opinions  of  men,  not  in  a  scornful  way, 
but  in  love,  that  again  shows  that  the  world's  law  is  loosing  its  power 
over  you,  and  your  devotion  to  God  is  growing  more  single  and  true.  Do 
you  find  that  passion  is  submitting  itself  to  the  gentle  reign  of  God  within 
you,  losing  its  heat  and  fierceness,  and  becoming  tamed  under  the  sweet  dominion 
of  Christian  love?  That  again  is  the  growth  of  purity.  {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
The  hope  of  future  glory  excites  to  holiness : — 1.  Is  it  possible  for  any  man  to  purify 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.vp.  m. 

himself  ?  Is  it  not  the  Spirit  of  God  that  must  work  in  us  "  both  to  will  and  to  do  "  ? 
To  this  I  answer,  that  we  must  distinguish  of  a  twofold  work  of  purification.  (1) 
The  first  is,  the  infusing  of  the  habit  of  purity  or  hohness  into  the  soul,  which  is 
done  in  regeneration  or  conversion  ;  and  in  this  respect  no  man  living  can  be  said 
to  purify  himself.  (2)  The  other  is  the  exercising  of  that  habit  or  grace  of  purity, 
which  a  man  received  in  conversion ;  by  the  acting  or  exercising  of  which  grace 
he  grows  actually  more  pure  and  holy.  And  in  this  respect  a  man  may  be  said  in 
some  sense  to  purify  himself,  yet  not  so  as  if  he  were  either  the  sole  or  the  prime 
agent  in  this  work.  2.  But  admitting  that  a  man  may  purify  himself  in  the  sense 
mentioned,  yet  can  he  do  it  to  that  degree  as  to  equal  the  purity  of  Christ  Himself  ? — 
to  "  purify  himself  even  as  He  is  pure  "  ?  To  this  I  answer,  that  "  even  as,"  denotes 
here  only  a  similitude  of  kind,  not  an  equahty  of  degree ;  that  is,  he  that  hopes  for 
glory,  gets  his  heart  purified  with  the  same  kind  of  holiness  that  is  in  Christ, 
though  he  neither  does  nor  can  reach  it  in  the  same  measure  of  perfection :  he  gets 
the  same  meekness,  the  same  spiritual-mindedness  and  love  to  the  Divine  precept?  ; 
that  is,  the  same  for  kind.  I.  What  is  implied  and  included  in  a  man's  purifying 
OF  himself,  here  spoken  of  in  the  text.  Now  that  which  a  man  is  to  remove 
and  to  purify  himself  from  is — 1.  The  power  of  sin.  (1)  Wherein  it  consists,  (a) 
A  most  serious  and  hearty  bewailing  of  all  the  past  acts  of  sin  by  a  continually 
renewed  repentance.  We  may  here  compare  the  soul  to  a  linen  cloth,  it  must  be 
first  washed  to  take  off  its  native  hue  and  colour,  and  to  make  it  white  ;  and  after- 
wards it  must  be  ever  and  anon  washed  to  preserve  and  to  keep  it  white.  In  Uke 
manner  the  soul  must  be  cleansed,  first  from  a  state  of  sin  by  a  converting  repentance, 
and  so  made  pure,  and  afterwards  by  a  daily  repentance  it  must  be  purged  from 
those  actual  stains  that  it  contracts,  and  so  be  kept  pure.  TUl  it  be  our  power  and 
privilege  not  to  sin,  it  is  still  our  duty  to  repent,  (b)  The  purifying  ourselves  from 
the  power  of  sin  consists  in  a  vigilant  prevention  of  the  acts  of  sin  for  the  future. 
If  we  would  keep  our  garment  clean  it  is  not  sufficient  to  wash  it  only,  unless  we 
have  also  a  continual  care  to  keep  it  from  trailing  in  the  dirt.  For  a  restraint  of 
ourselves  from  the  committing  of  sin  bereaves  the  power  of  sin  of  that  strength  that 
it  would  certainly  have  acquired  by  those  commissions.  While  a  beast  is  kept  in 
and  shut  up  he  still  retains  his  wild  nature  ;  but  when  he  breaks  out  and  gets  loose 
his  wildness  is  much  more  hurtful  and  outrageous.  Now,  for  the  keeping  of  sin 
from  an  actual  breaking  out,  a  man  should  observe  what  objects  and  occasions  are 
apt  to  draw  it  forth,  and  accordingly  avoid  them,  (c)  The  purifying  ourselves  from 
the  power  of  sin  consists  in  a  continual  mortifying  and  weakening  the  very  root 
and  principle  of  inherent  corruption.  Sin  is  not  only  a  scar,  or  a  sore,  cleaving  to 
one  part  or  member,  but  it  has  incorporated  itself  into  the  whole  man  (Job  xxv.  4). 
A  man  draws  so  much  filth  from  his  very  conception  and  nativity,  that  it  is  now 
made  almost  as  natural  and  essential  to  him  to  be  a  sinner  as  to  be  a  man.  Now 
the  chief  work  of  purification  hes  in  the  disabling  and  mortifying  this  sinful 
faculty.  The  power  of  godliness  must  be  brought  into  the  room  of  the  power  of 
Bin.  (2)  The  means  by  which  it  is  to  be  effected — (a)  The  first  is,  with  all  possible 
might  and  speed  to  oppose  the  very  first  rising  and  movings  of  the  heart  to  sin  ;  for 
these  are  the  buds  that  produce  that  bitter  fruit ;  and  if  sin  be  not  nipped  in  the 
very  bud,  it  is  not  imaginable  how  quickly  it  will  shoot  forth.  When  an  enemy  ia 
but  rising,  it  is  easy  to  knock  him  to  the  ground  again ;  but  when  he  is  up,  and 
stands  upon  his  legs,  he  is  not  then  so  easily  thrown  down.  (6)  A  second  way  to 
purify  ourselves  from  the  power  of  sin  is  to  be  frequent  in  severe  mortifying  duties, 
such  as  watchings  and  fastings,  the  use  of  which  directly  tends  to  weaken  the  very 
vitals  of  our  corruption.  For  they  are  most  properly  contrary  to  the  flesh  ;  and 
whatsoever  opposes  that  proportionably  weakens  sins.  Better  were  it  for  a  man  to 
restrain  an  unruly  appetite,  and  to  stint  himself  in  the  measures  of  his  very  food 
and  his  sleep,  than  by  a  full  indulgence  of  himself  in  these  to  pamper  up  his 
corruption,  and  give  it  strength  and  activity  to  cast  off  all  bonds,  till  at  length  it 
becomes  unconquerable,  (c)  A  third  way  to  purify  ourselves  from  the  power  of  sin 
is  to  be  frequent  and  fervent  in  prayer  to  God  for  fresh  supplies  of  sanctifying  grace. 
There  is  no  conquest  to  be  had  over  sin  but  by  grace,  nor  is  grace  any  way  so 
effectually  to  be  procured  as  by  prayer.  A  praying  heart  naturally  turns  into  a 
purified  heart.  2.  I  proceed  now  to  the  other  thing  from  which  we  are  to  purify 
ourselves,  and  that  is,  the  guilt  of  sin.  In  speaking  of  which  I  shall  show — (1) 
Negatively,  what  cannot  purify  us  from  the  guilt  of  sin.  (2)  Positively,  what  alone 
can.  (a)  For  the  first  of  these.  No  duty  or  work  within  the  power  and  performance 
of  man,  as  such,  is  able  to  expiate  and  take  away  the  guilt  of  sin.     In  this  matter 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  213 

we  must  put  our  hands  upon  our  mouths,  and  be  silent  for  ever.  (6)  In  the  next 
place  therefore  positively,  that  course  which  alone  is  able  to  purify  us  from  the  guilt 
of  sin,  is  by  applying  the  virtue  of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  the  soul  by  renewed  acts 
of  faith.  It  is  from  His  crucified  side  that  there  must  issue  both  blood  to  expiate 
and  water  to  cleanse  our  impieties.  Faith  also  is  said  to  purify  the  heart  (Acts 
XV.  9).  But  how?  Why  "certainly,  as  it  is  instrumental  to  bring  into  the  soul  that 
purifying  virtue  that  is  in  Christ.  Faith  purifies,  not  as  the  water  itself,  but  as  the 
conduit  that  conveys  the  water.  II.  How  the  hope  of  heaven  and  a  future  glory 
COMES  TO  have  SUCH  A  SOVEREIGN  INFLUENCE  UPON  THIS  WORK.  1.  First  upon  a  natural 
account ;  this  hope  purifies,  as  being  a  special  grace  infused  into  the  heart  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  in  its  nature  and  operation  directly  contrary  to  sin  :  as  heat  is  a 
quality  both  in  nature  and  working,  contrary  to  and  destructive  of  cold.  When 
leaven  is  cast  into  the  lump  it  presently  begins  to  work  and  to  ferment,  till  by 
degrees  it  has  thoroughly  changed  the  whole  mass.  In  like  manner  every  grace  will 
be  incessantly  working,  till  it  has  wrought  over  the  heart  to  its  own  likeness.  Now 
hope  is  one  of  the  principal  graces  of  the  Spirit,  so  that  we  have  it  marshalled  with 
faith  and  charity,  and  placed  immediately  after  faith  in  regard  of  the  method  of  its 
operation,  which  is  immediately  consequent  upon  that  of  faith.  For  what  faith 
looks  upon  as  present  in  the  promise,  that  hope  looks  upon  as  future  in  the  event. 
Faith  properly  views  the  promise,  hope  eyes  the  performance.  2.  The  hope  of  future 
glory  has  an  influence  upon  this  work  of  purifying  ourselves  upon  a  moral  account ; 
that  ■  is,  hy  suggesting  to  the  soul  such  arguments  as  have  in  them  a  persuasive 
■force  to  engage  it  in  this  work.  (1)  The  necessary  relation  that  this  work  has  to  the 
attainment  of  heaven,  as  the  use  of  the  means  to  the  acquisition  of  the  end.  (2)  It 
is  purity  alone  that  can  fit  and  qualify  the  soul  for  so  holy  a  place.  He  that  is 
clothed  in  filth  and  rags  is  not  a  fit  person  to  converse  and  live  in  a  court ;  nor  is 
there  any  one  who  designs  the  course  of  his  life  in  such  a  place  but  will  adorn  and 
dress  himself  accordingly.  (3)  The  obligation  of  gratitude.  If  I  expect  so  great  a  gift 
at  God's  hands  as  eternal  happiness,  even  humanity  and  reason  cannot  but  constrain 
me  to  pay  Him  at  least  a  temporary,  short  obedience.  For  shall  I  hope  to  be  saved 
by  Him  whom  I  strike  at  and  defy  ?  Or  can  I  expect  that  He  should  own  me  in  another 
world  when  I  reject,  despise,  and  trample  upon  His  commands  in  this  ?  (4)  Purity  is 
the  only  thing  that  can  evidence  to  us  our  right  and  interest  in  those  glorious  things 
that  we  profess  ourselves  to  hope  for.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  The  Chri&tiaiVs  hope  and  it$ 
fruits : — The  one  great  object  of  the  revelation  which  God  has  given  us,  is  to  make 
us  happy  in  making  us  holy.  To  this  end  every  part  of  revealed  truth  more  or 
less  directly  tends.  I.  The  Christian's  hope — what  it  is.  This  hope  is,  that  he 
shall  in  every  respect,  in  body  as  well  as  in  soul,  be  made  wholly  like  his  Saviour. 
Further,  observe  that  this  is  a  real  hope.  It  is  not  a  mere  wish,  a  doubtful  surmise, 
a  faint  desire ;  it  is  a  sure  and  certain  hope.  "  We  know  that  when  He  shall  appear 
we  shall  be  like  Him."  And,  let  me  add,  that  hope  implies  not  only  a  bare 
expectation,  but  expectation  accompanied  with  desire,  consequently,  if  the  great 
subject  of  his  hope  be  the  presence  of  Christ,  that  presence  is  what  the  Christian  will 
desire  above  all  things,  and  feel  to  be  the  perfection  of  happiness.  II.  The  effects 
OF  THIS  HOPE.  "Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as 
He  is  pure."  Now,  observe  in  this  the  implied  certainty  of  the  connection  between 
the  hope  of  the  Christian  and  the  life  of  the  Christian ;  between  the  sure  anticipa- 
tion of  glory  hereafter  and  holiness  here.  Here,  then,  are  two  points  we  have  to 
consider — the  extent  to  which  the  Christain  attains  purity,  and  how  far  the  work  of 
purification  is  his  own.  With  reference  to  the  first  point  the  meaning  manifestly 
is  not  that  the  Christian  is  even  now  actually  as  pure  as  Christ,  but  that  he 
endeavours  to  make  himself  so.  But  in  what  sense  is  this  work  his  own  ?  The 
Christian  does  not,  as  an  independent  agent,  purify  himself.  The  idea  is  absurd, 
and  involves  an  impossibility.  But  although  the  work  of  purification  is  God's,  we 
are  not  mere  machines,  nor  does  He  treat  us  as  such.  He  deals  with  us  as  with 
rational,  intelligent  beings,  capable  of  discerning  between  good  and  evil,  and  of 
choosing  for  ourselves.  (A.  Jenour,  M.A.)  The  Christianas  hope  and  its  results : 
— I.  The  OBJECT  of  a  Christian's  hope.  II.  The  foundation  of  these  hopes. 
"Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  The  foundations  of  such  high  expectations 
should  be  strongly  laid;  and  they  are  strongly  laid,  even  in  the  grace  of  God's 
adopting  love.  III.  What  is  the  practical  result  of  this  hope  within  a  beUever's 
heart  ?    It  is  equally  powerful  and  universal.     (R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  The 

great  hope  of  the  sons  of  God,  and  its  hijiuence  on  life  : — I.  The  great  hope  of  thb 
sons   of   God — "  To   be  like  Christ,"   and  that   implies   an  unbounded   progress 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

towards  perfection.  To  be  like  Christ  implies  two  things :  perfect  communion  with 
God,  as  the  blessedness  of  life ;  and  perfect  self-sacrifice,  as  the  law  of  life.  These 
were  the  two  great  features  of  Christ's  human  character :  to  have  them  is  our 
destiny;  to  have  them  is  to  be  perfect.  II.  Its  influence  on  life — "  He  that  hath 
this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  To  the  question,  How 
shall  I  realise  an  aim  so  glorious  ?  John  answers — Hope  for  it — and  the  hope  will 
gradually  become  the  means  of  fulfilling  itself.  1.  As  an  unconscious  influence. 
2.  As  a  safeguard  against  life's  temptations.     (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  The  purifying 

effect  of  hope  in  Christ : — I.  The  present  privileges  and  future  hope  of  the 
Christian.  1.  The  present  privilege  of  the  Christian  is  to  look  up  to  God  as  his 
Father.  2.  But  this  state  of  privilege  is  preparatory  to  something  still  higher, 
more  precious  and  valuable.  II.  In  whom  and  on  what  basis  is  he  permitted  to 
entertain  so  glorious  and  exalted  a  hope  ?  1.  He  has  this  hope  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord ;  in  God  who  hath  given  us  His  eternal  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our 
sins,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  obey  Him.  2.  His  hope  rests  upon  the  work 
of  Christ  upon  earth  and  His  glorification  in  heaven.  III.  The  effect  of  this 
hope  on  the  believer's  heart  and  life.  1.  This  hope  is  calculated  altogether  to 
ensure  his  sanctification,  to  cleanse  and  sublimate  his  soul.  2.  But  what  is  the 
effect  of  hope  in  bringing  about  this  purification  ?  Much  every  way.  The  hope  of 
the  Christian  is  altogether  calculated  to  elevate  the  soul  and  ennoble  the  character. 
Is  he  the  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  shall  he  not  prepare  himself  to 
take  possession  of  his  inheritance  ?  IV.  But  after  what  model  must  we  purify 
OURSELVES?  We  must  purify  ourselves  "even  as  He  is  pure."  He  must 
propose  to  himself  no  faulty  or  defective  pattern.  (H.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.) 
A  purifying  hope : — I.  The  first  thing  here  implied  is  incoeruption.  In  purity  or 
in  holiness  there  is  incorruption,  or  incorruptibility.  "Every  man  that  hath  this 
hope  "  has  a  knowledge  of  his  entire  corruption  and  depravity ;  and  he  consequently 
comes,  in  his  faith,  in  his  desires,  in  his  hope,  out  of  this,  and  his  hope  centres  in 
an  incorruptible  God.  He  has  an  incorruptible  religion ;  God  the  Father  appears 
in  His  incorruptibility  in  all  the  love  of  His  heart,  God  the  Son  appears  in  His 
incorruptibility,  God  the  Holy  Ghost  appears  in  His  incorruptibility.  We  shall  be 
invigorated  to  all  eternity  with  all  the  freshness  of  incorruptibility.  II.  Purity 
signifies  also  qualification.  "  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope,"  comes  out  of  his 
own  thoughts  into  God's  thoughts,  comes  out  of  his  own  sentiments  into  God's 
sentiments,  comes  out  of  his  own  ways  into  God's  ways ;  and  therefore  we  read  of 
a  man's  "  ceasing  from  his  own  wisdom."  What  is  the  whole  object  of  the  gospel 
towards  us  ?  Why,  to  make  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  concerning  us  ;  and  if  I 
know  the  mind  of  God  concerning  me,  that  what  He  has  done  is  for  me,  that  His 
Holy  Spirit  is  for  me,  that  His  testimony  in  the  Holy  Scripture  is  for  me,  why, 
being  of  one  mind  with  Him,  I  am  fit  to  live  with  God.  There  is  no  collision; 
there  is  perfect  harmony.  III.  Purity  also  supposes  right.  "  Every  man  that 
hath  this  hope"  comes  out  of  his  state  of  having  no  right  to  anything,  into  a  right 
and  title  to  the  things  of  eternity.  And  what  is  our  right  to  eternal  glory  ?  Why,  that 
question  may  be  answered  several  ways,  but  I  answer  it  in  these  few  words  :  our 
right  to  eternal  glory  is  the  authority  of  God.  IV.  Purity  supposes  also  llberty. 
iWhere  is  our  bondage  ?  In  sin.  Sin  is  our  bondage.  The  flesh,  the  law,  the  world 
— these  things  are  our  bondage.  But  holiness — purity — is  our  liberty.  Then 
"  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  "  comes  into  liberty.  Christ  having  led  captivity 
captive,  has  for  Himself  and  for  us  perfect  liberty.  What  is  to  hold  Him  ?  The 
law  is  established,  the  covenant  confirmed,  the  promises  Yea  and  Amen.  He  has 
dominion  over  all  worlds.  (James  Wells.)  The  pattern  of  purity : — 1.  The 
workman  is  "  every  one  that  hath  hope  in  Him,"  every  one  that  looks  to  be  like  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  the  kingdom  of  glory,  he  is  the  man  must  set  al)out  this  task.  2.  The 
work  is  a  work  to  be  wrought  by  himself ;  he  is  a  part  of  the  Lord's  husbandry,  and 
he  must  take  pains  as  it  were  to  plough  his  own  ground,  to  weed  his  own  corn,  he 
must  purify  himself;  this  is  the  work.  3.  The  pattern  by  which  he  must  be 
directed  is  the  pattern  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  purity.  I.  Tilat  a  man  that  is  care- 
less OF  purifying  himself,  that  man  must  have  no  hope.  Shall  we  encourage 
men  to  that  hope,  that  they  shall  carry  with  them  to  hell  ?  May  we  say,  thou 
mayest  hope  to  be  like  Christ  in  glory,  when  thou  dost  not  labour  to  be  like  Him  in 
purity  in  this  world  ?  We  should  betray  that  soul.  And  do  you  know,  this  is  the 
beginning  of  salvation.  When  a  man  hath  run  hitherto  in  a  naughty  course,  and 
now  comes  to  be  resolved  in  his  conscience,  that  if  he  continue  thus  he  shall  perish, 
I  say  the  revolving  of  his  conscience  that  way  is  the  beginning  of  his  conversion. 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  215 

II.  Whosoeveb  hopes  to  be  saved  must  set  himself  i]pon  this  work,  to  purify 
HIMSELF.  But  here  is  as  great  a  difficulty  as  the  other.  Doth  it  Me  in  the  power 
of  a  man  to  purify  himself?  That  is  the  work  of  God  (Psa.  li.  10).  You  must  not 
make  one  truth  of  God  to  destroy  another ;  therefore,  for  the  clearing  of  it,  consider 
what  the  apostle  writes  (Philip,  ii.  12).  God  doth  not  work  things  in  us  or  with  us, 
as  we  do  with  a  spade  or  a  shovel ;  that  is,  that  we  shall  be  mere  patients  only, 
but  He  works  with  us  suitably  to  the  reasonable  soul  He  hath  bestowed  upon  us. 
Though  principally  God,  yet  there  is  a  concurrence  between  God  and  thee ;  and 
this  is  grace,  when  thy  will  is  made  active  and  able  to  do  things,  that  now  the 
things  done  by  God's  grace  are  attributed  to  men.  How  may  it  be  done?  The 
examples  of  the  world  are  like  a  stream  that  carries  a  man  clean  out  of  the  way  of 
purity.  1.  Bemember  we  come  to  do  service  to  a  Father ;  that  is,  for  encourage- 
ment. 2.  No  means  in  the  world  so  effectual  as  when  a  man  would  go  to 
Christ  to  look  to  His  ordinances.  What  are  they  ?  His  word  and  His  sacraments. 
3.  Then  go  and  read  a  lecture  to  thyself  of  watchfulness.  What  it  is  to  watch, 
that  implies  when  a  man  is  in  great  danger  to  be  surprised,  that  all  is  untrusty 
within  him,  and  false  abroad  ;  then  reason,  I  had  need  of  a  strong  watch  of  every 
side ;  I  have  a  false  nature,  and  this  flesh  of  mine  is  ready  to  betray  me  into  the 
hands  of  the  world  and  of  the  devil ;  therefore  there  must  be  a  marvellous  strong 
guard.  III.  The  pattern  to  which  we  should  conform  ourselves.  The  glass 
we  should  imitate  is  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  as  He  is  pure.  It  is  not  meant  thou 
shouldst  ever  hope  to  be  as  pure  in  quantity.  "  As  "  is  not  a  note  of  quantity,  but  of 
quality — it  shows  a  likeness.  A  man  that  would  have  his  child  to  write  a  fair  hand, 
he  will  not  give  him  an  ill  copy  to  write  by,  but  as  fair  as  may  be,  though  there  be 
no  possibility  the  child  should  write  so  well  as  it.  So  we  cannot  possibly  attain  to 
that  purity  in  Christ,  yet  the  copy  must  be  fair.  Scholars,  if  they  will  have  an 
elegant  style,  they  set  the  best  orators  before  them.  Thus,  though  the  law  of 
God  be  perfect,  though  such  a  thing  as  a  man  is  not  able  to  fulfil,  yet  it  is  a  fit 
pattern ;  the  copy  must  be  fair,  that  I  may  mend  my  hand  by  it.  And  thus, 
if  we  go  on  following  our  pattern,  as  the  scholar's  hand,  by  practice,  mends 
every  day,  though  it  never  come  near  the  copy,  so  shall  we  grow  in  grace.  {R. 
Sihhes.)  The  influence  of  the  Christian  hope  on  the  Christian  character : — The 
apostle  is  here  speaking  of  true  Christians  only.  "  Now  are  we  the  sons 
of  God."  They  have  been  brought  into  closer  relationship  to  Him,  through 
repentance  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  They  have  received  the  grace  of 
adoption,  and  are  members  of  His  family.  Then  the  apostle  turns  our  thoughts 
from  the  true  Christian's  present  advantages  to  his  coming  blessedness.  They 
shall  see  their  Saviour  as  He  is.  Having  spoken  of  the  believer's  position  and 
prospects,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  state  a  third  great  matter — the  influence  which 
a  Christian's  expectation  for  the  future  should  have  on  his  consecration  for  the 
present.  The  confidence  that  he  will  one  day  be  with  Jesus,  the  confidence  that  he 
will  one  day  be  fully  like  to  Jesus — that  helps  to  make  him,  in  some  measure,  like 
to  Jesus,  even  on  this  side  the  grave.  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  Himpurifieth  him- 
self, even  as  He  is  pure.  Heaven  is  largely  unknown.  Eye  hath  not  seen  it,  heart 
hath  not  conceived  its  joys ;  but  enough  is  revealed  to  make  the  hope  of  being  there 
one  of  the  mightiest  agents  in  moulding  the  character  of  man,  even  in  this  mortal 
state.  What  we  shall  be  there  is  to  regulate  what  we  are  here.  There,  there  are 
harps  of  gold  and  songs  of  triumph  ;  there,  the  light  that  never  fades.  From  us  aU 
that  is  far  away;  far  from  us  in  point  of  time  and  place  and  character.  But  yet  it 
is  intended  by  God  to  work  upon  us  here  and  now.  Through  all  the  intervening 
space  that  heavenly  glory  is  to  stretch  forth  its  hand,  and  touch  our  souls  and 
transform  them  into  the  image  of  our  Lord  and  Master.  Let  me  in  the  next  place 
direct  your  attention  to  some  of  the  details  of  this  great  matter.  There  is  no  grace 
of  Christian  character,  to  be  acquired  here,  which  may  not  be  fostered  by  the 
thoughts  of  what  we  shall  have  there.  There  is  that  first  of  all  the  graces — Faith — 
the  foundation  stone  in  the  temple  of  Christian  character,  the  root  out  of  which  all 
other  fruits  of  the  Spirit  do  grow.  Maybe  some  of  you  have  sore  conflict  with 
doubts.  You  have  tried  many  expedients  without  being  satisfied.  Have  you  tried 
what  a  clearer  hope  of  heaven  will  do?  If  amidst  the  darkness  of  this  mortal 
state  you  can  yet  read  your  "  title  clear  to  mansions  in  the  skies,"  you  will  then 
remember  that  there  is  no  night  there ;  you  will  be  able  to  say  with  the  great- 
hearted Arnold  of  Eugby,  "  In  the  presence  of  an  admitted  mystery,  I  can  he  down 
as  calmly  and  contentedly  as  in  the  presence  of  a  perfectly  comprehended  truth." 
Next  to  faith,  the  apostle  Peter  mentions  courage.     Add  fortitude  to  your  faith. 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Because  he  is  a  soldier,  a  Christian  needs  to  be  brave.  There  will  be  no  cowards  in 
heaven ;  and  there  ought  to  be  none  in  the  visible  Church  below.  You  will 
remember  what  they  tell  of  Nelson,  when  he  had  cleared  his  deck  for  action  and 
was  about  to  enter  into  the  deadliest  struggle  with  "the  adversary.  "  Now,"  he 
Bays,  "now  for  Westminster  Abbey  or  the  peerage!"  He  looked  beyond  all  the 
darkness  and  danger  of  the  bloody  conflict.  "If  I  fall,"  said  he,  "they  will  bury 
me  among  the  noble  dead ;  if  I  survive,  they  will  give  me  a  place  among  the  noble 
living."  Therefore  had  he  no  fear.  Therefore  was  he  forgetful  of  perU.  The 
sight  of  the  future  glory  inspired  him  with  all  the  courage  the  occasion  required. 
Maybe  some  of  you  have  sadly  felt  your  lack  of  soldierly  courage.  You  have 
wanted  the  boldness  to  say  "no,"  when  asked  to  do  some  forbidden  thing;  or  if 
you  had  the  courage  to  say  "  no,"  you  had  not  the  courage  to  give  the  real  reasons 
for  so  baying.  It  is  in  the  latter  respect  that  so  many  fail.  I  am  sure  I  speak  to 
Bome  who  have  often  been  ashamed  of  their  shamefacedness  and  faithlessness. 
They  have  mouined  over  their  want  of  soldierly  fortitude,  and  have  longed  for 
more  of  the  heroic  spirit  that  could  dare  anything  for  Jesus'  sake.  Have  you  ever 
tried  the  power  of  a  clearer,  stronger  hope  of  heaven  ?  The  bravest  soldiers  of  the 
Cross  have  been  men  who  drew  their  inspiration  from  the  world  to  come.  Temper- 
ance is  a  grace  of  character  we  have  to  cultivate  in  this  life.  Some  of  you  are 
saddened  by  your  felt  want  of  this  Christian  moderation.  You  feel  a  constant  peril 
of  the  world  getting  too  much  power  over  you.  The  saints  of  God  have  tried  many 
remedies  for  this.  Simeon  Stylites  built  his  high  pillar,  and  lived  on  the  top  of  it 
for  thirty  years.  I  am  not  aware  that  his  worldly-mindedness  was  much 
diminished  by  it.  The  only  effective  cure  is  that  which  God's  Word  prescribes, 
"  Set  your  affections  on  things  above."  Until  you  get  the  other  world  into  its  right 
place  in  your  hearts,  you  will  never  keep  the  present  world  in  aU  due  subordination. 
The  starry  circle  of  Christian  graces  is  not  yet  complete.  There  must  be  patience, 
as  weU  as  temperance.  What  would  patience  be  if  it  had  no  hope  of  heaven  to 
sustain  it?  It  would  never  be  strong  enough  to  do  its  perfect  work.  It  would 
languish  and  die  in  many  a  heart.  It  was  never  before  the  mighty  thing  it  hath 
been  since  Christ  "  brought  hfe  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel." 
Some  of  you,  maybe,  have  heavy  burdens  to  carry,  and  you  long  to  carry  them 
more  like  Christ  carried  His  Cross — without  one  word  of  complaint,  without  one 
feeling  of  discontent.  Sometimes  your  greatest  trouble  is  that  you  cannot  bear 
your  troubles.  You  know  what  you  ought  to  do,  you  desire  to  do  it ;  but,  while  the 
spirit  is  willing,  the  flesh  is  weak.  You  must  try  this  expectation,  a  bright  hope  of 
heaven.  This  expectation  has  never  failed.  I  have  seen  an  aged  Christian  who 
has  toiled  through  many  a  weary  year  and  was  a  poor  man  stiU.  Age  and 
infirmity  had  weakened  his  efforts,  but  still  he  must  work  to  earn  his  daily 
bread.  Yet  have  I  seen  such  a  one  free  from  all  fretfulness  and  murmur- 
ing. He  had  hope  in  Christ ;  and  that  hope  did  soar  away  to  heaven,  and 
then  came  back  again  with  leaves  from  the  tree  of  life.  I  pass  by  other 
virtues  we  have  to  cultivate  to  speak  of  those  which  are  last  but  not  least  in  the 
apostle's  inventory  of  Christian  graces — brotherly  -  kindness  and  charity. 
Amidst  all  our  divisions  and  differences,  what  power  of  reconcihation 
there  is  in  the  thought :  We  go  to  the  same  home,  to  join  in  the  same  song, 
to  cast  our  crowns  at  the  feet  of  th«  same  Divine  Saviour !  (C.  Vince.) 
Hope  making  pure : — No  sacred  inspiration,  no  emancipating  impulse,  no  con- 
secrating motive,  no  uplifting  enthusiasm,  no  grand  ethical  or  spiritual  force  of 
any  sort,  can  spring  from  self -despite.  Good  is  not  born  of  evil  nor  of  the  mere 
contemplation  and  realisation  of  evil.  Convince  a  man  that  he  is  a  low  creature,  a 
mere  animal,  evolved  from  lower  types,  and  he  will  go  far  toward  proving  the 
doctrine  true.  Make  out  that  a  man  is  the  slave  of  circumstances,  the  victim  of 
base  necessity,  and  the  slave  of  circumstances  and  the  victim  of  base  necessity  will 
he  be.  Helpful  moral  ministry  lies  in  the  revelation  of  the  noble  and  divine  in 
man,  the  elements  of  worth,  the  germs,  the  potencies  of  good.  The  grand  charac- 
teristic of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  that  it  makes  a  man  feel  that  he  is  a  being 
of  capacity  and  worth,  one  whom  God  loves  and  cares  for,  desires  to  redeem  and 
save,  and  purposes  to  do  great  things  by,  counting  not  the  cost  the  process  of  His 
grace  involves.  It  sets  forth  the  ideal  I'clation  of  man  as  the  child  of  God.  What 
soul  but  recognises  this  as  the  highest,  deepest,  grandest  truth  concerning  it? 
What  so  accentuates  the  evil  into  which  men  have  actually  fallen  as  the  Ught  of 
this  sublime  truth  ?  And  what  so  brings  the  sense  of  shame  with  regard  to  evil  in 
ourselves  and  starts  the  reactions  of  repentance  and  resolve,  as  to  realise  from  what 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  217 

height  we  have  fallen  into  it,  what  better  purpose  our  sin  has  foiled,  and  with  what 
pain  and  grief  it  is  regarded  by  those  who  know  us  best  and  love  us  most !  This  is 
the  effect  of  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  soul.  It  reveals  the  man  to  him- 
self, shows  him  what  he  truly  is,  and  awakens  the  instincts  which  belong  to  his 
deepest  aflSnities  and  relations.  It  makes  him  feel  how  foreign  sin  is  to  his  real 
nature  and  life,  and  starts  the  yearning  after  goodness.  It  sets  the  child  of  God 
crying  out  unto  and  claiming  his  Father.  Nothing  is  so  terrible  as  the  theory — 
call  it  philosophy,  science,  rationalism,  agnosticism,  or  what  you  will — that  man  is 
abandoned  to  the  evil  into  which  he  has  fallen,  with  no  help  for  his  recovery.  This 
subverts  all  the  moral  principles  and  paralyses  all  the  moral  forces  of  a  life  and 
opens  the  way  for  all  manner  of  delusions,  sophistries,  subterfuges,  and  shams.  But 
that  is  a  grand,  Divine,  redeeming,  saving  religion  which  shows  man  that  he  is  a 
child  of  God,  awakens  the  instincts  of  this  relation,  and  leads  him  into  the  actual 
and  effectual  realisation  of  what  he  natively  and  ideally  is,  enabling  him  to  say, 
"Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  But  that  will  not  do  for  man  what  he 
needs  which  destroys  aspiration,  and  allows  to  settle  upon  him  the  dull  satisfaction 
of  a  fiuahty,  the  thought  that  he  has  attained  to  the  highest,  and  that  there  is  no 
grander  possibihty  and  idea  calling  to  him,  and  challenging  endeavour.  Man's 
true  life  is  one  of  progress  and  growth.  And  it  is  another  eminent  characteristic 
of  Christianity  that  it  meets  this  requirement.  It  sets  before  man  lofty  ideals. 
But  something  has  grown  certain  by  that  which  already  is.  We  know  that  our 
perfecting  must  come  in  our  religion,  not  out  of  it ;  in  our  Divine  sonship,  not 
out  of  it.  Oh,  the  sadness  of  those  whose  religion  has  failed  them,  or  who  have 
become  stolid  and  moribund  in  it,  to  whom  it  has  become  a  memory,  but  ceased 
to  be  a  hope,  and  whose  good  days  are  behind  them  !  Christianity,  where  it  has  a 
true  effect,  makes  us  know  that,  if  certain  influences  could  act  upon  us  completely, 
if  we  could  be  perfect  correlation  to  certain  forces,  the  result  would  translate  and 
fulfil  all  our  best  deshes.  It  is  the  nature  and  inevitable  effect  of  hope  to  train  the 
life  into  preparation  for  its  own  realisation,  and  to  purify  it  of  aU  that  is  incon- 
sistent therewith.  We  pitch  our  lives  at  the  height  of  the  good  we  anticipate. 
The  ideal  draws  us  into  itself.  Thus,  hope  is  the  beginning  of  its  own  fulfilment. 
Especially  is  this  the  case  if  the  hope  be  centred,  as  every  great  and  noble  hope 
must  be,  by  a  heart  of  living  personality,  and  the  looked-for  event  is  to  give  to  us, 
and  give  us  to,  not  only  somewhat,  but  some  one.  We  see  this  in  the  forecast  of 
and  preparation  for  the  great,  solemn,  tender,  and  sacred  relations  of  the  present 
life.  How  the  anticipation  of  these  lifts  up  the  life  to  their  plane !  Change  is 
impending  by  which  our  life  is  going  to  be  translated  from  the  present  scene  and 
setting,  with  their  poverty  and  hardness,  to  a  condition  of  affluence  and  advantage. 
How  we  set  our  hves  in  the  order  of  the  new  days  and  ways  !  We  say,  "  I  shall  do 
this  and  that  by  and  by,"  and  we  begin  to  do  this  and  that  now  ;  "  I  shall  have 
this  and  that  when  the  change  has  come,"  and  the  anticipation  already  moulds  our 
tastes  and  consciousness  ;  "  my  friend  Uves  thus  and  so,"  and  we  begin  to  Uve  like 
Him  with  whom  we  are  soon  to  be.  The  provincialisms  fall  off  from  us  as  we  con- 
template the  grand  capital  of  being.  The  prodigal,  through  all  his  homeward 
journey,  must  have  been  becoming  ever  more  and  more  a  son,  because  he  was  going 
to  his  father.  Hawthorne  has  given  profound  truth  pictorial  form  in  his  allegory 
of  "  The  Great  Stone  Face  :  "  The  young  man,  Ernest,  had  heard,  when  a  chUd, 
from  his  mother's  hps,  the  local  prophecy,  that  some  day  there  should  come  to  the 
valley  one  bearing  an  exact  resemblance  to  the  great  stone  face  which  they  could 
see  in  the  neighbouring  mountain,  and  being  the  greatest  and  noblest  personage  of 
the  time,  should  be  a  great  blessing  to  those  among  whom  he  lived ;  and  he  had 
taken  the  prophecy  more  seriously  than  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  valley.  As  he 
had  greater  faith,  he  had  the  power  of  seeing  more  clearly  than  his  neighbours  the 
grandeur  of  the  strange,  stony  outline,  and  so  the  prophecy  meant  more  to  him 
than  the  rest,  and  the  hope  of  its  fulfilment  entered  more  deeply  into  his  life.  Ever 
as  the  years  passed  that  hope  became  stronger  and  of  richer  meaning.  When  this 
one  and  that  one  came  to  the  valley  and  was  regarded  as  the  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy — Mr.  Gathergold,  the  millionaire ;  General  Blood  and  Thunder,  the 
military  hero;  Old  Stony  Phiz,  the  eminent  statesman;  and  the  poet,  whose 
■wondrous  songs  glorified  both  nature  and  humanity,  and  had  such  meaning  and 
charm  for  Ernest  himself,  his  hope  was  most  eager  and  rejoicing ;  but  he  was 
always  the  first  to  discover  that  the  prophecy  was  not  yet  fulfilled.  But  ever  as  the 
prophecy's  fulfilment  was  thus  deferred,  the  great  stone  face  seemed  to  whisper  to 
him,  "Fear  not,  Ernest ;  he  will  come."    As  he  thus  dearly  cherished  the  hope  of 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

the  great  man's  coming,  he  gave  himself  to  doing  good,  preparing  the  valley  for  the 
great  benefactor's  arrival,  doing  in  his  imperfect  way  what  he  thought  the  great 
one  who  would  fulfil  the  prophecy  would  do  in  his  better  way  when  he  came.  He 
learned  a  heavenly  wisdom  and  became  involuntarily  a  preacher,  the  pure  and  high 
simplicity  of  his  soul,  which  dropped  silently  in  good  deeds  from  his  hand,  flowing 
also  from  his  lips  in  words  of  truth,  so  that  the  people  came  to  him  with  their  needs 
and  troubles,  felt  in  his  presence  the  benignity  of  the  great  stone  face,  and  had  a 
greater  confidence  that  one  would  come  who  resembled  it,  until  at  length,  when 
Ernest  had  grown  old,  and  with  the  grey  about  his  face  like  the  mists  which  often 
hung  about  the  face  in  the  mountain,  the  people  saw  that  he  resembled  it.  His 
hope  had  configured  his  features,  even  as  the  character  of  which  they  were  the 
expression.  Arid  the  people  said,  "  The  man  resembling  the  great  stone  face  is 
with  us ;  "  but  Ernest  the  more  firmly  believed  that  a  wiser  and  better  than  him- 
self would  yet  appear.  Thus  is  it  ever  with  our  noblest  hopes.  Thus  is  it  with  the 
grandest  of  all  hopes — that  of  seeing  God.  All  grossness,  triviality,  selfishness, 
sordidness,  falsity,  scorn,  bitterness,  and  contempt  are  purged  from  the  heart  where 
such  hope  abides.  Pessimism  is  the  grave  of  heroism,  aspiration,  the  nurse  of 
noble  purpose  and  generous  ardour.  He  who  believes  the  worst  will  be,  will  be  his 
worst.  He  who  believes  the  best  will  be,  will  be  his  best.  And  he  who  hath  the 
hope  of  seeing  Christ  and  being  like  Him,  will  purify  himself  even  as  He  is  pure. 
The  life  that  is  pitched  only  at  temporal  ends  will  be  weak  in  its  ethics  and  liable 
to  allow  itself  large  licence  as  to  means.  But  when  one  has  attained  to  the  love  of 
the  highest  and  has  come  to  realise  that  "  the  highest  is  the  most  human  too,"  the 
soul  then  knows  that  it  belongs  to  the  highest  and  must  be  joined  to  the  highest, 
and  the  life  is  governed  by  sublime  attraction.  The  great  question  in  regard  to 
every  life  is.  Does  it  respond  to  the  highest,  does  it  cleave  to  the  best  ?  The  great 
Elder  Brother,  revealing  your  Divine  sonship,  making  possible  its  realisation, 
and  setting  before  you  the  glory  of  its  consummation,  claims  you  for  Himself, 
claims  you  for  the  Father  whom  He  reveals,  claims  you  for  the  life  for  which 
you  were  made.  {J.  W.  Earnshaw.)  The  Christian's  hope:— I.  A  Christian 
IS  DESCKIBED  BY  HIS  HOPE.  Hopc  is  a  spcclal  act  of  the  new  life,  and  an 
immediate  effect  of  our  regeneration.  The  animal  life  fits  us  to  live  here, 
but  the  spiritual  life  hath  another  aim  and  tendency ;  it  inclineth  and  disposeth 
us  to  look  after  the  world  to  come.  1.  The  nature  of  it.  It  is  a  certain  and 
desirous  expectation  of  the  promised  blessedness :  the  promise  is  the  ground  of 
it ;  for  hope  runneth  to  embrace  what  faith  has  discovered  in  the  promise  (Titus  i.  2). 

(1)  The  expectation  is  certain,  because  it  goeth  upon  the  same  grounds  that  faith 
doth,  the  infallibility  of  God's  promise,  backed  with  a  double  reason,  both  of  which 
do  strongly  work  upon  our  hope.  First,  the  goodness  of  Christ ;  He  would  never 
proselyte  us  to  a  religion  that  should  undo  us  in  this  world,  if  there  were  not  a 
suificient  recompense  appointed  for  us  in  another  world  (1  Cor.  xv.  19).  Secondly, 
the  simplicity,  and  faithful  and  open  plainness  which  Christ  ever  used ;  this  is 
pleaded  (John  xiv.  2).  (2)  The  expectation  is  earnest  and  desirous,  because  it  is  as 
great  a  good  as  human  nature  is  capable  of.  2.  The  necessity  of  this  hope,  which 
is  twofold — (1)  To  support  us  under  our  difficulties.  How  else  could  we  subsist 
under  the  manifold  troubles  of  the  present  life.  Oh,  how  would  a  Christian  be 
tossed  up  and  down,  and  dashed  against  the  rocks,  if  he  were  without  his  anchor  1 

(2)  To  quicken  our  diligence,  and  put  life  into  our  endeavours  and  resolutions,  that 
we  may  not  faint  in  the  way  to  heaven  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  All  the  world  is  led  by 
hope ;  it  is  the  great  principle  which  sets  every  one  a-work  in  his  vocation  and 
calling.  The  merchant  trades  in  hope,  the  husbandman  ploughs  in  hope,  and  the 
soldier  fights  in  hope.  So  what  sets  the  Christian  a-work,  notwithstanding  the 
difficulties  which  attend  his  service,  the  temptations  which  assault  his  constancy, 
the  calamities  which  attend  his  profession,  but  only  hope?  You  see  to  what  to 
turn  your  eye,  and  direct  your  pursuit ;  it  is  the  everlasting  fruition  of  the 
ever-blessed  God.  Secondly,  this  hope.  It  is  not  said  he  that  hath  hope  in  Him, 
but  he  that  hath  this  hope ;  it  is  not  a  sensual  enjoyment  which  is  propounded  as 
our  blessedness,  but  seeing  God  as  He  is,  and  being  like  Him ;  if  our  hearts  be  set 
upon  the  vision  and  likeness  of  God,  we  will  be  purifying  ourselves  more  and  more. 
It  is  not  a  sensual  paradise,  but  a  pure  sinless  state.  Thirdly,  this  hope  in  Him. 
If  we  expect  to  receive  it  from  God,  we  must  receive  it  upon  God's  terms,  and 
according  to  His  manner  of  promising  it.  Now  He  promiseth  it  not  absolutely,  but 
conditionally,  to  the  pure  and  holy,  and  to  none  else.  Fourthly,  observe  the 
quantity  of  the  proposition  ;  it  is   not  particular  nor  indefinite,  but  it  hath  an 


CHAP,  in.]  I,  JOHN.  219 

expression  of  universality  affixed  ;  every  man  that  hath  this  hope.  It  is  not  spoken 
of  some  eminent  saints,  who  shall  have  a  greater  degree  of  glory  than  the  ordinary 
sort  of  Christians,  but  of  all  who  have  any  interest  or  share  in  it.  11.  The  pubitt 
AND  LIKENESS  TO  Cheist,  WHICH  IS  THE  EFFECT  OF  THIS  HOPE.  1.  Here  is  an  act  doue 
on  the  believer's  part,  he  "purifieth  himself,"  or  a  serious  endeavour  of  purity  and 
holiness.  God  giveth  the  new  nature,  first  infuseth  the  habits  of  grace,  and  then 
exciteth  them;  and  being  renewed  and  excited  by  God,  we  set  ourselves  to  seek 
after  holiness  and  purity  in  heart  and  life.  2.  It  noteth  a  continued  act ;  it  is  not 
he  hath  purified,  but,  he  purifieth  himself ;  he  is  always  purifying,  making  it  his 
daily  work  to  clarify  and  refine  his  soul,  that  it  may  be  fit  for  the  vision  of  God, 
and  the  fruition  of  God.  3.  It  noteth  a  discriminating  act,  "  He  purifieth  himself." 
It  is  not  said,  should  purify  of  right,  dejure,  but  de  facto ;  he  is,  and  will  be  in  this 
work.  It  is  not  laid  down  here  by  way  of  precept,  or  as  a  rule  of  duty,  which  yet 
would  be  binding  upon  us,  but  as  an  evidence  and  mark  of  trial,  whereby  the  heirs 
of  promise  are  notified  and  distinguished  from  others.  4.  It  noteth  an  unlimited 
endeavour,  "He  purifieth  himself."  He  doth  not  say  from  what,  he  leaveth  it 
indefinitely,  because  he  would  include  all  sin,  and  exclude  none.  There  must  be 
an  endeavour  after  universal  purity.  If  you  will  have  me  descend  to  particulars, 
let  me  warn  you  of  two  things — first,  fleshly  lusts  (1  Peter  ii.  11) ;  and,  secondly, 
worldly  lusts  (Titus  ii.  12).  III.  I  now  come  to  the  connection  between  both 
THESE.  1.  You  may  take  notice  of  the  suitableness  of  our  heart  to  the  object,  or  the 
things  believed  and  hoped  for.  That  which  we  hope  for  is  conformity  to  Christ,  a 
pure  immaculate  state  of  bliss.  Men  are  as  their  hopes  are ;  if  they  pitch  on  carnal 
things,  they  are  carnal ;  if  upon  worldly  things,  they  are  worldly.  Our  affections 
assimilate  us  into  the  objects  they  fix  upon.  2.  It  is  the  condition  indispensably 
required  of  us ;  it  is  not  an  indifferent  thing  whether  we  will  be  holy,  yea  or  no,  but 
absolutely  necessary.  Heaven  is  the  portion  of  the  sanctified  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  (T. 
Manton,  D.D.)  The  practical  influence  of  the  believer^ s  hope  : — I.  The  standard 
OF  PURITY  IS  Christ.  1.  We  should  consider  Him  attentively  as  the  means  of 
elevating  our  views  of  holy  obedience  by  His  blessed  example,  and  of  stimulating  us 
to  seek  for  higher  attainments  in  grace  than  we  are  likely  to  find  by  our  very 
imperfect  knowledge  of  our  yet  imperfect  brethren.  2.  The  moral  sight,  like  the 
mariner's,  acquires  by  practice  an  almost  inconceivable  keenness ;  and  the  highest 
points  of  moral  beauty  in  the  temper  and  conduct  of  Jesus  are  only  visible  to  him 
who  looks  on  Him  and  His  perfections  continually  with  ardent  attachment,  with 
keen  and  steady  scrutiny,  and  with  holy  desire  to  follow  in  His  steps.  II.  The 
PRINCIPLES  OF  PURIFICATION  which  are  in  operation  in  the  Christian's  mind.  1.  A 
sense  of  the  love  and  mercy  of  God  in  this  dispensation  of  salvation.  2.  Filial 
affection  to  God,  as  having  become  His  child.  3.  The  expectation  of  the  promised 
blessing.  4.  The  spiritual  influence  by  which  his  belief  is  maintained.  III.  The 
RESULT  ACCOMPLISHED  in  the  bcliever's  mind.  1.  He  that  has  the  Christian  hope, 
obtains  a  purity  of  thought  and  intention.  2.  He  attains  to  the  purifying  of  his 
tempers  and  dispositions.  3.  He  attains  to  the  purifying  of  the  affections.  4.  He 
attains  to  purity  of  conversation  in  the  world,  and  of  intercourse  with  his  fellow- 
men.  5.  He  attains  to  purity  of  conscience.  {Edward  Craig,  M.A.)  The 
Christianas  hope: — I.  Its  objects.  1.  The  second  and  glorious  appearance  of 
Christ.  2.  Complete  resemblance  to  His  image.  3.  The  contemplation  of  His 
glory  and  the  enjoyment  of  His  love  as  the  means  of  perfecting  this 
resemblance.  11.  Its  certainty.  1.  Think  on  what  it  rests :  not  on  the  schemes 
of  men,  which  a  thousand  unforeseen  events,  and  even  the  failure  in  a  single 
instance  of  the  means  which  are  employed  to  accomplish  them,  may  render 
abortive ;  but  on  the  purposes  of  God  towards  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus — on 
the  determination  of  infinite  wisdom,  which  no  event  can  thwart.  2.  Think  of  the 
security  of  its  foundation :  this  is  the  work  and  the  grace  of  Christ.  3.  Think, 
again,  what  the  character  and  origin  of  this  hope  is.  It  is  the  hope  of  seeing 
Christ,  and  being  like  Him  ;  it  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  which  is  shed  abroad  in  the 
heart.  HI.  The  purifying  influence  of  this  hope.  1.  The  hope  of  Christ's 
appearance  must  have  a  purifying  effect  on  all  who  truly  possess  it,  because  without 
holiness  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  them  to  inherit  His  glory.  2.  The  very  nature 
and  object  of  this  hope  have  a  purifying  tendency.  Why  is  it  that  the  Christian 
longs  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  ?  Not  merely,  or  chiefly,  because 
then  he  shall  no  more  struggle  with  the  distresses,  or  toils,  or  sorrows  of  life ;  but 
because  then  his  grateful  affections  shall  flow  out  in  perpetual  streams  of  adoration 
and  obedience  towards  God  and  the  Lamb ;   not  checked,  as  at  present,  by  any 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

obstruction  of  temptation  and  sin.    And  can  the  love  and  dominion  of  sin  subsist 
in  union  with  such  a  hope  as  this?     (D.  Dickson,  D.D.)         Purification  by  hope  : — 
The  Christian  is  a  man  whose  main  possessions  lie  in  reversion.     Most  men  have  a 
hope,  but  his  is  a  peculiar  one ;  and  its  effect  is  special,  for  it  causes  him  to  purify 
himself.     I.  The  believee's  hope.     1.  It  is  the  hope  of  being  like  Jesias.     Perfect, 
glorious,    conqueror   over    sin,    death,    and  hell.      2.  It   is    based    upon   Divine 
love.     3.  It  arises  out  of  sonship.     4.  It  rests  upon  our  union  to  Jesus.     5.  It  is 
distinctly  hope  in  Him.    6.  It  is  the  hope  of  His  second  Advent.    II.  The  operation 
OF  THAT  hope.     1.  The  believer  purifies  himself  from — (1)  His  grosser  sins.    From 
evil  company,  &c.     (2)  His  secret  sins,  neglects,  imaginings,  desires,  murmurings, 
&c.     (3)  His  besetting  sins  of  heart,  temper,  body,  relationship,  &c.     (4)  His  relative 
sins  in  the  family,  the  shop,  the  church,  &c.    (5)  His  sins  arising  out  of  his  nationaUty, 
education,  profession,  &c.     (6)  His  sins  of  word,  thought,  action,  and  omission.     2. 
He  does  this  in  a  perfectly  natural  way.     (1)  By  getting  a  clear  notion  of  what  purity 
really  is.     (2)  By  keeping  a  tender  conscience,  and  bewailing  his  faults.     (3)  By 
having  an  eye  to  God  and  His  continual  presence.      (4)  By  making  others  hia 
beacons  or  examples.     (5)  By  hearing  rebukes  for  himself,  and  laying  them  to 
heart.     (6)  By  asking  the  Lord  to  search  him,  and  practising  self-examination.     (7) 
By  distinctly  and  vigorously  fighting  with  every  known  sin.     3.  He  sets  before  him 
Jesus  as  his  model.     (1)  Hence  he  does  not  cultivate  one  grace  only.     (2)  Hence  he 
is  never  afraid  of  being  too  precise.     (3)  Hence  he  is  simple,  natural,  and  uncon- 
strained.    (4)  Hence  he  is  evermore  aspiring  after  more  and  more  holiness.     HI. 
The  test  of  that  hope.    Actively,  personally,  prayerfully,  intensely,  continually, 
he  aims  at  the  purification  of  himself,  looking  to  God  for  aid.     [G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  Christianas  hope: — The  hope  of  the   Christian   is  ihe  one  worthy,  enduring 
hope  that  is  capable  of  lifting  man  above  the  earth  and  leading  him  to  heaven. 
For  all  earthly  and  human  ideals  are  too  near  the  man  to  last  him  more  than  a 
little  while.     No  sooner  does  he  propose  one  such  to  himself,  and  begin  to  mount 
toward  it,  than  it  begins  to  lose  its  excellence  as  he  draws  nigh  to  it,  and  soon  it  has 
no  power  to  hold  his  affections.     There  is  no  imaginable  state  that  he  cannot  so 
disenchant  except  heaven,  and  no  model  that  he  cannot  unidealise  except  the  Son 
of  God.     Therefore,  every  mere  earthly  hope  is  unworthy  to  rule  a  man,  and  if  he 
have  no  higher,  will  at  last  degrade  him ;  because  man  is  greater  than  any  earthly 
honour  he  can  aspire  to,  and  greater  than  the  world  he  lives  in,  and  greater  than  all . 
its  achievements  and  glories — yes,  greater  than  anything  except  God.     Here,  now, 
is  the  eternal  grandeur  of  Christ's  religion.    It  proposes  the  only  worthy  and  endur- 
ing hope  to  man.     It  says  to  you  and  to  me,  "  If  you  will  you  may  be  God-like,  for 
you  are  the  sons  of  God.    And  you  may  be  like  Him  if  you  will,  and  see  Him  as  He 
is."    This  is  the  way  to  the  stars.    And  Jesus,  our  Elder  Brother,  has  gone  before, 
and  opened  the  way  for  aspiring  man  to  follow.     Behold,  they  go  to  Him,  out  of 
every  nation.     One  by  one  they  shake  off  all  meaner  desires,  and  lay  all  meaner 
purposes  down,  and  as  they  climb  toward  Him  along  the  various  paths  of  suffering 
and  of  duty  their  hearts  are  filled  with  a  common  hope — to  be  like  Him,  and  see 
Him  as  He  is.     {Bp.  S.  S.  Hams.)        Parifying  power  of  hope : — In  the  moulding- 
room  of  an  iron  foundry  you  may  see  workmen  making  in  fine  sand  the  moulds  into 
which  the  molten  iron  will  be  poured  in  a  day  or  two.     It  is  delicate  work,  requiring 
care  and  skill.     Compared  with  it,  the  pouring  of  the  molten  iron  into  the  mould 
seems  very  easy.     But  it  is  not.     Air  bubbles  that  weaken  the  iron  are  more  dangerous 
than  a  wi-ong  pattern.     It  is  a  great  thing  to  get  a  good  ideal  of  life.     But  to  work 
out  the  ideal,  to  make  it  real,  to  get  the  work  just  like  the  perfect  pattern,  is  no  easy 
thing.     There  are  more  failures  from  the  want  of  faithfulness  and  skill  in  the  worker 
than  from  the  want  of  a  good  model  of  the  work  to  be  done.     Hope  has  a  purifying 
power.     1.  Because  it  knows  that  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.    2. 
Because  it  creates  an  atmosphere  of  life  that  is  death  to  personal  impurity.     3. 
Because  it  encourages  us  to  believe  that  the  work  of  our  being  made  like  Christ  will 
be  accomplished.    "  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concerneth  me."    4.  Because  we 
grow  like  those  we  ardently  love.     (Geo.  Cooper,  D.D.)         Christian  hope  influencing 
I  present  Christian  life : — There  is,  in  one  of  the  valleys  of  Perthshire,  a  tree  which 
I  sprang  up  on  the  rocky  side  of  a  little  brook,  where  there  was  no  kindly  soil  in 
!  which  it  could  spread  its  roots,  or  by  which  it  could  be  nourished.    For  a  long  time 
,  it  was  stunted  and  unhealthy,  but,  at  length,  by  what  may  be  called  a  wonderful 
vegetable  instinct,  it  has  sent  a  fibre  out  across  a  narrow  sheep-bridge,  which  was  close 
beside  it,  and  that  fixed  itself  in  the  rich  loam  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  streamlet, 
[whence  it  drew  sap  and  sustenance,  so  that  it  speedily  became  vigorous.   Now,  what 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  221 

\ 

that  tiny  bridge  was  to  the  tree,  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  is  to  the  believer.  The  \ 
Christian  life  on  earth  is  growing  in  an  unkindly  soil ;  and  if  it  could  find  no  better  \ 
nourishment  than  that  can  furnish  it  would  die ;  but,  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  \ 
God,  through  faith  in  the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  the  Lord,  it  sends  a  rootlet 
across  the  river  into  the  better  land,  and  draws  from  that  all  the  support  it  needs  to 
keep  it  fresh  and  healthy.  (W.  M.  Taylor.)  The  purifying  hope  : — Let  thy  hope 
of  heaven  moderate  thy  affections  to  earth.  You  that  look  for  so  much  in  another 
world  may  be  very  well  content  with  a  little  in  this.  Nothing  more  unbecomes  a 
heavenly  hope  than  an  earthly  heart.  You  would  think  it  an  unseemly  thing  to  see 
some  rich  man,  that  hath  a  vast  estate,  among  the  poor  gleaners  in  harvest  time,  as 
busy  to  pick  up  the  ears  of  corn  that  are  left  in  the  field  as  the  most  miserable  beggar 
in  the  company.  Oh,  how  all  the  world  would  cry  shame  of  such  a  sordid  man ! 
Well,  Christian,  be  not  angry  if  I  tell  thee  that  thou  dost  a  more  shameful  thing  by 
far,  if  thou,  who  pretendest  to  hope  for  heaven,  be  as  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  this 
world's  trash  as  the  poor  carnal  wretch  is  who  expects  no  portion  but  what  God  hath 
left  him  to  pick  up  in  the  field  of  this  world.  Certainly  thy  hope  is  either  false,  or 
at  best  very  little.  The  higher  the  summer  sun  mounts  above  the  horizon,  the 
more  force  it  bears  to  clear  and  heat  the  air  with  his  beams ;  and  if  thy  hope  of 
salvation  were  advanced  to  any  ordinary  height  in  thy  soul,  it  would  scatter  these 
inordinate  desires  after  this  world,  with  which  now  thou  art  choked  up,  and  put  thee 
into  a  greater  heat  of  affection  after  heaven.     (Christian  Treasury.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Whosoever  committeth  sin  transgresseth  also  the  law. — Sin  : — I.  A 

GENEKAi  ACCOUNT  OE  DECLARATION  concemiug  "  Whosoever  committeth  sin."  What 
such  an  one  doeth.  "  He  transgresseth  the  law."  By  the  law  is  here  to  be  under- 
stood the  law  of  God,  in  and  by  which  He  hath  commanded  perfect  obedience  to 
every  precept  of  it.  Which  law  is  as  immutable  as  the  nature  and  wiU  of  God :  it 
can  no  more  change  than  God  Himself.  11.  What  sin  is  in  its  consequences  : 
even  in  any,  in  the  least  act  of  it ;  yea,  in  any  act  of  it :  "  Sin  is  the  transgression 
of  the  law."  It  is  therefore  most  carefully  to  be  avoided.  Sin  in  its  nature  and 
quality,  matter  and  manner,  may  seemingly  to  us  be  more  or  less  sinful ;  yet  it  is 
one  and  the  same  as  to  the  essence  of  it.  Herein  it  is  we  are  ourselves  so  often 
deceived  and  overcome  by  it.  K  we  can  dish  up  the  sin  we  are  in  our  own  persons 
most  inclined  to,  so  as  to  have  the  gross  parts  of  it  so  refined  as  to  render  it  pala- 
table, and  that  it  may  go  down  glibe,  we  are  then  able  to  act  the  same  ;  yet  as  the 
nature  of  sin  cannot  be  changed,  so  it  is  not  the  less  pernicious,  because  we  have  so 
contrived  as  to  swallow  it  most  easily.  It  is  in  many  instances  so  much  the  more 
poisonous.  Sin  is  Mke  a  poisonous  plant.  The  root,  the  leaves,  the  every  part  is 
fuU  of  it.  Be  it  weaker  or  stronger  in  any  part  of  it,  yet  it  diffuses  itself  ia  and 
throughout  the  whole.  There  is  the  nature  of  sin  in  every  act  of  it :  and  this  more 
than  we  can,  or  ever  shall  be  able  to  comprehend.  IH.  The  antidote  these  saints 
HAD,  which  was  all-suflScient  to  bear  up  their  minds,  and  lift  up  their  hearts  with 
holy  confidence,  above  and  beyond  the  law,  sin,  and  its  curse.  "  And  ye  know 
that  He  was  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins ;  and  in  Him  is  no  sin."  {E,  S. 
Pierce.)  Sin  the  transgression  of  the  law  : — I.  Show  that  all  mankind  is  under 
the  law  of  God,  which  still  remaineth  in  force  as  an  inviolable  rule  of 
RIGHTEOUSNESS.  1.  That  man  is  God's  creature,  and  therefore  His  subject.  The 
subjection  of  man  to  God  is  buUt  upon  his  absolute  dependence  upon  God,  both  as 
to  creation  and  preservation.  2.  Man  being  God's  subject,  hath  a  certain  law  given 
to  him,  which  doth  require  obedience  from  him,  and  doth  determine  his  duty, 
particularly  wherein  it  shall  consist  (Micah  vi.  8).  3.  Man  being  under  a  law, 
Bhould  be  very  tender  of  breaking  or  disobeying  it,  for  God  never  dispenseth  with  it, 
as  it  is  purely  moral,  and  standeth  much  upon  keeping  up  His  legislative  authority ; 
which  may  appear  by  these  considerations — (1)  If  man  could  have  kept  it,  he  would 
have  gotten  life  by  it ;  that  was  God's  first  intention ;  and  the  reason  why  it 
Bucceeded  not  was  through  our  sin.  (2)  In  that  God  would  not  release  the  penalty 
of  ttie  law,  nor  pardon  any  sin  against  it  without  satisfaction  first  made  by  the  blood 
of  Christ;  the  law  is  both  the  rule  of  our  duty  and  God's  judgment;  it  showeth 
what  is  due  from  us  to  God,  and  also  what  is  due  from  God  to  us  in  case  of  dis- 
obedience. (3)  Before  man  can  have  actual  benefit  by  this  satisfaction,  he  must 
consent  to  return  to  the  duty  of  the  law,  and  live  in  obedience  to  God  (Acts  xxvi.  18). 
(4)  Christ  merited  regeneration,  or  the  spirit  of  holiness,  that  all  new  creatures 
might  voluntarily  keep  this  law,  though  not  in  absolute  perfection,  yet  in  sincere 
obedience  (Titus  iii  5,  6).     (5)  The  more  we  keep  this  law,  the  more  pleasing  we 


223  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

are  to  God,  and  the  more  communion  we  have  with  Christ.  (6)  That  we  cannot 
have  full  communion  with  God  till  we  are  perfectly  conformed  to  His  law ;  for  we 
are  not  introduced  into  the  heavenly  glory  till  we  are  perfect  and  complete  in  holi- 
ness (Eph.  V.  27).  (7)  That  the  law  is  the  rule  of  all  God's  judgments  in  the  world, 
and  His  righteous  process,  whether  against  nations  or  persons  (Rom.  i.  18).  (8)  That 
He  will  not  spare  His  own  children  when  they  transgress  it  by  heinous  sins  (Prov.  xi.  31). 
(9)  That  Christ  came  not  to  dissolve  our  obligation  to  God,  or  ever  intended  it,  but  to 
promote  it  rather.  II.  The  nature  and  heinousness  of  sin  is  to  be  determined  by  a 
•  contrariety  or  want  of  conformity  to  this  law  ;  for  sin  presupposeth  a  law  and  law- 
giver, and  a  debt  of  subjection  lying  upon  us.  1.  By  omitting  what  is  commanded  as 
a  duty  to  God  or  man  ;  as  suppose  invocation  of  God  (Jer.  x.  25).  2.  By  committing 
what  God  hath  forbidden,  or  breaking  through  the  restraints  God  hath  laid  upoa 
us,  in  worshipping  idols,  or  satisfying  our  revenge,  or  fulfilling  our  lusts.  III.  That 
those  that  live  in  sin,  OB  any  allowed  breach  op  this  law,  are  still  under  the 

CURSE  OF  IT,  AND  CANNOT  LOOK  UPON  THEMSELVES  AS  God's   ADOPTED   CHILDREN.       1.    It 

is  certain  that  when  we  come  to  take  the  law  out  of  the  hand  of  a  redeemer,  we  are 
all  sinners  and  transgressors  before  God.  2.  Though  God  findeth  us  sinners,  and 
we  apprehend  ourselves  to  be  so,  yet  when  He  taketh  us  into  His  famUy  He  doth 
not  leave  us  so ;  but  on  God's  part  regeneration  maketh  way  for  adoption 
(John  i.  12,  13).  3.  None  are  so  exact  with  God  in  the  obedience  of  His  law 
but  that  still  they  need  the  same  grace  that  brought  them  into  the  family  to  keep 
them  in  the  family,  and  to  pardon  their  daily  failings.  4.  Though  God's  adopted 
children  may  through  infirmity  break  His  law,  yet  there  is  a  manifest  difference 
between  them  and  others  that  live  in  a  state  of  sin,  either  in  enmity  to  godliness, 
or  in  a  course  of  vanity,  sensuality,  or  any  kind  of  rebellion  against  God,  rejecting 
His  counsels,  calls,  and  mercies,  which  should  reclaim  them.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
Nature  of  sin : — I.  What  law  the  apostle  mentions  in  the  text.  There  is  no 
reason  to  think  that  He  means  any  law  given  to  Adam,  or  to  Noah,  or  any  law 
given  by  Moses,  except  the  moral  law,  which  is  founded  in  the  reason  of  things,  and 
is  of  perpetual  obligation.  This  He  calls  the  law,  in  distinction  from  all  positive 
laws  and  particular  precepts.  By  the  law,  therefore,  he  means  the  first  supreme 
and  universal  law  of  God's  moral  kingdom,  which  is  binding  upon  all  rational  and 
accountable  creatures.  H.  What  this  moral  law,  which  is  binding  upon  all  man» 
KIND,  requires.  It  Certainly  requires  something  that  is  reasonable,  because  it  is 
founded  in  reason.  Our  Saviour  perfectly  understood  the  true  import  and  perpetual 
obligation  of  the  law,  and  came  to  fulfil  and  magnify  it.  There  are  but  two  things 
really  valuable  and  desirable  in  their  own  nature.  One  is  happiness,  and  the  other 
is  holiness.  Happiness  is  valuable  and  desirable  in  its  own  nature,  or  for  what  it 
is  in  itself.  And  holiness  is  valuable  and  desirable  in  its  own  nature,  or  for  what 
it  is  in  itself.  The  moral  law  therefore  which  is  founded  in  the  nature  of  things, 
requires  men  to  love  and  seek  hohness  and  happiness  for  themselves  and  others.  It 
requires  them  to  love  and  seek  the  holiness  and  blessedness  of  God  supremely ; 
because  He  is  supremely  great  and  good.  And  it  requires  men  to  love  and  seek 
one  another's  holiness  and  happiness  as  their  own.  And  when  they  exercise  such 
disinterested  love  to  God  and  man,  they  fulfil  the  law,  or  do  aU  that  the  law  requires 
them  to  do.  III.  What  it  forbids.  Every  law  has  both  a  precept  and  prohibition. 
It  forbids  whatever  is  directly  contrary  to  what  it  requires,  and  requires  whatever  is 
directly  contrary  to  what  it  forbids.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  under  the 
last  head  that  the  Divine  law  requires  disinterested  love  to  God  and  man ;  and 
from  this  we  may  justly  conclude  that  it  forbids  whatever  is  directly  contrary  to 
disinterested  love  to  God  and  man.  Improvement:  1.  If  the  transgression  of  the 
Divine  law  consists  in  positive  selfishness,  then  it  does  not  consist  in  a  mere  want 
of  conformity  to  it.  2.  If  the  Divine  law  requires  pure,  disinterested  love,  and 
forbids  selfishness,  then  every  free,  voluntary  exercise  of  the  heart  is  either  an  act 
of  obedience  or  disobedience  of  the  law  of  God.  3.  If  every  selfish  exercise  be  a 
transgression  of  the  law,  then  those  are  under  a  deep  deception  who  imagine 
that  they  have  no  sin.  4.  If  every  selfish  exercise  is  a  transgression  of  the  law,  and 
every  transgression  of  the  law  is  sin,  then  every  sin  deserves  God's  wrath  and  curse, 
both  in  this  life  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.  5.  If  the  law  of  God  forbids  all 
selfish  and  sinful  affections  upon  pain  of  eternal  death,  then  mankind  are  all  natu- 
rally in  a  very  guilty  and  wretched  condition.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  evil  of 
sin: — 1.  There  is  folly  in  it,  as  it  is  a  deviation  from  the  best  rule  which  the  Divine 
wisdom  hath  given  unto  us.  They  who  reject  that  which  is  able  to  make  them 
'^ise  to  salvation,  that  in  which  all  true  wisdom  consisteth,  how  can  they  be  wise 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  223 

men  ?  Every  soul  in  hell  is  brought  there  by  sinful  folly.  2.  Laws  are  not  only 
rules  to  direct,  but  have  a  binding  force  from  the  authority  of  the  lawgiver.  God 
doth  not  only  give  us  counsel  as  a  friend,  but  commands  as  a  sovereign.  Therefore 
the  second  notion  whereby  the  evil  of  sin  is  set  forth  is  that  of  disobedience  and 
rebellion ;  and  so  it  is  a  great  injury  done  to  God,  because  it  is  a  contempt  of  God's 
authority.  3.  It  is  shameful  ingratitude.  Man  is  God's  beneficiary,  from  whom 
he  hath  received  life  and  being,  and  all  things,  and  is  therefore  bound  to  love  and 
serve  Him  according  to  His  declared  will.  4.  It  is  a  disowning  of  God's  propriety 
in  us,  as  if  we  were  not  His  own,  and  God  had  not  power  to  do  with  His  own  as  He 
pleaseth.  It  robbeth  God  of  His  propriety.  If  we  consider  His  natural  right,  so  sin 
is  such  an  injury  and  wrong  to  God  as  theft  and  robbery.  If  we  consider  our  own 
covenant  by  which  we  voluntarily  own  God's  right  and  property  in  us,  so  it  is  breach 
of  vows.  If  we  consider  this  covenant  as  being  made  in  a  way  of  devoting  and 
consecrating  of  ourselves  from  a  common  to  a  holy  use,  so  it  is  sacrilege ;  all  which 
aggravate  sin,  and  should  make  it  more  odious  to  our  thoughts.  5.  It  is  a  con- 
tempt of  God's  holiness  and  purity,  as  if  He  were  indifferent  to  good  and  evil,  and 
stood  not  upon  His  law,  whether  men  broke  it  or  kept  it,  and  would  not  call  them 
to  an  account,  and  judge  them  for  it.  Whereas  God  standeth  punctually  and  pre- 
cisely upon  His  law ;  the  least  point  is  dearer  unto  Him  than  all  the  world  in  some 
sense  (Matt.  v.  18).  6.  It  is  a  denial  of  the  go,Qdness  of  God,  as  if  He  were  envious 
of  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  mankind,  as  if  He  had  planted  in  us  desires  which 
He  would  not  have  satisfied,  only  to  vex  and  torment  us,  and  had  fettered  us  un- 
reasonably, and  His  commands  were  grevious  and  His  yoke  intolerable ;  yea, 
ensnared  us  by  keeping  us  from  that  which  is  good  and  comfortable  for  us.  7.  It  is 
a  depreciation  and  contempt  of  God's  glorious  majesty.  What  else  shall  we  make 
of  a  plain  contest  with  Him,  and  a  flat  contradiction  to  His  holy  will  ?  8.  It  is  a 
questioning,  if  not  a  flat  denial,  of  God's  omnisciency  and  omnipresence,  as  if  He 
did  not  see  or  regard  the  actions  of  men,  since  we  dare  do  that  in  the  presence  of 
God  which  we  would  scarce  do  before  a  little  child.  9.  It  is  the  violation  of  a  law 
which  is  holy,  just,  and  good.  The  matter  of  it  reeommendeth  itself  to  our  con- 
sciences, as  tending  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  conducing  to  preserve  the  rectitude  of 
our  natures.  10.  It  is  a  disorder  in  nature,  or  a  breach  in  the  moral  order  and 
harmony  of  the  world,  whilst  man,  the  most  excellent  of  all  visible  creatures,  is  so 
perverted  and  depiaved,  like  the  chief  string  to  an  instrument  broken  and  out  of 
tune.  11.  It  is  a  disbelief  of  the  promises  and  threatenings  wherewith  the  law  is 
enforced ;  for  in  the  law,  besides  the  precept,  there  is  a  sanction  by  penalties  and 
rewards.  12.  It  is  a  slighting  of  all  those  providences  by  which  He  would  confirm 
and  back  His  law.  The  Lord  knoweth  how  apt  we  are  to  be  guided  by  present 
sense.  So  aU  those  ehastisings  by  which  God  will  show  us  the  bitter  fruit  of  sin 
(Jer.  ii.  19).  13.  It  is  a  contempt  of  all  those  means  by  which  God  useth  to  enforce 
His  laws  and  quicken  the  sense  of  our  duty  upon  our  hearts  ;  such  are  the  strivings 
and  pressing  motions  of  His  Spirit  (Gen.  vi.  3).  14.  The  slenderness  of  the  tempta- 
tion that  irritates  us  to  break  the  laws  of  God  doth  also  show  the  malignity  of  sin  ; 
for  what  is  it  but  the  pleasing  of  the  carnal  faculty  (James  i.  14).    Practical  lessons : 

1.  We  see  hence  the  folly  of  them  who  make  a  mock  and  sport  of  sin  (Prov.  xiv.  9). 

2.  It  showeth  the  folly  of  those  that  do  not  only  make  a  light  reckoning  of  sin 
themselves,  but  think  also  that  God  makes  little  account  of  it.  3.  How  just  is  God 
in  appointing  eternal  punishment  as  the  fruit  and  reward  of  sin.  4.  If  all  sin  be  so 
odious,  how  much  more  a  Ufe  of  sin  !  5.  The  necessity  of  entering  into  the  gospel- 
covenant.  Now  this  is  done  by  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  6.  The  necessity  of  persevering  in  the  gospel-estate  by  new  obedience,  and  a 
continual  dependence  on  the  grace  of  the  Kedeemer.  7.  What  reason  we  have  to 
submit  to  the  sharpest  providences  which  God  in  His  corrective  discipline  puts  us 
under  (Isa.  xxvii.  9).  8.  That  a  renewed  heart  should  be  affected,  not  only  with  the 
evil  after  sin,  but  with  the  evil  in  sin ;  for  to  persuade  God's  children  to  a  conformity 
to  their  Father,  he  urgeth  this  argument,  that  it  is  a  breach  of  the  law.  (T.  Man- 
ton,  D.D.)  Sin  and  its  removal : — I.  Sin  is  denounced  as  a  transgression  of  the 
LAW.  How  fitted  is  such  a  representation  to  warn  us  against  it !  It  teaches  us  what 
sin  is.  The  very  fact  that  a  law  exists  to  direct  our  conduct  is  enough  to  claim  our 
attention.  "  Do  this,  and  live ;  in  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shaft  surely  die  "  : 
these  announcements  may  be  regarded  as  beacons  set  up  to  warn  us  against  ship- 
wreck on  the  sea  of  life,  or  lights  to  guide  us  into  a  safe  and  peaceful  haven.  Not 
only,  however,  is  it  a  solemn  thing  to  know  there  is  a  law  to  which  we  are  subject, 
but  the  responsibility  is  greatly  increased  when  we  remember  it  is  the  law  of  Go;\ 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

He  is  the  lawgiver,  and  knows  what  to  require,  and  has  authority  to  enjoin  it.  It 
is  the  transcript  of  His  mind,  and  to  disobey  it  must  be  rebellion  against  Him.  In 
its  nature  the  law  is  absolutely  perfect,  being  alike  worthy  of  God  and  adapted  to 
advance  the  best  interests  of  those  who  are  subject  to  it.  It  is  holy — distinguishing 
in  all  cases  between  right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil.  It  is  just — never  claiming 
anything  beyond  what  God  is  justified  to  require  and  man  is  bound  to  render. 
And  it  is  good — securing  the  highest  advantages  to  aU  who  obey  it.  It  is  weU  for 
time,  and  better  for  eternity.  This  law  it  is  the  purpose  of  God  ever  to  maintain. 
No  change  in  man  can  produce  a  change  in  it.  It  never  was  and  can  never  be 
broken  without  entailing  sorrow  and  suffering  on  the  transgressor.  Sin  has  been 
the  cankerworm  at  the  root  of  human  happiness  and  prosperity.  We  must  esteem 
it  the  enemy  of  God,  the  enemy  of  holiness,  justice,  and  goodness ;  the  enemy  of 
man,  of  his  peace  and  prosperity ;  the  prolific  source  of  aU  sorrow,  because  the 
transgression  of  that  law  which  God  has  established  as  the  directory  of  man  and 
the  safeguard  of  righteousness.  II.  In  pursuance  of  his  argument,  the  apostle 
declares  that  the  very  puepose  of  Christ's  mission  was  to  destroy  sin.  III. 
It  strengthens  these  views  still  further  to  observe  that  the  apostle  represents 
the  believer's  union  with  Christ  to  be  productive  of  the  same  result  (ver.  6). 
rV.  The  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  Christian  is  declared  to  bb 
righteousness.  "  He  that  doeth  righteousness."  He  does  it.  He  has  laid  the 
law  of  God  before  him,  and  seeks  to  walk  in  conformity  to  it.  {J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
The  nature  of  sin  : — Very  little  consideration  may  show  us  the  importance  of  seeing 
wherein  consists  the  real  nature  of  sin.  The  empiric  who  sets  himself,  in  deahng 
with  any  disease  of  the  body,  merely  to  counteract  its  external  symptoms,  often 
aggravates  the  malady  with  which  he  ignorantly  meddles  ;  and  he  assuredly  runs  a 
far  greater  risk  of  working  a  far  wider  ruin  who  attempts  in  such  presumptuous 
ignorance  to  deal  with  the  disorders  of  the  soul.  Weigh  the  effects  of  sin,  and  you 
must  appreciate  something  of  its  deadly  character ;  look  what  it  has  wrought  in  the 
heavenly  world ;  remember  that  those  natures,  framed  according  to  the  wise  design 
of  the  AU-Wise  and  the  All-Mighty  with  the  largest  capacities  for  blessedness  with 
which  created  beings  could  be  gifted,  have  all  those  vast  capacities  filled  with 
anguish,  unconceivable,  unalleviated,  and  then  see  what  sin  has  wrought,  and 
measure  as  you  can  in  that  awful  shattering  of  God's  great  work  of  love  what  sin 
is.  Or  turn  to  this  world,  and  compare  what  it  was  when,  as  "very  good,"  God's 
blessing  rested  upon  its  rejoicing  dawn ;  and  then  gather  into  one  heap  the  sad- 
nesses of  this  present  earth  —  its  darkened  imaginations,  its  toiling,  wearied, 
suffering  multitudes — and  remember  that  all  these  are  the  work  of  sin,  and  see 
what  a  poison  must  be  in  it.  Or  look  to  Calvary,  and  know  that  this  too  is  sin's 
work.  For,  secondly,  all  this  belongs  not  to  some  distant  world,  not  to  beings  of 
another  kind  iiom.  us,  not  to  devils  in  hell ;  but  it  belongs  to  us,  it  touches  us,  nay, 
it  is  in  us,  in  every  one  of  us,  ruling  in  some,  struggling  in  others,  present  in  all. 
What,  then,  is  its  nature  ?  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law."  But,  then,  what 
is  "  the  law  "  ?  It  is  the  manifestation  to  reasonable  creatures  by  the  unapproach- 
able and  incomprehensible  Lord  of  so  much  of  the  perfection  of  His  own  necessary 
character  as  can  be  comprehended  by  the  creature  to  whom  it  is  revealed,  in  order 
that  the  character  of  the  supreme  Lord  may  be  formed  and  maintained,  according 
to  his  limited  capacity,  in  the  creature  also.  This  connection  of  the  reasonable 
creature's  happiness  with  the  existence  of  a  true  harmony  between  his  own  spiritual 
being  and  the  character  of  God,  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  inalienable 
relation  between  the  perfect  Creator,  from  whom  we  have  our  being  and  in  whom 
we  subsist,  and  the  reasonable  creatures  of  His  hand.  First,  because  only  by  this 
harmony  of  his  own  will  with  the  wUl  of  his  Creator  can  the  perfection  of  the 
creature's  own  nature  be  reached  or  maintained.  And  next,  because  only  in  the 
Creator  can  the  creature,  created  with  capacities  for  knowing,  loving,  serving, 
resting  on  his  Creator,  ever  find  complete  happiness.  By  whatever  means,  then, 
the  supreme  Lord  reveals  Himself  to  His  reasonable  creatures,  that  revelation  is  to 
them  "  the  law."  And  as  in  keeping  this  law  there  is  for  the  creature  all  blessed- 
ness, so  in  the  transgression  of  it  there  is  certain  and  inevitable  misery.  For,  first, 
every  variation  from  it  is  a  disturbance,  it  may  be  a  fatal  disturbance,  of  the 
intricate  and  marveHous  machinery  of  his  own  being,  all  of  which  was  planned  and 
executed  with  Divine  wisdom  for  a  purpose  to  which  he  in  his  waywardness  is 
running  counter.  Here,  doubtless,  we  may  find  the  cause  and  the  history  of  the 
fall  of  the  apostate  angels.  Under  some  temptation  of  self-will  they  quitted  that 
order  in  which  God's  loving  wisdom  had  placed  them  ;  and  violating  that,  the 


CHAP,  m.]  /.  JOHN.  225 

indwelling  grace  of  God,  whereby  alone  the  creature  can  ever  stand  upright,  was 
first  resisted  and  then  quenched  in  them,  and  their  nature  became  incapable  of  the 
bliss  for  which  they  had  been  created.  And  as  it  was  with  them,  so  it  must  be  with 
every  other  creature ;  in  choosing  that  which  is  at  variance  with  the  will  of  Him 
who  created  them,  they  reject  all  possible  perfectness  in  their  own  nature.  Again, 
they  lose  that  which  alone  can  fill  with  perfect  and  enduring  happiness  the  reason- 
able soul  created  capable  of  knowing  it,  the  loving  revelation  to  itself  of  the  Lord 
of  all  as  its  abiding  portion.  For  the  creature  whose  will,  affections,  and  spiritual 
nature  are  diverse  from  those  of  the  Almighty,  cannot  rejoice  in  Him;  the  contra- 
diction between  them  makes  it  impossible  ;  all  the  boundless  reach  of  the  Creator's 
perfections  becomes  to  such  a  fallen  one  the  occasion  of  a  more  energetic  repulsion 
of  his  own  nature  from  that,  the  only  true  centre  and  rest  of  his  being.  All  thia 
leads  to  some  most  practical  conclusions.  1.  First,  we  have  here  some  light  thrown 
on  the  awful  mystery  of  eternal  death,  and  of  the  steps  down  which  the  creatures 
of  the  God  of  love  are  dragged  into  it.  Malignity,  hatred,  despair,  the  last  and 
blackest  sins  into  which  the  smaller  pleasurable  sins  have  run,  are  often,  even  in 
this  life,  a  visible  anguish  to  their  victim ;  and  the  reason  of  all  this,  and  its  end,  is 
taught  us  as  we  gaze  into  the  nature  of  sin.  For  sin  is  not  a  thing,  but  a  certain 
mode  of  action  by  a  reasonable  creature,  and  that  action  affects  his  own  inward 
constitution ;  and  the  misery  of  eternity  is  not  the  mere  retribution  appointed  for 
something  which  happened  in  this  life,  but  is  a  continuous  and  most  intense  course 
of  action  into  which  action  here  has  by  necessary  steps  run  on.  2.  Secondly,  see 
here  the  true  evil  of  the  least  allowed  sin.  For  this,  which  is  the  consequence  of 
the  deadly  nature  of  sin,  must  be  in  every  sin  ;  and  when  we  give  way  to  the  least 
sin,  we  yield  ourselves  to  it,  and  we  cannot  know  how  far  it  may  prevail  over  us. 
The  mere  allowing  our  earthly  hearts  to  fix  with  too  much  delight  upon  lawful 
things  short  of  their  true  Lord — this  of  itself  may  destroy  us,  by  being  the  first 
step  which  leads  us  away  from  Him  as  the  centre  of  our  being.  StUl  more,  one 
habit  of  sin,  one  allowed  evil  temper,  one  permitted  lust,  may  be  the  acting  of  our 
soul  against  God  which  insures  for  us  the  eternal  rebellion  of  a  lost  spirit  in  the 
blackness  of  despair.  Doubtless,  as  some  poisons  destroy  the  life  of  the  body  more 
suddenly  than  others,  so  some  sins  lay  waste  the  soul  with  a  more  awful  rapidity 
than  others,  because  they  concentrate  into  themselves  a  more  energetic  contra- 
diction of  the  holiness  of  the  blessed  God  :  but  aU  have  the  evil  nature  in  them  ; 
and  one  therefore  which  possesses  the  soul  may,  and  if  it  remains,  must,  shut  it 
out  from  heaven  and  blessedness,  not  because  God  is  a  severe  exactor  of  a  threatened 
penalty,  but  because  sin  must  part  the  soul  which  it  possesses  from  Him,  who,  by 
the  necessity  of  His  own  blessed  nature,  cannot  bear  iniquity,  3.  And  again,  see 
here  the  need  we  have  of  crying  constantly  to  God  for  larger  and  yet  larger 
gifts  of  His  converting  grace.  4.  And,  lastly,  let  us  learn  hence  that  lesson 
without  which  prayer  for  the  gifts  of  God's  grace  is  nothing  but  delusion — 
the  lesson  of  striving  in  act  against  sin.  {Bp.  S.  Wilberforce.)  Sin: — A 
right  knowledge  of  sin  lies  at  the  root  of  all  saving  Christianity.  Without 
it  such  doctrines  as  justification,  conversion,  sanctification,  are  "words  and 
names"  which  convey  no  meaning  to  the  mind.  The  material  creation  in 
Genesis  began  with  "  light,"  and  so  also  does  the  spiritual  creation.  I.  I  shall 
supply  some  deftnitiok  of  sin.  Sin  is  that  vast  moral  disease  which  affects  the 
whole  human  race,  of  every  rank,  and  class,  and  name,  and  nation,  and  people. 
"A  sin,"  to  speak  more  particularly,  consists  in  doing,  saying,  thinking,  or 
imagining,  anything  that  is  not  in  perfect  conformity  with  the  mind  and  law  of 
God.  The  slightest  outward  or  inward  departure  from  absolute  mathematical 
parallelism  with  God's  revealed  will  and  character  constitutes  a  sin,  and  at  once 
makes  us  guUty  in  God's  sight.  II.  Concerning  the  origin  and  souece  of  thia 
vast  moral  disease  called  "  sin  "  I  must  say  something.  Let  us,  then,  have  it  fixed 
down  in  our  minds  that  the  sinfulness  of  man  does  not  begin  from  without,  but 
from  within.  It  is  a  family  disease,  which  we  all  inherit  from  our  first  parents, 
Adam  and  Eve,  and  with  which  we  are  born.  Of  all  the  foolish  things  that 
parents  say  about  their  children  there  is  none  worse  than  the  common  saying, 
*'  My  son  has  a  good  heart  at  the  bottom.  He  is  not  what  he  ought  to  be ;  but  he 
has  fallen  into  bad  hands.  Public  schools  are  bad  places.  The  tutors  neglect  the 
boys.  Yet  he  has  a  good  heart  at  the  bottom."  The  truth,  unhappily,  is  diametri- 
cally the  other  way.  The  first  cause  of  all  sin  lies  in  the  natural  corruption  of  the 
boy's  own  heart,  aad  not  in  the  school.  III.  Concerning  the  extent  of  this  vast 
moral  disease  of  man  called  sin,  let  us  beware  that  we  make  no  mistake.    The 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

only  safe  ground  is  that  which  is  laid  for  us  in  Scripture  (Gen.  vi.  5  ;  Jer.  xvii.  9). 
Sin  is  a  disease  which  pervades  and  runs  through  every  part  of  our  moral  constitu- 
tion  and   every   faculty  of   our   minds.     The   understanding,  the   ailections,    the 
reasoning  powers,  the  will,  are  all  more  or  less  infected.     Even  the  conscience  is 
so  blinded  that  it  cannot  be  depended  on  as  a  sure  guide,  and  is  as  likely  to  lead 
men  wrong  as  right,  unless  it  is  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     IV.  Concerning 
the  GUILT,  viLENEss,  and  offensiveness  of  sin  in  the  sight  of  God,  my  words  shall 
be  few.     The  blind  man  can  see  no  difference  between  a  masterpiece  of  Titian  or 
Eaphael  and  the  Queen's  Head  on  a  village  signboard.     The  deaf  man  cannot 
distinguish  between  a  penny  whistle  and  a  cathedral  organ.     The  very  animals 
whose  smell  is  most  offensive  to  us  have  no  idea  that  they  are  offensive,  and  are  not 
offensive  to  one  another.    And  man,  fallen  man,  I  believe,  can  have  no  just  idea  what 
a  vile  thing  sin  is  in  the  sight  of  that  God  whose  handiwork  is  absolutely  perfect — 
perfect  whether  we  look  through  telescope  or  microscope — perfect  in  the  formation 
of  a  mighty  planet  like  Jupiter,  with  his  satellites,  keeping  time  to  a  second  as  he 
rolls  round  the  sun — perfect  in  the  formation  of  the  smallest  insect  that  crawls 
over  a  foot  of  ground.    But  let  us  nevertheless  settle  it  firmly  in  our  minds  that  sin 
is  "  the  abominable  thing  that  God  hateth"  ;  and  that  "  nothing  that  defiles  shall 
in  any  wise  enter  "  heaven  (Jer.  xliv.  4  ;  Hab.  i.  13  ;  Jas.  ii.  10 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  4 ; 
Eom.  vi.  23  ;  Rom.  ii.  16  ;  Mark  ix.  44  ;  Psa.  ix.  17  ;  Matt.  xxv.  46 ;  Rev.  xxi.  27). 
V.  One  point  only  remains  to  be  considered  on  the  subject  of  sin,  which  I  dare  not 
pass  over — its  deceitfulness.     "  It  is  but  a  little  one !     God  is  merciful !     God  is 
not  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss !     We  mean  well !     One  cannot  be  so 
particular!     Where  is  the  mighty  harm?    We  only  do  as  others!"     Who  is  not 
familiar  with  this  kind  of  language  ?     1.  A  Scriptural  view  of  sin  is  one  of  the  best 
antidotes  to  that  vague,  dim,  misty,  hazy  kind  of  theology  which  is  so  painfully 
current  in  the  present  age.     2.  A  Scriptural  view  of  sin  is  one  of  the  best  antidotes 
to  the  extravagantly  broad  and  liberal  theology  which  is  so  much  in  vogue  at  the 
present  time.     3.  A  right  view  of  sin  is  the  best  antidote  to  that  sensuous,  cere- 
monial, formal  kind  of  Christianity,  which  has  swept  over  England  like  a  flood, 
and  carried  away  so  many  before  it.     4.  A  right  view  of  sin  is  one  of  the  best 
antidotes  to  the  overstrained  theories  of  perfection,  of  which  we  hear  so  much  in 
these  times.     5.  A  Scriptural  view  of  sin  will  prove  an  admirable  antidote  to  the 
low  views  of  personal  holiness,  which  are  so  painfully  prevalent  in  these  last  days 
of  the  Church.    We  must  return  to  first  principles.     We  must  go  back  to  "  the  old 
paths."     We  must  sit  down  humbly  in  the  presence  of  God,  look  the  whole  subject 
in  the  face,  examine  clearly  what  the  Lord  Jesus  calls  sin,  and  what  the  Lord  Jesus 
calls  "  doing  His  will."     (Bp.  Ryle.)         The  lawless  nature  of  sin : — What  do  we 
mean  when  we  say  of  others,  or  of  ourselves,  that  we  are  sinners  ?    And  what  is 
the  kind  and  degree  of  feeling  which  ought  to  accompany  this  utterance  ?    I.  Sra 
CONSISTS  IN  ACTION,  IN  DOING  SOMETHING.     Sin,  it  is  Said,  is  the  transgression  of  the 
law.    Every  one,  then,  who  sins  acts,  or  does  something ;   for  transgressing  is 
certainly  acting.   But  in  saying  this,  let  me  not  be  understood  to  imply  that  sinning 
is  limited  to  mere  external  actions.     In  fact,  we  more  properly  say  that  the  sin 
resides  in  the  mind,  and  consists  in   the  purpose  there  formed,  even  when  the 
purpose  is  manifested  in  outward  action.     The  outward  act  does  not  give  character 
to  the  internal  disposition  and  purpose ;  but  the  internal  disposition  and  purpose 
give  character  to  the  outward  act.    The  outward  act  is  the  internal  spirit  embodied  ; 
and  in  every  case  of  open  sin,  both  the  mental  purpose  and  this  external  embodying 
are  sinful.     II.  Sin  alw.vys  implies  knowledge— knowledge  of  the  law  of  which  it 
is  a  transgression.    It  is  the  moral  law,  which  is  always  made  known,  first  of  all,  in 
the  conscience.     This  peculiar  faculty  gives  to  every  human  being,  in  proportion  as 
his  nature  is  unfolded,  the  sense  of  moral  obligation,  makes  him  accountable,  and 
capable  of  such  actions  as  we  call  right  and  wrong,  worthy  of  reward  or  of  punish- 
ment.    The  law,  in  this  form,  is  as  old  as  man.     He  finds  it  in  himself ;  and  it 
reveals,  in  some  degree,  its  binding  power  wherever  man  is  seen  on  earth ;  though 
it  speaks  more  clearly  in  proportion  as  the  human  faculties  are  improved,  and  man 
becomes  more  truly  human.     But  since  to  the  generality  of  men  conscience,  in  the 
absence  of  an  extraordinary  revelation,  speaks  but  feebly,  God  has  more  fully  pro- 
claimed His  law  in  His  Word.     On  the  principle  that  to  whom  much  is  given,  of 
the  same  will  much  be  required,  the  possessors  of  this  Word,  if  they  fail  to  live 
answerably  to  it,  will  involve  themselves  in  deeper  and  more  inexcusable  trans- 
gression than  the  heathen.     III.  Sin  always  implies  voluntariness,  or  that  the 
nction  to  which  it  is  ascribed  is  the  free  action  of  its  author.    We  may  search 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  227 

among  the  Divine  commandments  in  the  Bible  as  long  as  we  please,  we  shall  not 
find  one  addressed  to  man  which  it  is  not  in  his  power  to  obey,  if  rightly  disposed. 
Thus  falsehood,  theft,  and  all  kinds  of  dishonesty  are  sins,  becaute  every  one  who 
chooses  can  refrain  from  these  acts.  The  power  of  the  will  extends  to  everything 
which  man  can  be  said  to  do.  It  is  a  power  over  the  movements  of  the  body,  and 
over  the  general  state  and  exercises  of  the  mind.  It  is  seen  in  controlling  the 
thoughts,  restraining  the  imagination,  regulating  the  affections,  and  subordinating 
the  appetites  and  the  desires.  In  confining  sin  to  the  voluntary  actions,  we  give  it 
then  all  the  scope  which  it  can  have  in  fact,  and  a  very  wide  scope ;  for  as  all  our 
properly  human  actions  are  voluntary,  they  may  conceivably  all  be  sinful.  IV.  Sin 
IS  A  WBONG  ACT,  or,  as  the  text  denominates  it,  a  transgi-ession.  Holiness  is  the 
whole  of  that  moral  state,  by  which  a  temper  of  obedience  to  the  Divine  law  is 
expressed.  Sin  is  whatever  appears  in  the  form  of  disobedience.  It  is  any  and 
every  state  of  mind  and  act  of  the  life  by  which  the  precepts  of  the  law  are  con- 
travened or  evaded.  The  object  aimed  at  by  the  transgressor  is  not  the  commission 
of  sin,  but  simply  the  gratification  of  an  appetite  or  desire  ;  sin,  in  other  words,  is 
not  his  end,  but  merely  a  means  to  his  end :  while  yet  in  order  to  gain  the  end  to 
which  some  whetted  desire  points,  in  order  to  secure  a  certain  amount  of  pleasure, 
he  commits  the  sin,  sometimes  recklessly,  sometimes  coolly  and  dehberately.  Any 
desire  of  the  mind,  any  freak  of  caprice  or  passion,  the  sensual  appetites,  the  love 
of  fame,  the  love  of  power,  or  the  love  of  accumulation,  may  thus  urge  him  across 
the  boundary  line  wMch  separates  right  from  wrong,  holiness  from  sin.  Sin  is  thus, 
according  to  the  true  import  of  the  Greek  word  in  the  text,  lawlessness.  No  matter 
what  the  sin  may  be,  whether  evU-speaking,  or  dishonesty  in  business,  or  intemper- 
ance in  any  of  its  forms,  or  any  of  the  legion  of  sins  of  which  men  render  them- 
selves guilty,  all  may  be  traced  directly  to  that  lawlessness,  that  denial  of  Divine 
restraint  which  is  given  as  the  fundamental  characteristic  of  sin  in  the  text. 
Conclusion : — (1)  From  this  exhibition  of  the  subject  we  infer  that  all  sin  is 
personal,  by  which  we  mean  that  it  belongs  to  some  personal  being  who  has  com- 
mitted it ;  and  that  in  the  sin  of  one  being  no  other  being  whatever  can  have  a 
share.  (2)  Sin  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  mere  nature  or  mind  of  man,  or  to 
any  latent  principle  of  the  mind.  Everything  sinful  in  man  is  his  own 
act,  or  work.  (3)  Keeping,  then,  this  in  view,  we  are  conducted  to  the  further 
inference,  that  sin  is  a  great  evil.  It  is  a  virulent,  positive  mischief,  con- 
sisting in  treason  against  the  Divine  government,  and  resistance  of  the 
supreme  source  of  all  rightful  authority.  (D.  N.  Sheldon,  D.D.)  The  per- 
petual obligation  of  the  moral  law;  the  evil  of  sin  and  its  desert  of  punish- 
ment : — I.  What  we  mean  by  the  moral  law.  1.  The  moral  law  signifies  that 
rule  which  is  given  to  all  mankind  to  direct  their  manners  or  behaviour,  considered 
merely  as  they  are  intelligent  and  social  creatures,  who  have  an  understanding  to 
know  God  and  themselves,  a  capacity  to  judge  what  is  right  and  wrong,  and  a  will 
to  choose  and  refuse  good  and  evil.  2.  It  is  found  in  the  Ten  Commands ; 
it  is  found  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  scattered  up  and  down  through  all  the  writings 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  and  it  may  be  found  out  in  the  plainest  and  most 
necessary  parts  of  it,  by  the  sincere  and  dihgent  exercise  of  our  own  reasoning 
powers.    II.  This  moral  law  is  of  universal  and  perpetual  obligation  to  all 

MANKIND,   EVEN    THROUGH    ALL   NATIONS   AND    ALL   AGES.       1.    It   is    a   laW    whlch    aiisCS 

from  the  very  existence  of  God  and  the  nature  of  man ;  it  springs  from  the  very 
relation  of  such  creatures  to  their  Maker  and  to  one  another.  2.  This  law  is  so 
far  wrought  into  the  very  nature  of  man  as  a  reasonable  creature  that  an  awakened 
conscience  will  require  obedience  to  it  for  ever.  3.  This  law  is  suited  to  every 
state  and  circumstance  of  human  nature,  to  every  condition  of  the  life  of  man,  and 
to  every  dispensation  of  God  ;  and  since  it  cannot  be  changed  for  better  law,  it 
must  be  everlasting.  4.  It  appears  yet  further  that  this  law  is  perpetual,  because 
whatsoever  other  law  God  can  prescribe  or  man  can  be  bound  to  obey,  it  is  built 
upon  the  eternal  obligation  of  this  moral  law.  5.  Scripture  asserts  the  perpetuity 
and  everlasting  obligation  of  the  moral  law  (Luke  xvi.  17).  III.  The  evil  nature 
OF  SIN.  1.  It  is  an  affront  to  the  authority  and  government  of  a  wise  and  holy 
Grod,  a  God  who  has  sovereign  right  to  make  laws  for  His  creatures,  and  has  formed 
all  His  commands  and  prohibitions  according  to  infinite  wisdom.  2.  Sin  carries 
in  the  nature  of  it  high  ingratitude  to  God  our  Creator,  and  a  wicked  abuse  of  that 
goodness  which  has  bestowed  upon  us  all  our  natural  powers  and  talents,  our 
limbs,  our  senses,  and  all  our  faculties  of  soul  and  body.  3.  Sin  against  the  law 
of  God  breaks  in  upon  that  wise  and  beautiful  order  which  God  has  appointed  to 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

run  through  His  whole  creation  (Prov.  xvi.  4).     4.  As  it  is  the  very  nature  of  sin 

to  bring  disorder  into  the  creation  of  God,  so  its  natural  consequences  are  pernicious 

to  the  sinful  creature !     5.    Sin  provokes  God  to  anger,  as  He  is  the  righteous 

governor  of  the  world ;   it  brings  guilt  upon  the  creature,  and  exposes  it  to  the 

punishments  threatened  by  the  broken  law.     IV.  The  pkopeb  demerit  of  bin,  or 

what  is  the  punishment  it  deserves.     1.  When  God  made  man  at  first,  He  designed 

to  continue  him  in  life  and  happiness  so  long  as  man  continued  innocent  and 

obedient  to  the  law,  and  thereby  maintained  his  allegiance  to  God  his  Maker. 

2.  By   a  wilful   and  presumptuous  transgression  of  the   law,  man  violated  his 

allegiance  to  God  his  Maker,  and  forfeited  all  good  things  that  his  Creator  had 

given  him  and  the  hope  of  aU  that  He  had  promised.     3.  This  forfeiture  of  life,  and 

the  blessings  of  it  by  sin,  is  an  everlasting  forfeiture.     4.  There  is   scarce  any 

actual,  i.e.,  wilful  sin,  but  carries  with  it  some  particular  aggravations,  and  these 

deserve  such  further  positive  punishments  as  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  God  shall 

see  reason  to  inflict.     Conclusion :  1.  Is  the  law  of  God  in  perpetual  force  and  is 

every  transgression   of  it   so  heinous  an   evil? — then  let  us  take  a  survey  how 

wretched  and  deplorable  is  the  state  of  mankind  by  nature.     2.  Is  the  moral  law 

of  such  constant  obligation,  and  is  death  the  due  recompense  of  every  transgression 

of  it  ? — then  it  is  necessary  for  ministers  to  preach  this  law,  and  it  is  necessary  for 

hearers  to  learn  it.     3.  What  a  holy  regard  and  jealousy  has  God  shown  for  the 

honour  of  His  everlasting  law,  and  what  a  sacred  indignation  has  He  manifested 

against  sin,  when  He  sent  His  own  Son  to  obey  this  law,  and  to  suffer  for  our 

disobedience  of  it  1     4.  How  glorious  is  the  wisdom  and  the  mercy  of  the  gospel, 

which  does  honour  to  the  law  in  every  respect,  which  prepares  an  honourable 

atonement  and  pardon  for  guilty  rebels  who  have  broken  this  everlasting  law,  and 

provides  grace  and  power  to  renew  our  nature  according  to  the  demands  of  it ! 

6.  Happy  is  the  world  above,  where  such  natural  and  such  easy  obedience  is  for 

ever  paid  to  this  law  of  God  without  the  least  transgression.     (Isaac  Watts,  D.D.) 

What  sin  is  : — Sin  is  the  transgression  of  law.     It  is  doing  contrary  to  or  without 

law.     The  first  thing,  in  ascertaining  the  real  nature  of  sin,  is  to  get  a  clear  notion 

of  law.  What  is  it  ?     How  does  it  arise  ?     There  seems  to  me  but  one  possible  way 

for  us  in  this  nineteenth  century  to  ascertain  what  is  law ;  and  that  is,  by  the 

observation  of  the  consequences  and  tendencies  of  actions.     The  study  of  the  laws 

of  different  peoples  can  only  help  us  in  this  thus  far — it  enables  us  to  see  what 

they  found  to  be  useful  and  good  to  them,  and  so  gives  us  a  presumptive  notion 

that  the  same  may,  in  similar  circumstances,  be  good  and  useful  to  us.    But  it 

is  only  by  observing  what  are  the  consequences  to  which  the  action  actually  does 

tend  under  our  circumstances  that  we  can  be  sure  of  its  real  character  in  its 

relation  to  us.    By  our  own  observation  alone  we  can  arrive  at  certainty.    But 

now,  what  is  it  that  we  are  to  observe  in  actions,  in  order  to  find  out  God's  law  ? 

What  is  the  test  by  which  we  may  discern  what  we  should  and  what  we  should 

not  do?    The  tendency  of   an  action  to  promote  the  highest  and  most  perfect 

happiness  upon  the  whole  is  the  sure  criterion  of  its  being  according  to  the 

law  of   God.     There  is  no  other  which  does  not  resolve  itself  into  this.     For, 

just  think    a    little  within  yourselves,  how  can  you  know  that  it  is  the  wiU 

of   God  you  should  act  in  a  certain  way,  but  from  the  fact  that  God  has  so 

created  you  and  others  that,  if  you  do  so  act,  it  will  promote  your  highest  and 

truest  happiness  ?    There  is  no  mark,  no  sign  put  upon  actions,  distinguishing  one 

from  another,  that  all  men  can  recognise,  but  this.     On  the  other  hand,  this  test  is 

clear,   adequate,  and  such  as  every  man  can  appreciate  and  feel  the  force  of. 

Whatever  tends  to  promote  human  happiness  upon  the  whole,  and  in  the  long  run, 

must  be  good  and  according  to  the  will  of  God.    Whatever  tends,  ultimately  and 

in  the  end,  to  produce  suffering,  pain,  or  misery,  must  be  evil  and  opposed  to  the 

Divine  will.     The  only  point  where  the  test  can  seem  to  fail,  is  where  temporary 

consequences  are  mistaken  for  ultimate  results.   Self-denial  for  the  sake  of  doing  good 

to  some  one,  may  bring  temporary  suffering ;  but  the  pleasure  arising  from  the 

contemplation  of  the  good  conferred,  the  vigour  and  high  tone  imparted  to  the 

mind  by  the  act  of  self-denial,  and  the  approbation  and  love  secured  by  it  from 

our  fellow-creatures,   together  constitute  an   amount  of  happiness  which,  while 

immeasurably   compensating  for  the  trifling   suffering,  declare  the  action  to  be 

according  to  God's  will.     And  so,  too,  the  test  requires  that  the  kind  or  degree  of 

happiness  be  taken  into  the  account,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  whole  law  of  God  and 

our  complete  duty.     We  find,  for  example,  that  whilst  some  actions  bring  pleasure 

through  our  physical  organisation,  others  bring  pleasure  through  our  mental  consti- 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  229 

tution ;  and  that  those  affecting  us  through  the  latter  means,  induce  a  more  perfect 
sense  of  happiness  than  those  affecting  us  through  our  physical  organisation.  And 
BO,  again,  acts  of  kindness,  love,  truthfulness,  honour,  forgiveness,  &c.,  bring  a 
greater,  intenser,  more  complete  degree  of  happiness  than  mere  culture  of  intellect ; 
and  the  suffering  or  pain  brought  by  neglecting  them  is,  upon  the  whole,  much 
greater  ;  so  that  the  Divine  law  requiring  these  is  higher  and  more  imperative  than 
that  requiring  the  intellectual  culture.  Still,  in  every  case  you  will  see  that  it  is 
the  happiness  or  pain  which  determines  and  makes  plain  the  law  or  will  of  God ; 
and  it  is  the  relative  character  or  degree  of  the  happiness  which  determines  the 
relative  stringency  and  imperativeness  of  the  law.  But,  observe,  I  do  not  say  that 
it  is  the  tendency  of  an  action  to  promote  happiness  which  constitutes  it  virtuous, 
and  the  tendency  of  an  action  to  promote  misery  or  pain  which  constitutes  it  or 
causes  it  to  be  sin ;  but  only  that  it  is  the  tendency  which  is  to  us  the  test, 
criterion,  or  sign  by  which  we  know  it  to  be  good  or  bad,  virtuous  or  vicious.  But 
now,  if  you  accept  this  test,  and  consider  God's  law  as  requiring  whatever  tends  to 
promote  happiness,  you  will  see  that  sin  includes  a  much  wider  range  of  actions 
than  is  generally  contemplated.  For  human  happiness  is  dependent  upon  physical 
actions  as  well  as  upon  moral,  and  the  violation  of  the  laws  of  our  physical  and 
intellectual  being  is,  therefore,  quite  as  much  sin  as  is  the  violation  of  the  laws  of 
our  moral  nature.  And  you  have  no  right  to  select  this  law  or  the  other,  and  say, 
the  transgression  of  this  is  sin,  whilst  the  transgression  of  the  other  is  only  an 
act  of  imprudence  and  folly.  The  same  authority  which  renders  the  laws  relating 
to  morals  imperative,  renders  the  laws  relating  to  the  intellect  and  body  imperative. 
The  tone  of  Greek  thought  and  feeling  was  much  higher  and  truer  upon  this 
subject  than  the  mediaeval  and  later  Christian  thought  and  feeling.  To  the  Greeks 
the  body  was  as  sacred  as  the  soul — the  senses  and  intellect  as  divine  as  the  moral 
powers.  And  they  were  right.  They  are  as  essential  to  man's  happiness  ;  they 
are,  at  least,  in  our  present  mortal  condition,  the  very  foundation  of  all  other 
good — their  healthful  existence  is  the  condition  of  all  other  forms  of  happiness. 
Leave  the  moral  powers  unguided  by  the  intellect,  and  they  lead  into  all  sorts  of 
errors  and  follies.  Leave  the  physical  powers  a  prey  to  disease,  and  the  intellectual 
and  moral  powers  sooner  or  later  suffer  the  evil  consequences.  And  you  will  at 
once  discern  for  yourselves  how  this  condemns  the  too  common  tendency  amongst 
religionists  to  create  artificial  sins,  that  is,  to  denounce  things  which  they  them- 
selves are  not  disposed  to  enjoy.  No  one  can  lawfully  condemn  anything  which 
does  not  tend  to  diminish  human  happiness  upon  the  whole;  and  therefore, 
however  uncongenial  an  action  may  be  to  our  own  tastes,  we  have  no  right  to 
reprove  it,  unless  we  can  show  that  it  necessarily  tends  to  such  diminution.  Nay, 
we  must  go  further  than  this.  The  different  constitutions  and  temperaments  of 
individuals  are  such  that,  what  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  purest  and  most 
perfect  happiness  of  one  man,  is  altogether  inimical  to  that  of  another.  Each 
man  must,  therefore,  be  left  free  to  follow  his  own  course,  and  to  determine  for 
himself  what  is  the  will  of  God  concerning  him,  excepting  when  he  begins  a  course 
which,  if  universally  followed  out,  would  be  injurious  to  mankind  at  large.  From 
these  principles  there  follow  certain  practical  conclusions.  First,  we  see  the  law  of 
life  allows  of  many  modifications,  according  to  individual  circumstances  and  necessities. 
Physically,  mentally,  and  morally,  men  have  different  requirements,  which  each  one 
for  himself  must  determine  before  God.  Again,  we  may  see  human  duty  is  neces- 
sarily a  progressive  thing,  changing  and  purifying,  itself  with  man's  advancing 
culture.  Many  actions  are  necessary  to  happiness  in  a  barbarous  state  which  are 
altogether  inadmissible  in  a  more  advanced  stage.  Civilisation,  also,  gives  rise  to 
many  requirements  to  which  the  savage  is  a  stranger.  There  can  be  no  stereotyped 
law  laid  down,  excepting  in  very  rudimental  and  fundamental  principles,  as  I  said ; 
but  the  law  will  always  be  rising  higher,  purer,  and  freer  as  men  advance. 
(Jos.  Cranhrook)  Sin: — I.  What  is  that  law  whereof  sin  is  the  transgression? 
It  is  the  law  of  God,  even  any  law  of  His  whereby  He  lays  any  duty  upon  any  of 
the  children  of  men.  1.  There  is  a  law  engraven  upon  the  hearts  of  men  by 
nature,  which  was  in  force  long  before  the  promulgation  of  the  law  from  Mount 
Sinai.  This  is  the  light  of  reason,  and  the  dictates  of  natural  conscience  con- 
cerning those  moral  principles  of  good  and  evil,  which  have  an  essential  equity  in 
them,  and  show  man  his  duty  to  God,  to  his  neighbour,  and  to  himself.  2.  There 
is  another  law  which  was  given  to  the  Jewish  nation  by  the  ministry  of  Moses 
{John  xvii.  19).  By  this  we  are  to  understand  the  whole  system  of  Divine  precepts  con- 
cerning ceremonial  rites,  judicial  processes,  and  moral  duties.     3.  There  is  the  moral 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

law.  II.  Wherein  the  nature  of  sin  consists.  It  consists  in  a  want  of  conformity 
to  the  law  of  God,  or  a  disconformity  thereto.  The  law  of  God  is  the  rule ;  whatso- 
ever is  over  this  rule  is  sin.  1.  Sin  is  no  positive  being,  but  a  want  of  due 
perfection,  a  defect,  an  imperfection  in  the  creature ;  and  therefore  it  is  (1)  Not 
from  God,  but  from  the  creature  itself.  (2)  It  is  not  a  thing  to  glory  in  more  than 
the  want  of  all  things.  (3)  It  is  a  thing  we  have  reason  to  be  humbled  for,  and 
have  great  need  to  have  removed.  (4)  It  is  not  a  thing  to  be  desired,  but  fled 
from  and  abhorred  as  the  abominable  thing  which  God  hateth.  2.  Original  sin  is 
truly  and  properly  sin.  3.  The  first  motions  of  sin,  and  the  risings  of  that 
natural  corruption  in  us,  before  it  be  completed  with  the  consent  of  the  will  to  the 
evil  motion,  are  truly  and  properly  sin.  4.  All  consent  of  the  heart  to  and  delight 
in  motions  towards  things  forbidden  by  the  law  of  God  are  sins,  though  these 
never  break  forth  into  action,  but  die  where  they  were  born,  in  the  inmost  corners 
of  our  hearts  (Matt.  v.  28).  5.  AH  omissions  of  the  internal  duties  we  owe  to  God 
and  our  neighbours  are  sins,  as  want  of  love  to  God  or  our  neighbours.  6.  Hence 
a  man  sins  by  undue  silence  and  undue  speaking,  when  the  cause  of  God  and  truth 
I  require  it ;  seeing  the  law  bids  us  speak  in  some  cases,  but  never  speak  what  is  not 
/  good.  7.  Hence  also  a  man's  sins,  when  he  omits  outward  duties  that  are  incum- 
/  bent  on  him  to  perform,  as  well  as  when  he  commits  sin  of  whatever  kind  in  his 
/  life.  8.  The  least  failure  in  any  duty  is  sin ;  and  whatever  comes  not  up  in  perfee- 
'  tion  to  the  law  is  sinful.  III.  Wherein  the  evil  of  sin  lies.  1.  In  the  wrong 
done  to  God,  and  its  contrariety.  (1)  To  His  nature,  which  is  altogether  holy. 
(2)  In  its  contrariety  to  God's  will  and  law,  which  is  a  sort  of  a  copy  of  His  nature. 
And  God  being  all  good,  and  the  chief  good,  sin  must  needs  be  a  sort  of  infinite 
evil.  2.  In  the  wrong  it  doth  to  ourselves  (Prov.  viii.  36).  (1)  It  leaves  a  stain 
and  spiritual  pollution  on  the  soul,  whereby  it  becomes  filthy  and  vile  (Isa.  1.  15), 
and  shame  and  confusion  on  the  sinner  himself  (Gen.  iii.  7).  (2)  It  brings  on 
guilt,  whereby  the  sinner  is  bound  over  to  punishment,  according  to  the  state  in 
which  he  is,  until  his  sin  be  pardoned.  This  ariseth  from  the  justice  of  God  and 
the  threatening  of  His  law,  which  brings  on  all  miseries  whatsoever.  1.  It  is  high 
rebellion  against  the  sovereign  Majesty  of  God,  that  gives  the  life  of  authority  to 
the  law.  2.  It  is  an  extreme  aggravation  of  this  evil,  that  sin,  as  it  is  a  disclaiming 
our  homage  to  God,  so  it  is  in  true  account  a  yielding  subjection  to  the  devil;  for 
sin  is  in  the  strictest  propriety  his  work.  More  particularly,  sin  strikes  at  the  root 
of  all  the  Divine  attributes.  (1)  It  is  contrary  to  the  unspotted  holiness  of  God, 
which  is  the  peculiar  glory  of  the  Deity.  (2)  Sin  vilifies  the  wisdom  of  God,  which 
prescribed  the  law  to  men  as  the  rule  of  their  duty.  (3)  Sin  is  a  high  contempt 
and  horrid  abuse  of  the  Divine  goodness,  which  should  have  a  powerful  influence 
in  binding  man  to  his  duty.  (4)  The  sinner  disparages  the  Divine  justice,  in 
promising  himself  peace  and  safety,  notwithstanding  the  wrath  and  vengeance 
that  is  denounced  against  him  by  the  Lord.  (5)  Sin  strikes  against  the  omniscience 
of  God,  and  at  least  denies  it  implicitly.  Many  who  would  blush  and  tremble  if 
they  were  surprised  in  their  sinful  actings  by  a  child  or  a  stranger  are  not  at 
all  afraid  of  the  eye  of  God,  though  He  nan-owly  notices  all  their  sins  in  order  to 
judge  them,  and  wiU  judge  them  in  order  to  punish  them.  (6)  Sin  bids  a  defiance 
to  the  Divine  power.  He  can  with  one  stroke  dispatch  the  body  to  the  grave,  and 
the  soul  to  the  pit  of  hell,  and  make  men  as  miserable  as  they  are  sinful :  and  yet 
sinners  as  boldly  provoke  Him  as  if  there  were  no  danger.  Conclusion :  1.  If  ye 
would  see  your  sins,  look  to  the  law  of  God.  That  is  the  glass  wherein  we  may 
see  our  ugly  face.  2.  See  here  what  presumption  it  is  in  men  to  make  that  duty 
which  God  has  not  made  so,  and  that  sin  which  God  has  not  made  so  in  religion. 
3.  Flee  to  Jesus  Christ  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  for  His  blood  and  Spirit  to  remove 
the  same.  All  the  waters  of  the  sea  will  not  wash  it  out,  but  that  blood  alone. 
And  repent  and  forsake  your  sin,  or  it  will  be  your  ruin.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
The  knoirledfje  of  sin  necei<ii(irij  to  repentance  : — 1.  The  text  supposes  that  there  is 
some  law  given  by  the  Almighty  which  sin  transgresses.  Now,  the  laws  of  God 
are  of  various  kinds,  and  made  known  in  different  ways.  The  law  of  God  requires 
certain  dispositions  and  tempers.  Now,  if  a  man  is  not  actuated  by  these  dis- 
positions, he  is  guilty  of  habitually  breaking  the  Divine  law,  and  therefore  is 
habitually  living  in  a  state  of  sin.  The  law  of  God  requires  you  to  be  heavenly- 
minded,  to  be  meek  and  kind,  and  to  love  your  neighbour  as  yourself;  it  requires 
you  to  be  pure  and  chaste,  and  to  be  "  holy  even  as  "  Christ  is  "  holy  "  :  the  man, 
therefore,  who  does  not  in  the  fullest  degree  possess  these  dispositions,  is  living  in 
the  hourly  commission  of  sin,  however  unconscious  he  may  be  of  his  transgression 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  231 

and  guilt.  2.  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law."  But,  then,  it  is  the  trans- 
gression of  a  law  of  which  the  spirit  is  to  be  regarded  rather  than  the  letter.  In 
criminal  cases  the  judge  will  not  suffer  a  penal  statute  to  be  strained  beyond  its 
literal  meaning  in  order  to  condemn  a  prisoner  ;  but  the  law  of  God,  which  requires 
the  highest  conceivable  purity,  both  of  heart  and  life,  is  to  be  interpreted  in  the 
most  extensive  sense :  it  forbids  not  only  the  sin,  but  everything  connected  with 
it,  everything  leading  to  it.  It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  the  guilt  of  the 
criminal,  that  the  particular  crime  of  which  he  is  guilty  should  be  expressly  named 
in  Scripture.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  general  class  of  sins  under  which  it  may  be 
ranked,  be  forbidden ;  or  that  the  disposition  from  which,  in  common  with  many 
other  sinful  acts,  it  proceeds,  be  contrary  to  the  pure  and  holy  law  of  God.  3. 
Again,  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law."  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  guilt 
of  such  transgression,  either  that  the  law  should  be  distinctly  known,  or  the 
transgressor  be  conscious  that  he  has  committed  a  sin  in  breaking  it.  The  law 
may  be  broken,  and  man  fall  under  its  condemnation,  without  knowing  or  sus- 
pecting the  consequences  of  his  misconduct.  For,  in  this  case,  as  in  that  of  human 
laws,  it  is  sufficient  that  the  offender  might  have  known  what  the  law  was.  How 
many  deceive  themselves  by,  first,  so  narrowing  the  bounds  of  sin  as  to  allow  only 
the  grossest  acts  to  be  criminal ;  and  then,  by  deeming  themselves  guiltless,  merely 
because  their  consciences  are  at  ease!  Man's  conscience,  however,  is  not  the 
legitimate  interpreter  of  the  Divine  law.  It  is  the  office  of  conscience,  indeed,  to 
accuse  and  reprove  us  when  we  have  done  wrong :  but  if  conscience  fails  in  its 
duty ;  if  it  be  uninformed,  or  blind,  or  corrupt ;  if  it  becomes,  as  it  too  often  does, 
partner  in  the  crime,  this  will  not  alter  the  nature  of  sin,  or  the  responsibility  of 
man:  sin  will  still  be  the  transgression  of  the  law  of  God,  and  not  merely  the 
doing  of  what  we  may  know  or  feel  to  be  wrong.  4.  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of 
the  law."  By  keeping  this  definition  in  view  we  shall  avoid  the  error  of 
those  who  place  the  guilt  of  sin  solely  in  the  intention  with  which  it  is 
committed.  The  drunkard,  the  man  of  pleasure,  the  sabbath-breaker,  wiU 
tell  you  that  they  did  not  intend  anything  sinful ;  they  had  no  express  pur- 
pose of  disobeying  or  offending  God.  In  short,  all  the  various  classes  of  sinners 
mean,  according  to  their  own  statement,  simply  their  own  gratification.  But  if  we 
gratify  ourselves  in  a  way  which  God  has  forbidden,  we  are  guilty  of  sinning 
against  God,  whatever  be  in  this  respect  our  wish  or  intention.  5.  Another 
mistake  into  which  many  persons  are  apt  to  fall,  is  that  of  judging  of  sin  rather 
by  its  probable  effects  than  by  its  intrinsic  heinousness  as  a  violation  of  the  law  of 
God.  Without  doubt,  everything  which  God  has  forbidden  would  be  injurious  to 
man :  yet  the  principle  on  which  we  should  abstain  from  evil  is  reverence  for  the 
authority  of  God,  rather  than  any  view  of  utility  or  interest.  Besides,  were  the 
principle  true,  that  the  evil  of  sin  is  to  be  estimated  simply  by  its  effects  ;  yet  who 
is  to  be  the  judge  of  those  effects?  6.  Another  mode  of  judging  of  sin,  equally 
common,  and  equally  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God,  is  that  of  estimating  it  by  the 
opinions  of  the  world  rather  than  by  Scripture.  The  chief  evil  of  sin  consists  in 
the  insult  which  it  offers  to  the  majesty  and  greatness  of  Him  who  is  the  Creator  and 
Lord  of  all  things.  That  this  law  is  strict,  far  too  strict  for  man  in  his  fallen  state 
to  fulfil,  cannot  be  denied ;  but  a  less  holy  law  would  fail  of  conveying  to  us  adequate 
ideas  of  the  greatness  and  holiness  of  the  Being  whose  transcript  it  is.  Besides,  the 
obhgation  of  man  to  obey  is  infinitely  strong.  For  what  is  the  relation  in  which  he 
stands  to  God  ?  Is  not  God  the  author  of  his  being,  the  giver  of  his  faculties, 
the  bestower  of  all  his  comforts  ?  Is  the  law  to  be  relaxed  to  accommodate  the 
weakness  and  corruption  of  man  ?  Or,  rather,  ought  not  that  very  weakness  and 
corruption  to  be  exposed  and  corrected  by  the  purity  of  the  law  ?  (John  Venn,  M.A.) 
What  is  sin  ? — I.  Sin  is  a  missing  the  makk.  It  is  a  failing  to  arrive  at  that  high 
purpose  which  God  has  prepared  for  us ;  and  as  in  the  natural  world  the  failure  to 
fulfil  the  law  imposed  upon  us  would  lead  to  the  most  fearful  results,  so  the  terrible 
results  of  our  aberration  are  visible  in  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  of  our  kind. 
n.  Sm  IS  A  DELIBERATE  SETTING  OURSELVES  AGAINST  GoD.  TMs  is  clear  if  we  ask 
what  mark  it  is  we  miss.  The  law  imposed  upon  us  by  God.  Now  every  sin,  of  ) 
whatever  kind,  partakes  of  this  character.  III.  Therefore  the  least  sin  is  mortal  j 
IN  ITS  character.     (J.  J.  Lios,  M.A.)       Sin,  the  transgression  of  the  law: — I.  The 

NATURE   OF    THE    DiVINE   LAW.       II.     ThE   NATURE    AND    DEMERIT    OF    SIN,    which   is   the 

transgression  of  it.  1.  Consider  against  whom  it  is  committed.  2.  The  huiniliations 
and  sufferings  appointed,  and  submitted  to,  in  order  to  atone  for  it.  3.  The  dreadful 
consequences  which  still  result  from  it.     4.  What  would  be  its  consequences,  did  it 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

tiniversally  prevail.  (D.  Savile.)  The  law  of  God  : — St.  John  has  set  before  U3 
the  child  of  God  as  striving  to  shape  his  inner  and  outer  life  after  the  pattern  of 
God's  purity.  This  is  to  him  a  law :  he  must  in  each  thought  and  act  make  himself 
as  like  God  as  he  can.  He  must  give  himself  no  freedom  of  choice.  His  will  must 
be  to  do  what  he  knows  to  be  the  will  of  the  aU-wise,  and  truthful,  and  loving  God. 
Over  against  him  St.  John  puts  the  man  who  has  no  rule  of  life,  who  simply  pleases 
himself,  obeying  the  desires  of  his  own  flesh  and  mind,  allowing  neither  God  nor 
man  to  pass  within  the  edge  of  the  circle  he  has  drawn  round  himself.  AH  within 
it  is  his  own,  and  all  of  that  he  will  keep  to  himself ;  no  one  has  any  claim  upon  it, 
no  one  has  a  right  to  tell  him  what  to  do  with  it.  This  is  lawlessness,  which  is 
indeed  a  form  of  selfishness.  Nothing  can  be  further  from  the  mind  of  God.  For 
there  is  no  act  of  God  which  is  not  wrought  under  the  great  laws  of  truth,  and 
justice,  and  love.  Every  time  we  sin,  we  not  only  set  ourselves  against  authority, 
we  also  deny  the  truth  of  God's  witness  to  some  eternal  facts.  We  put  ourselves 
outside  of  the  laws  which  give  order,  and  firmness,  and  strength  to  all  the  world  and 
to  God.  St.  John  goes  on  to  give  another  reason  why  all  the  children  of  God  should 
be  righteous.  It  was,  he  says,  for  the  sake  of  taking  away  sins,  or  of  making  man 
righteous  that  God  manifested  Himself  to  us.  It  may  not  be  clear  to  us  why,  for 
this  end,  so  costly  a  sacrifice  must  be  made.  But  we  know  that  made  it  was,  and  we 
see  from  the  greatness  of  it  that  it  could  not  but  be  made,  and  thus  learn  that  to  the 
laws  which  God  lays  on  His  children  He  submits  Himself,  and  that  these  laws 
therefore  have  not  their  rise  in  His  mere  will,  but  are  themselves  eternal.  There  is 
in  God  a  "must"  and  a  "must  not,"  which  set  bounds  to  Him,  even  as  they  set 
bounds  to  us.  To  reach  this  truth  through  the  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ  is  in 
itself  a  large  step  towards  righteousness.  It  would  be  well  if  all  Christians  quite 
understood  that  the  great  end  of  God  when  He  manifested  Himself  in  Christ  was  to 
bring  men  to  be  like  Himself,  in  goodness  and  happiness,  by  taking  away  sins,  or,  as 
it  is  put  in  the  kindred  passage  (v.  8),  by  destroying  the  works  of  the  devil.  (C.  Wat- 
son, D.D.)  What  is  siri  ? — More  literally :  "Whosoever  committeth  sin  committeth 
lawlessness;  for  sin  is  lawlessness."  The  Bible  does  not  contain  many  definitions. 
It  does  define  sin.  Sin  is  lawlessness.  That  is,  it  is  the  violation  or  careless 
disregard  of  law.  There  is  what  we  call  the  criminal  class  in  the  community ;  that 
is,  there  are  those  in  the  community  who  either  openly  set  themselves  against  the 
laws  which  the  community  has  made,  or  who  live  in  careless  disregard  of  those  laws. 
They  live  as  if  there  were  no  law.  A  sinner  is  to  God's  law  what  a  criminal  is  to 
social  law.  That  is  to  say,  a  sinner  is  a  man  who  sets  himself  against  the  Divine 
law.  He  may  be  a  sinner  in  broadcloth  or  in  fustian,  he  may  be  a  sinner  in  a  big 
stone  house  or  in  a  common  lodging-house ;  but  if  in  his  life  he  counts  the  wQl  of  God 
as  though  it  were  not,  and  lives  without  regard  to  it ;  or  if  in  any  part  of  his  life  he 
leaves  God  out,  not  considering  what  God  would  have  him  do  in  that  particular  part, 
he  is  a  sinner,  for  just  in  so  far  he  is  living  a  lawless  life.  Men  may  be  divided  into 
three  generic  classes.  There  are  a  few  men  who  have  seriously  considered  that  there 
is  a  moral  order  in  the  universe,  God  and  a  law  of  righteousness  that  proceed  from 
Him,  and  who  endeavour  to  conform  their  life  to  that  law  of  righteousness.  There 
are  also  a  few  men  at  the  other  extreme  who  have  said  to  themselves — practically,  if 
not  in  words — I  am  going  to  get  what  I  can  out  of  life ;  I  am  going  to  live  as  though 
there  were  no  future  life,  no  judgment,  no  God,  no  law  in  the  world.  And  between 
f  these  two  bodies  of  men,  one  at  the  one  extreme,  and  the  other  at  the  other,  is  the 
great  mass  of  men  who  sometimes  think  of  God's  law  and  often  forget  it,  who  bring 
it  into  a  part  of  their  life  and  leave  it  out  of  a  part  of  their  life.  All  men,  in  so  far 
as  they  live  thus,  live  lawless— that  is  sinful— lives.  What  shall  we  say  is  the  generic 
law  of  life  ?  It  is  love.  To  live  regardless  of  the  law  of  love,  or  to  live  any  part  of 
one's  life  regardless  of  that  law  of  love,  is  lawlessness.  Now,  what  does  this  law  of 
love  require?  What  is  the  law  of  government— that  is,  what  does  love  require  of 
government  ?  The  Psalmist  says,  "Justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  God's 
throne,"  so  justice  and  judgment  should  be  the  habitation  of  human  government : 
•'  For  He  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  crieth  ;  the  poor  also,  and  him  that  hath 
no  helper.  He  shall  spare  the  poor  and  needy,  and  shall  save  the  souls  of  the 
needy."  Will  any  man,  looking  on  the  governments  of  the  world,  say  that  that 
is  the  ideal  according  to  which  governments  are  organised  ?  There  is  not  a  govern- 
ment which  is  not,  in  some  measure,  a  lawless  government  if  it  be  measured  by  the 
law  of  God.  What  shall  we  say  the  law  of  love  requires  of  the  great  commercial  and 
industrial  world  ?  What  does  God  organise  that  world  for  ?  Love.  And  if  you 
translate  love  into  terms  of  political  economy,  it  means  the  wise  and  equitable 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  233 

distribution  of  wealth.     Business,  according  to  the  law  of  God,  means  benevolence. 
I  leave  you  to  judge  how  far  business,  as  it  is  carried  on  to-day,  means  benevolence. 
What  is  the  law  of  the  teaching  profession  ?  Truth.   What  is  the  teacher  for  ?   what 
the  editor  ?   what  the  preacher  ?     Primarily  this :  that  he  may  give  to  listening 
people  truth,  absolute  truth,  uncoloured,  unchanged ;  that  he  may  speak  the  truth, 
the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.     Will  any  teacher  here  to-day  say  that 
truth  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  schoolroom  ?   Is  there  any  man  who  will  take  a  daily 
paper  to-day  and  say  that  the  one  inspii'ation  and  purpose  of  the  editors  is  to  give  us 
the  absolute  truth,  in  aU  its  correct  proportions — without  sensationalism,  without 
misinterpretations?     What  is  the  law  of  society?    What  has  God  made  society  for? 
This  interchange  of  men  and  women,  what  does  it  mean  ?   What  has  God  made  the 
reception  for  ?  what  the  party  for  ?  what  the  social  calling  for  ?   Or  did  not  He  make  it 
— was  it  made  in  the  other  world  ?     Society  has  for  its  purpose  the  interchange  of 
life.     The  Divine  function  of  society  is  the  interchange  of  life  and  the  impartation 
of  life.     It  is  said  that  Christ  went  into  society ;  that  He  went  wherever  He  was 
invited  ;  but  I  do  not  think  a  great  many  Christians  follow  Christ's  example  when 
they  go  to  parties  and  receptions.  Wherever  He  went,  because  His  own  heart  was  full 
of  the  love  of  God  and  of  His  fellow-men,  love  bubbled  out  from  Him.    How  do  we 
go  ?     I  wonder  how  many  of  us  have  worn  mask  and  domino ;  how  many  of  us  have 
pretended  to  be  somebody  we  were  not  that  we  might  be  polite  and  courteous,  and 
keep  our  lives  to  ourselves  and  not  give  our  true  life  forth  to  others.     And  every 
social  circle,  every  social  interchange  that  has  not  for  its  inspiration  love,  the  minis- 
tration to  the  highest  life  of  manhood  and  womanhood,  is  lawless,  it  is  sin.  Continue 
what  I  have  begun ;  take  this  law  of  love  and  apply  it  to  one  phase  of  life  after  the 
other.     Let  the  lawyer  ask  himself  how  much  of  the  law  of  love  there  is  in  the 
court-room  ;  and  the  medical  man  ask  himself  how  much  there  is  in  the  practice  of 
his  professional  life ;  and  the  artist  ask  himself  how  much  there  is  in  the  handling 
of  his  brush  ;  and  the  musician  ask  himself  how  much  there  is  in  the  music  of  his 
voice  and  the  ministry  of  his  instrument ;  and  the  writer  ask  himself  how  much  there 
is  in  the  writing  of  his  story ;  and  each  individual  ask  himself  how  much  there  is  in 
his  individual  life  :  how  much  he  subjects  his  wUl  to  the  will  of  God,  in  questions 
of  what  he  shall  eat,  and  what  he  shall  drink,  and  what  he  shall  read.     Go  into  a 
great  factory  full  of  spindles  and  wheels  and  all  intricate  machinery ;    all  are 
connected  with  some  great  water-wheel  below ;  and,  when  the  band  is  coimected, 
all  the  wheels  begin  to  revolve  and  all  the  spindles  to  play  their  music.      Now, 
imagine  every  wheel  and  every  spindle  with  a  will  or  purpose  of  its  own,  and 
keep  the  bands  off  and  let  every  spindle  dance  to  its  own  tune,  every  wheel  revolve 
at  its  own  pleasure — what  product  would  you  get  from  your  factory?  The  world  is 
"~*V)ut  of  gear  with  God,  that  is  the  trouble ;  and  you  and  I,  if  we  are  lawless,  are  just 
/   in  so  far  out  of  gear  with  God,  and  nothing  can  make  our  life  right  save  bringing  our- 
selves back  into  oneness  with  God,  to  will  what  He  wills  to  do,  do  what  He  would  have 
us  do.    (L.  Abbott,  D.D.)        Sin  and  penalty : — Infraction  of  law  must  be  followed  by 
infliction  of  penalty.     This  is  a  principle  to  which  common  sense  subscribes.     It  is 
i      older  than  historical  Christianity.    Before  we  open  the  Bible,  we  learn  it  from  the 
'       grand  and  tranquil  regularities  of  nature.     There  is  a  law  in  the  fire  ;  break  it,  and 
you  will  be  burned.   There  is  a  law  in  the  water ;  break  it,  and  you  will  be  drowned. 
There  is  a  law  in  mechanical  force ;  break  it,  and  you  will  be  crushed.     There  are 
laws  for  souls  as  well  as  for  bodies  ;  these  laws  are  all  wrapped  up  in  one :  "  Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.   Let  the  soul  break  it,  and  the  soul  wUl  die.   The 
fuU  penalty   does  not  foUow  close   upon  the  transgression,  but  it  is  inevitable. 
{G.  Stanford,  D.D.)        Sins,  small  and  great : — As  there  is  the  same  roundness  in 
a  little  ball  as  in  a  bigger,  so  the  same  disobedience  in  a  small  sin  as  in  a  great. 
{J.  Trapp.) 

Ver.  5.  And  in  Him  is  no  sin. — The  personal  history  and  character  of  Christ :  the 
influence  of  character  : — It  has  always  been  felt,  even  by  men  who  did  not  view  the 
matter  from  the  Christian  standpoint,  that  the  immediate  effects  of  the  mission  of 
Christ  must  be  largely  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  that  Divine  personality  which  He 
allied  with  human  nature,  and  which  brought  Him  into  contact,  at  every  stage  of 
His  earthly  sojourn,  with  the  sorrows,  the  necessities,  and  the  sympathies  of  life. 
The  same  feeling  has  brought  it  to  pass  that  the  love  of  Christ,  rather  than  any  other 
form  of  the  religious  sentiment,  represents  the  very  heart  and  centre  of  the  Christian 
character.  "The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us,"  says  the  apostle  ;  and  the  love  of 
Christ  alone  supplies  the  strong  and  overruling  motive  which  can  conquer  the 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

unrighteousness,  the  impurity,  the  selfish  darkness  of  the  world.  It  is  a  leading 
principle  thus  suggested  by  the  history  of  Christ  that  the  power  of  individual 
character,  with  all  the  special  force  of  sympathy,  self-sacrifice,  and  love,  is  the  most 
essential  element  in  every  kind  of  influence  which  has  ever  brought  about  great 
movements  or  given  a  right  direction  tcJ  the  impulse  of  change.  It  is  true  that  the 
influence  must  be  followed  up  and  perpetuated  by  a  wise  organisation ;  but  the  best 
organisation  wiU  go  for  little  or  nothing  if  it  is  not  permanently  actuated  by  this 
individual  power.  Never  has  this  fruitful  principle  received  so  grand  an  illustration 
as  when  the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  amongst  us.  The  amazing  power 
which  our  Lord  exerted  lay  not  so  much  in  His  words  and  deeds  as  in  the  character 
from  which  they  sprang,  not  so  much  in  His  maxims  of  charity  as  in  His  life  of  love. 
This  is  a  more  than  sufficient  answer  to  the  cavils  of  some  who  have  endeavoured  to 
depreciate  the  greatness  of  our  Saviour's  teaching  by  trying  to  prove  that  it  has  no 
new  message  that  He  brought  into  the  world.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  was  something 
greater  than  a  new  message — it  was  above  aU  things  a  new  life.  When  Gibbon 
mockingly  wrote  that  he  had  read  the  golden  rule  of  doing  as  we  would  be  done  by 
in  a  moral  treatise  of  Isocrates,  written  four  hundred  years  before  the  publication  of 
the  Gospel,  his  words  were  true  enough,  but  perfectly  irrelevant.  No  one  need  be  in 
the  least  surprised  to  hear  it.  He  might  have  found  much  that  sounds  like  the  golden 
rule  in  a  hundred  places  ;  but  what  he  would  have  found  was  the  shadow,  not  the 
power.  The  mere  precept  was  nothing  better  than  a  well-sounding  phrase  till  it  was 
lifted  into  life  and  energy  by  the  quickening  influence  and  example  of  the  love  of 
Christ.  The  power  of  Christ  was  both  Divine  and  human— exerted  by  One  who  was 
the  Son  of  Man  as  well  as  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.  Consider  how  these  two 
elements  were  always  blended  together  to  constitute  the  unprecedented  manifestation 
of  the  Gospel.  The  life  of  Christ,  then,  is  the  noblest  example  of  the  power  of 
influence,  just  as  the  Church  of  Christ  is  the  grandest  illustration  of  the  value  of 
system,  that  have  ever  yet  been  made  known  among  mankind.  Here  we  are  dealing 
with  a  law  of  universal  application.  For  the  two  things,  influence  and  system,  are 
the  elements  which  meet  in  all  great  institutions ;  the  one  to  give  force  and  impetus  ; 
the  other  to  supply  a  preservative  and  perpetuating  power.  In  God  Himself  these 
two  principles  are  united  in  completeness  and  perfection.  His  power  is  as  supreme 
as  though  no  such  thing  as  law  existed.  His  order  is  so  perfect  that  He  is  "  a  law 
unto  Himself  and  to  all  other  things  besides."  WhUe  both  of  these  are  illustrated 
in  the  life  of  Christ  and  in  the  Church,  both  of  them  rank  among  the  best  gifts  which 
God  has  bestowed  on  His  creatures  for  the  discharge  of  their  work  and  the  improve- 
ment of  their  race.  The  life  of  influence  is  indispensable  to  give  vigour  to  system ; 
the  protection  of  system  is  just  as  requisite  to  prevent  the  life  of  a  new  impulse  from 
evaporating  and  loving  itself  when  the  motive  power  has  been  withdrawn.  For  such 
as  ourselves  the  strongest  element  of  personal  influence  wiU  be  found  in  the 
sympathy  of  simple  human  fellowship — a  sympathy  which  will  lead  us,  in  spite  of 
all  differences  of  education  and  position,  to  lay  mind  to  mind  and  heart  to  heart  in 
dealing  with  those  whom  influence  can  reach,  so  that,  lowly  as  may  be  the  object 
which  we  seek  to  elevate,  a  loving  and  unselfish  sympathy  may  enable  us,  if  the 
word  be  not  too  bold,  and  if  only  we  may  be  so  highly  privileged  to  lift  their  nought 
to  value  by  our  side.  There  never  was  a  time  when  it  was  more  important  to  realise 
this  great  social  gift  of  sympathy.  (Archdeacon  Hannah.)  The  secret  of  sinless- 
ness — abiding  in  the  Sinless  One  as  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins: — I.  Consider, 
first,  FOR  WHAT  END  He  WAS  MANIFESTED.  It  was  to  "  take  away  our  sins."  John 
has  just  described  sin  as  "  the  transgression  of  the  law  "  (ver.  4).  He  has  fastened 
upon  this  as  constituting  the  essence  of  sin.  He  is  of  the  same  mind  with  Paul 
(Kom.  viii.  7).  He,  like  Paul,  knows  that  as  our  sins  are  against  the  law,  so  the  law 
is  against  our  sins.  In  the  grasp  and  under  the  power  of  the  law,  as  condemned 
criminals,  we  are  fettered ;  and  can  no  more  get  rid  of  our  sins  than  a  doomed  felon 
can  shake  oft  his  irons.  An  impotent  sense  of  failure  deadens  and  depresses  us, 
while  the  feeling  of  our  prostrate  bondage  in  our  sins  irritates  our  natural  enmity 
against  God.  And  if  we  do  not  relapse  into  indifference,  or  take  refuge  in  formality, 
or  sink  into  sullen  gloom,  we  are  shut  up  to  the  one  only  effectual  way  of  ending  this 
miserable  struggle  between  the  law  and  our  sinful  nature — the  way  of  free  grace  and 
sovereign  mercy;  the  way  of  embracing  Him  whom  "God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a 
propitiation  through  faith  in  His  blood."  Then  indeed  "  sin  shall  no  more  have 
dominion  over  us,  when  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace  "  ;  when  "  there 
is  now  to  us  no  condemnation  because  we  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  All  this,  I  think, 
must  be  held  to  be  comprehended  in  the  fact  stated — "  He  was  manifested  to  take 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  235 

away  our  sins."  And  it  is  all  consistent  with  the  object  for  which  John  reminds  us 
of  it :  our  purifying  ourselves,  as  He  is  pure.  He  was  manifested  to  take  away  our 
sins,  root  and  branch.  Their  power  to  condemn  us  He  takes  away ;  and  so  He  takes 
away  also  their  power  to  rule  over  us.  Nor  is  this  all.  In  virtue  of  His  being 
manifested  to  take  away  our  sins,  we  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  obstacle  which 
our  sin,  as  a  breach  of  the  law,  interposed  to  His  being  graciously  present  with  us 
and  in  us  is  taken  away.  A  new  nature,  a  new  heart,  a  new  spirit,  as  respects  the 
law  of  God  and  God  the  lawgiver,  a  new  character  as  well  as  a  new  state,  is  the 
result  of  Christ  being  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins.  We  know  that,  personally, 
practically,  experimentally,  and  our  knowledge  of  it  is  what  enables  as  well  as  moves 
us  to  purify  ourselves  as  Christ  is  pure.  It  is  so  all  the  rather  because,  secondly,  we 
are  to  consider  that  He  is  manifested  as  Himself  the  Sinless  One — "In  Him  is  no 
sin."  II.  With  this  sinless  person  we  aee  one,  "abiding  in  Him  as  the  Sinless 
One  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins."  And  that  is  our  security  against  sinning — 
"Whosoever  abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not."  This  is  the  statement  of  a  fact. 
Between  abiding  in  Christ  and  sinning  there  is  such  an  absolute  incompatibiUty 
that  whosoever  sinneth  is  for  the  time  not  merely  in  the  position  of  not  abiding  in 
Christ,  but  in  the  position  of  not  having  seen  or  known  Him.  1.  We  abide  in  Christ 
by  faith ;  by  that  faith,  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit,  which  unites  us  to  Christ.  Our 
abiding  in  Him  by  this  faith  implies  oneness,  real  and  actual  oneness.  When  we 
sin,  when  we  suffer  any  such  thought,  or  feeling,  or  wish  to  find  harbour  in  our 
breasts,  we  cease  for  the  time  to  be  abiding  in  Him.  2.  We  abide  in  Christ  by  His 
Spirit  abiding  in  us.  That  is  a  filial  spirit — the  Spirit  of  God's  Son  in  us  crying 
Abba  Father — the  Spirit  of  adoption  in  us  whereby  we  cry  Abba  Father.  {R.  S. 
Candlish,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Whosoever  abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not. — The  secret  of  sinlessness — 
our  abiding  in  Christ — the  seed  of  God  abiding  in  us  —  our  being  born  of 
God: — I.  These  texts  (vers.  6  and  9)  do  not  teach  either  the  doctrine  of 
perfection  or  that  other  doctrine  which  is  apt  to  usurp  its  place — the  doctrine 
that  God  sees  no  sin  in  His  people,  or  that  what  would  be  sin  in  others  is  not 
sin  in  them.  H.  There  is  another  mode  of  dealing  with  the  statements  before  us 
which  I  cannot  feel  to  be  satisfactory.  It  is  to  limit  their  comprehensiveness,  and 
to  understand  the  apostle  as  speaking,  not  of  sin  universally,  but  of  sin  more  or 
less  voluntary  and  presumptuous.  According  to  this  view,  one  abiding  in  Christ 
cannot  sin  deliberately,  intentionally,  knowingly.  Is  that  true  ?  Was  it  true  of 
David  ?  Or  of  the  man  in  Corinth  who  was  excommunicated  for  incest,  and,  upon 
repentance,  restored  ?  III.  It  may  help  us  out  of  the  difficulty  if  we  first  look  at  the 
statements  before  us  in  the  light,  not  of  what  we  are  now  by  grace,  but  of  what  we 
are  to  be  in  the  future  state  of  glory.  It  will  be  true  then  that  we  sin  not ;  it  wUl  be 
impossible  for  us  then  to  sin.  What  will  make  it  impossible  for  us  to  sin  ?  Simply 
our  abiding  in  Christ,  our  being  born  of  God,  His  seed  abiding  in  us.  Let  me 
remind  you  that  this  impeccability  lies  in  the  will — the  seat  of  it  is  the  will.  It 
is  because,  in  the  state  of  glory,  my  will  is  made  "perfectly  and  immutably  free  to 
do  good  alone,"  that  my  will  is,  or  that  I  myself  am,  incapable  of  doing  evil.  And 
if  it  is  your  will  that  is  to  be  thus  free — free,  as  His  will  is  free,  to  do  good 
alone,  and  therefore  incapable  of  an  evil  choice,  then  your  impeccability  must  be,  if 
I  may  say  so,  itself  voluntary ;  voluntarily  accepted  and  realised.  IV.  Let  me  try 
to  bring  out  more  clearly  this  principle  as  one  that  must  connect  the  future  with  the 
present.  Why  is  it  that  in  heaven,  my  will  being  free  as  God's  will  is  free,  I  can  no 
more  sin  than  He  can  sin  ?  What  answer  would  John  give  to  that  question  if  you 
could  put  it  to  him  now  ?  As  thus  :  "  In  whatever  sense,  and  with  whatever  modi- 
fications, thou  didst,  in  thy  experience  when  here,  find  that  to  be  true  which  thou 
hast  so  emphatically  put — as  the  test,  apparently,  of  real  Christianity — it  is  all  true 
of  thee  there,  where  thou  art  now  !  How  is  it  so  ?  Why  is  it  so  ?  "  "  Because  I 
abide  in  the  Son  of  God,  and  God's  own  seed  abides  in  me,  as  being  born  of  God  " — ■ 
is  not  that  his  reply  ?  What  other  reply  can  he  give  ?  Then,  does  it  not  foUow 
that  it  is  an  impeccability  that  may  be  realised  on  earth  ?  For  the  causes  of  it  are 
realised  on  earth  ;  first,  your  abiding  in  the  Son  of  God  ;  secondly,  your  being  born 
of  God  so  as  to  have  His  seed  abiding  in  you.  V.  Viewed  thus  in  the  light  of  "  what 
we  shall  be,"  and  of  the  bearing  of  what  we  shall  be  on  what  we  are,  John's  state- 
ments assume  a  somewhat  different  aspect  from  what  they  are  apt  to  wear  when 
taken  by  themselves.  They  become  not  one  whit  less  solemn,  but  greatly  more 
encouraging.     For  one  thing,  you  may  now  regard  them  as  describing  a  precious 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

privilege,  as  well  as  imposing  a  searching  test.  They  show  you  the  way  of  perfect 
holiness ;  how  you  are  to  be  righteous  even  as  Christ  is  righteous  ;  even  as  God  ia 
righteous.  VI.  Taking  this  view,  I  confess  I  do  not  feel  so  much  concern  as  other- 
wise I  might  feel  about  reconciling  such  strong  statements  as  that  one  abiding  in 
Christ  sinneth  not,  or  that  one  born  of  God  cannot  sin,  with  the  acknowledged  and 
lamented  fact  that  he  does  sin.  John  has  dealt  with  that  fact  already,  and  told  us 
how  to  deal  with  it.  It  is  not  his  business  here  to  be  making  allowance  for  it.  For 
indeed  it  is  most  dangerous  to  be  considering  the  matter  in  that  light  or  on  that  side 
at  all.  It  is  almost  sure  to  lead,  first  to  calculations,  and  then  to  compromises  fatal 
to  singleness  of  eye  and  the  holy  ambition  that  ought  to  fire  the  breast — calculations 
first  about  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  residuum  of  old  corruption  which  we  must 
lay  our  account  with  finding  in  the  purest  God-born  soul,  and  then  compromises 
under  the  sort  of  feeling  that,  as  the  proverb  says,  what  cannot  be  cured  must  be 
endured.  Let  a  few  practical  inferences  be  suggested.  1.  I  think  the  texts  teach, 
or  imply,  the  doctrine  of  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints,  the  impossibiUty  of 
their  either  wholly  or  permanently  falling  away  from  a  state  of  grace.  2.  The  texts 
teach  very  plainly  that  this  doctrine,  whatever  may  be  its  practical  use  and  value  in 
its  right  place,  and  when  turned  to  legitimate  account,  cannot  give  to  any  man 
security  in  sin,  cannot  make  him  safe  when  he  is  sinning,  when  he  is  committing 
sin  or  transgressing  the  law.  3.  John's  true  design  and  purpose  is  to  put  you  in 
the  way  of  not  sinning,  of  its  being  impossible  for  you  to  sin.  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.) 
The  inadmissibility  of  sin  : — This  paragraph  goes  to  show  that  the  practice  of  sin  is 
out  of  the  question  for  a  believer  in  Christ.  Sin  has  no  pJace  whatever  in  the 
Christian  life,  according  to  the  proper  view  and  conception  of  it.  We  observe  five 
distinct  reasons  alleged  by  the  apostle  for  this  conclusion.  I.  First  he  makes  out, 
in  vers.  2  and  8,  that  on  purity  depends  oub  future  glory.  This  is  the  starting- 
point  of  his  denunciation  of  sin.  John  and  his  readers  are  "  now,"  in  this  present 
life,  the  "  children  of  God."  The  manner  of  their  future  existence  is  not  revealed. 
One  thing  "  we  know,"  that  it  will  be  a  God-like  state.  We  want  to  see  God,  for  we 
are  His  children.  And  we  are  told  that  "  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  Then  we  must  be  holy.  Now  the  pattern  of  God-likeness  for  us  is  Jesus 
the  Son  of  God.  We  will,  therefore,  conform  ourselves  to  Him.  Every  one  who 
longs  to  see  God,  and  has  seen  Jesus  Christ,  knows  now  what  he  must  be  like  in 
order  to  attain  the  vision.  So  he  "  purifies  himself,  as  He  is  pure."  The  apostle 
does  not  tell  us  here  how  this  purity  is  to  be  gained.  He  says  one  thing  at  a  time. 
He  wants  to  convince  us  that  such  purity  is  indispensable.  Observe,  by  the  way, 
the  word  which  John  uses  here  for  pure.  It  is  hagnos,  which  elsewhere  and  com- 
monly means  chaste  (2  Cor.  xi.  2;  Titus  ii.  5).  It  signifies  the  delicate  purity  of 
virgin  thoughts  and  an  uncontaminated  mind  (comp.  Rev.  xiv.  4),  the  opposite  of 
sensuality  and  carnality ;  the  purity  of  one  in  whom  the  animal  and  earthly  are 
refined  and  transformed  by  the  spiritual — as  in  Jesus.  II.  Now  St.  John  proceeds 
from  the  positive  to  the  negative,  from  enjoining  holiness  to  denouncing  sin.  And 
of  his  prohibitions  this  is  the  first :  sin  is  illegal.  So  he  puts  it,  with  concise 
energy,  in  ver.  4.  This  seems  to  you,  perhaps,  a  commonplace ;  because  you  have 
behind  you  many  ages  of  Christian  teaching.  Not  so  with  John's  readers.  Most  of 
them  had  been  Pagans,  taught  to  think  that  if  they  kept  the  ceremonial  rules  of 
religion,  and  the  laws  of  the  state  as  sanctioned  by  religion,  the  gods  were  satisfied 
with  them,  troubling  themselves  no  further  about  men's  conduct  or  the  condition  of 
their  souls — that,  in  fact,  private  morals  are  one  thing,  law  and  religion  quite 
another.  Some  of  them  had,  probably,  been  Pharisaic  Jews,  accustomed  to  observe 
strictly  the  letter  of  their  sacred  law,  while  they  found  means,  by  all  manner  of 
evasions,  to  indulge  in  gross  wickedness.  Now  the  apostle  traverses  this  position  in 
ver.  4.  He  deepens  our  conception  of  sin  and  broadens  our  conception  of  law,  while 
he  makes  them  coincide  and  cover  the  same  ground,  when  he  says, "  Sin  is  lawless- 
ness." The  law  of  God  is  all-embracing,  all-penetrating;  it  touches  every  part  of 
human  nature  and  conduct.  We  have  no  business  to  do  anything  or  think  anything 
that  is  in  the  least  degree  ungodly.  Every  sinner  is  a  rebel  and  an  outlaw  in  God's 
creation.  This  is  the  first  and  fundamental  condemnation — the  constitutional 
objection  to  sin,  as  we  may  call  it.  III.  In  the  next  place,  sin  is  unchristian. 
Here  again  we  must  put  ourselves  in  the  position  of  the  readers,  who  had  to  learn 
things  of  God  that  He  has  been  teaching  us  and  our  fathers  for  centuries.  "  He  was 
manifested  that  He  might  take  away  sins  " — not  "  our  sins,"  but  "  sins  "  in  the  most 
unlimited  sense  (compare  chap.  ii.  2).  This  our  apostle  had  learnt  from  his  first 
master,  the  Baptist,  who  pointed  him  to  Jesus  with  the  words,  "  Behold  the  Lamb 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  237 

of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world !  "  That  great  manifestation,  the 
appearance  of  the  Son  of  God  in  human  flesh,  was  God's  demonstration  against  sin. 
Christ's  one  object  was  to  destroy  it ;  and  we  can  only  "  abide  in  Him  "  on  the 
understanding  that  we  have  done  with  it  too.  Nor  must  we  deceive  ourselves  by 
thinking  that  "  righteousness  "  consists  of  good  frames  and  feelings — we  must  "  do 
righteousness"  (ver.  7).  This  apostle  had  known  his  Master  on  earth  more 
intimately  than  any  one  besides.  And  in  this  one  word  he  describes  the  character 
of  Jesus,  and  says  of  Him  what  could  be  said  of  no  other  child  of  Adam  :  "  In  Him 
sin  does  not  exist."  Elsewhere  he  calls  Him  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous,"  "  the 
pure,"  "the  true."  To  "take  away  sins,"  to  "cleanse  us  from  all  sin"  (i.  7),  ia 
with  John  a  summary  term  for  the  abolition  of  moral  evil.  The  Lord  Jesus  carries 
our  sins  right  away  and  discharges  us  from  them.  Herein  lies  the  glory  and  the 
fulness  of  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus — it  destroys  sin  root  and  branch, 
in  its  guilt  and  power,  its  burden  on  the  conscience,  and  its  dominion  over  the  heart. 
It  is  a  hard  saying,  that  of  ver.  6 :  "  Whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  Him  nor 
known  Him ! "  The  interpreter  needs  to  walk  warUy,  lest  with  this  sentence  he 
should  break  some  bruised  reed,  or  quench  the  smoking  flax  in  the  heart  of  one  who 
loves  the  Lord  and  yet  has  to  mourn  his  many  failures  and  shortcomings.  The 
apostle  writes  here,  and  in  vers.  4  and  6,  in  the  Greek  present  participle,  which 
describes  a  continuous  act  or  habit  of  sin :  "  every  one  that  sinneth  "  signifies  every 
one  who  lives  in  sin,  or  every  sinner  ;  and  "  every  one  that  doeth  sin  "  means  every 
one  whose  life  bears  this  fruit  and  yields  sin  for  its  product  and  result.  The  apostle 
is  not  thinking  of  the  case  of  men  weak  in  faith  or  "  overtaken  in  some  trespass." 
Once  to  have  seen  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  John  had  seen  Him,  is  enough  to  make  any 
other  ideal  of  hfe  impossible.  If  you  have  "  seen  Him,"  then  you  have  fallen  in  love 
with  holiness,  once  and  for  ever.  For  you  to  put  up  with  sin  any  more,  or  be  at 
peace  with  it,  is  a  thing  impossible.  IV.  Once  more,  St.  John  gives  us  to  under- 
stand that  SIN  IS  diabolicaij  (ver.  8).  The  righteous  Son  of  God  has  come  forth  to 
be  the  leader  of  the  sons  of  God,  who  are  saved  by  His  blood  and  abide  in  His 
righteousness.  For  the  doers  of  sin  there  is  another  leader  and  pattern :  "  He  that 
doeth  sin  is  of  the  devil."  Every  act  of  wrong-doing  is  an  act  of  assistance  to  the 
enemy  of  God  and  man  ;  it  is  an  act  of  treason,  therefore,  in  the  professed  servant 
of  God,  the  soldier  of  Christ  Jesus.  Every  such  act  helps  in  its  degree  to  prop  and 
maintain  the  great  fortress  of  evil,  the  huge  rampart  raised  in  this  world  against 
the  holy  and  almighty  will  of  God,  which  Scripture  calls  sin.  V.  Finally,  St.  John 
comes  round  again  to  what  he  had  said  at  the  outset :  Sin  is  unnatural  in  a  child 
or  God  (ver.  9).  The  two  sentences  of  ver.  9  amount  to  saying :  First,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  the  child  of  God  does  not  sin  ;  secondly,  as  a  matter  of  principle,  he  cannot 
sin.  Concerning  "  every  one  that  is  begotten  of  God,"  the  apostle  asserts,  "  sin  he 
does  not  commit."  There  is  a  master  influence,  a  principle  of  Divine  life  and 
Bonship,  which  produces  the  opposite  effect,  a  "  seed "  that  bears  good  fruit  of 
righteousness  instead  of  the  old  evU  fruit  of  unrighteousness.  This  "  seed  of  God 
abiding  "  in  the  beUever  is  surely,  according  to  John's  way  of  thinking,  the  presence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  which  he  called  in  chap.  ii.  27  "an  anointing  from  the  Holy 
One  dwelling  in  you,"  the  chrism  (anointing)  which  makes  men  Christians.  Of  the 
same  grace  he  writes  in  chapter  iii.  24  :  "In  this  we  know  that  He  dwells  in  us,  from 
the  Spirit  which  He  gave  os."  And  St.  Paul  teaches  us  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  given 
to  believers  in  Christ,  is  at  once  the  seal  of  their  sonship  to  God  and  the  seed  of  moral 
goodness ;  for  he  speaks  of  the  manifold  forms  of  Christian  virtue  as  "  the  fruit  o{ 
the  Spirit "  (Gal.  v.  22,  23),  that  excludes  "  the  works  of  the  flesh."  For  "  these  are 
contrary  one  to  the  other,  so  that  you  may  not  do  the  things  you  would  " ;  "  the 
Spirit  lusts  against  the  flesh  " — it  desires  and  effects  what  the  flesh  most  dishked. 
Sin  is  done  away  not  by  mere  negation  and  repression,  but  by  the  counterworking 
of  a  positive  and  stronger  principle.  The  ground  is  so  fiUed  with  the  good  seed  that 
weeds  have  no  room  to  grow.  To  a  child  of  God,  to  the  new  nature,  the  new  tastea 
and  dispositions  of  the  man  "born  of  the  Spirit,"  sin  becomes  a  moral  impossibility. 
It  is  wholly  repugnant  to  that  "  Divine  nature  "  of  which  he  now  partakes  (2  Pet. 
1.  4).  What  shall  we  say,  then,  to  the  notorious  fact  of  sin  in  believers?  Some 
have  shamelessly  declared  that  their  sin  is  no  sin,  for  they  are  "  born  of  God,"  and 
therefore  "  cannot  sin  "  !  St.  John  would  infallibly  draw,  for  such  men,  the  opposite 
conclusion — that,  seeing  they  thus  sin,  they  are  not  born  of  God,  they  "  lie  and  do 
not  the  truth."  The  fact  must  be  admitted,  but  not  for  a  moment  allowed.  Sin  ia 
an  alien  and  monstrous  thing  to  the  regenerate ;  its  detection  in  the  heart  must 
•anse  to  a  child  of  God  the  deepest  pain  and  shame.     Its  actual  commission,  eveQ 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.     '  [chap.  m. 

for  a  moment,  is  a  fall  from  grace,  a  loss  of  the  seal  of  sonship,  only  to  be  retrieved 
by  prompt  repentance  and  recourse  to  the  all-cleansing  blood.  Christianity  can 
make  no  concession  to  sin,  no  compromise  with  it  in  any  shape  or  form,  without 
stultifying  itself  and  denying  its  sinless,  suffering  Lord.  (G.  G.  Findlay,  B.A.) 
Abiding  in  Christ  the  remedy  against  sin  : — As  the  Venerable  Bede  wrote  long  ago, 
"  Quantum  in  Eo  manet,  tantum  non  peccat "  ("In  so  far  as  he  abideth  in  Him, 
thus  far  he  sinneth  not.")  Christian  purity  : — This  deUverance  does  not  imply  the 
annihilation  of  the  inward  tendency  to  sin,  so  that  we  shall  no  longer  find  it  in  us 
as  a  force  against  which  we  have  to  watch  and  to  contend.  For,  if  Christ,  by  His 
own  presence  and  power  in  our  hearts,  gives  us  complete  and  constant  victory  over 
the  hostile  force  within  us,  so  that  it  no  longer  consciously  moulds  our  acts,  or 
words,  or  thoughts,  we  are  already  saved  from  all  polluting  power  of  sin.  A 
tendency  to  evil  which  is  every  moment  trodden  underfoot  will  cause  us  no 
spiritual  shame.  {J.  A.  Beet,  D.D.)  Centrifugal  and  centripetal  forces  : — This 
exposition  may  be  illustrated  by  a  far-reaching  analogy  found  in  the  solar  system. 
The  motive  force  in  a  planet  at  any  moment,  which  force  is  an  accumulation  of  its 
previous  motion,  would,  if  the  attractive  force  of  the  sun  were  withdrawn,  carry  the 
planet  from  its  orbit  and  to  ruin.  Whereas,  if  the  inherent  force  were  removed,  the 
planet  would  fall  into  the  sun,  thus  losing  its  individual  existence.  But  under  the 
combined  influence  of  these  two  forces,  each  exerting  its  full  influence  every 
moment,  the  planet  moves  on  its  appointed  path,  preserving  its  individuality,  yet 
subordinate  to  a  body  immensely  greater  than  itself.  So  we  move  in  absolute 
devotion  to  Him  from  whom  we  receive  light  and  life  and  all  things.  (Ibid.) 
Counteracting  sin : — Similarly,  we  carry  in  our  bodies  chemical  forces  which  would 
destroy  us  were  they  not  neutralised  by  the  presence  of  animal  life.  Yet,  in  spite  of 
these  forces,  the  body  may  be  in  perfect  health.  For  the  neutralising  power  is 
sufiicient  to  preserve  us.  Just  so  the  presence  of  Christ  in  our  hearts  holds  back  our 
inborn  tendencies  to  evil,  aggravated  as  they  are  by  personal  sin,  and  preserves  us 
from  all  corruption.     Thus  does  He  save  His  people  from  their  sins.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you ;  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is 
righteous,  even  as  He  is  righteous. — The  secret  of  sinlessness  : — The  false  teachers 
of  John's  day  held  that  one  might  reach  in  some  mysterious  way  a  height  of  serene, 
inviolable,  inward  purity  and  peace,  such  as  no  things  without,  not  even  his  own 
actions,  could  stain.  In  a  less  transcendental  form,  the  same  sort  of  notion 
practically  prevails  in  the  world.  John  meets  it  by  bringing  out  in  marked  contrast 
the  two  opposite  natur^,  one  or  other  of  which  we  must  all  share :  that  of  God 
and  that  of  the  devil.  I.  "He  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous,  even  as  Christ 
is  righteous."  It  is  clearly  moral  character  that  is  here  in  question,  not  legal 
standing.  The  precise  lesson  taught,  the  great  principle  asserted,  is  that  righteous- 
ness, moral  righteousness,  cannot  possibly  exist  in  a  quiescent  or  inactive  state ; 
that  it  never  can  be  a  latent  power  or  undeveloped  quality  ;  that  wherever  it  is  it 
must  be  operative.  It  must  be  working,  and  working  according  to  its  own  essential 
nature.  Moreover,  it  must  be  working,  not  partially,  but  universally ;  working 
everywhere  and  always  ;  working  in  and  upon  whatever  it  comes  in  contact  with,  in 
the  mind  within  and  the  world  without.  Otherwise,  it  is  not  righteousness  at  all ; 
certainly  not  such  as  we  see  in  Jesus  ;  it  is  not "  being  righteous  as  He  is  righteous." 
n.  As  "  doing  righteousness,"  through  its  being  thus  associated  or  identified  with 
"  being  righteous  as  the  Son  is  righteous,"  proves  our  being  "  born  of  God  " ;  so 
*•  doing  sin  "  proves  a  very  different  relationship,  a  very  different  paternity.  "  He 
that  committeth  "  or  doeth  "  sin  is  of  the  devil"  ;  for,  by  doing  sin,  he  shows  his 
identity  of  nature  with  him  who  is  a  sinner  from  the  beginning.  And  it  is  upon 
identity  of  nature,  proved  practically,  that  the  question  of  moral  and  spiritual 
parentage  must  ultimately  turn.  This  phrase,  "  being  of  the  devil,"  as  used  here 
and  elsewhere  in  Scripture,  does  not  imply  what  in  human  opinion  would  be 
accounted  great  criminality  or  gross  immorality.  The  sin  which  lost  Satan  heaven 
was  neither  lust  nor  murder.  It  was  not  carnal  at  all,  but  merely  spiritual.  It 
was  not  even  lying — at  least,  not  at  first — though  "he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of 
it."  It  was  pure  and  simple  insubordination  and  rebellion ;  the  setting  of  his  will 
against  God's  ;  the  proud  refusal,  at  the  Father's  bidding,  to  worship  the  Son.  So 
*'  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning."  And  when  you  so  sin,  you  are  of  your 
father  the  devil.  In  order,  then,  to  enter  into  the  full  meaning  of  John's  solemn 
testimony,  it  is  not  needful  to  wait  till  some  horrid  access  of  diabolic  fury  or  frenzy 
seizes  us.     It  is   enough   if  "  the  tongue   speaketh  proud  thiugs,"  or  the  heart 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  239 

conceives  them.  "  Our  lips  are  our  own  ;  who  is  lord  over  us  ?  "  Or,  why  are 
they  not  our  own  ?  May  they  not  at  least  occasionally  be  our  own — this  once  ;  for 
singing  one  vain  song,  or  uttering  one  idle  word,  or  joining  in  an  hour's  not  very 
profitable,  but  not  yet  very  objectionable,  talk  ?  Is  there  any  rising  up  in  us  of 
such  a  feeling  as  this,  as  if  it  were  hard  that  we  may  not  occasionally  take  our 
own  way  and  be  our  own  masters  ?  It  is  the  devil's  seed  abiding  in  us  ;  the  seed  of 
the  devil's  sin,  and  of  his  sinful  nature.  III.  "  But  for  this  purpose  the  Son  of 
God  was  manifested,  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  {R.  S. 
Candlish,  D.D.)  On  imitation  of  the  obedience  of  Christ : — I.  What  we  are  to 
UNDERSTAND  BY  THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  Jesus  Christ.  1.  He  was  prc-cminently 
righteous  in  His  moral  sentiments.  His  mind  was  entirely  free  from  pollution,  and 
no  unrighteous  or  unholy  affection  ever  harboured  there.  He  had  the  law  of  God 
in  His  heart,  and  it  was  His  meat  and  His  drink  to  do  the  wiU  of  His  heavenly 
Father.  By  the  original  constitution  of  His  nature,  and  the  plenary  inspiration  of 
the  Spirit,  He  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners.  His  love 
to  God  was  intense,  rational,  and  pure,  and  His  benevolence  to  man  was  without  the 
slightest  ingredient  that  could  sully  the  purity  and  heavenliness  of  His  motives. 
2.  He  was  righteous,  not  only  in  His  moral  sentiments,  but  also  pre-eminently 
righteous  as  it  regarded  His  moral  actions.  From  the  perfection  of  His  knowledge 
He  knew  intuitively  both  what  was  good  and  what  was  evil ;  but  His  heart  never 
consented  to  what  was  evil,  and  His  will  led  him  invariably  to  choose  the  good 
and  reject  the  evil.  He  endured  a  severer  series  of  temptation  than  any  other 
human  being  that  ever  appeared  in  the  world.  He  had  no  other  motive  to  direct 
His  moral  conduct  but  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  desire  of  advantage  to  the  bodies 
and  the  souls  of  men.  The  only  ambition  by  which  He  was  actuated  was  the  noble, 
the  generous,  the  Godlike  ambition  of  doing  good.     II.  We  can  only  lay  claim  to 

THAT   designation    IN    SO    FAB   AS     OUR     SENTIMENTS     AND     ACTIONS     CORRESPOND     WITH 

His.  In  one  very  important  respect  there  is  certainly  a  vast  difference  between 
even  the  holiest  of  men  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  From  the  native  rectitude  of 
His  will  He  could  do  nothing  that  was  evil ;  but,  alas  !  we  are  naturally  prone  to 
evil ;  and  how,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  can  we  be  righteous,  even  as  He  was 
righteous  ?  But  we  ought  ever  to  recollect  that  this  is  not  a  natural,  but  a  moral 
inability ;  it  is  not  so  much  the  want  of  power  as  the  want  of  inclination,  and  this 
wiU  never  excuse  us  before  the  tribunal  of  Almighty  God.  We  know  what  is  good, 
and  what  the  Lord  requires  of  us ;  but  we  too  often  voluntarily  follow  after,  and  do 
that  which  is  evil.  (D.  Stevenson.)  The  inijwrtance  of  works  .-—The  words  "he 
that  doeth  righteousness,"  instruct  us  that  there  is  a  righteousness  which  we  can 
do.  We  are  elsewhere  taught  that  there  is  a  righteousness  which  we  cannot  do 
(Psa.  xiv.  1,  3;  Eom.  iii.  10).  The  righteousness,  in  the  sense  of  which  none  are 
righteous,  is  either  a  natural  righteousness,  we  all,  by  nature,  being  inclined  to 
evil,  or  it  is  an  independent  righteousness,  or  it  is  a  meritorious  righteousness, 
or  else  it  is  the  legal  righteousness,  the  righteousness  of  perfect  obedience, 
and  "  in  many  things  we  offend  all."  But  the  righteousness  which  we  can  do 
is  very  extensive  and  precious.  We  can  be  so  far  righteous  as  to  render  to 
God,  according  to  the  best  of  our  poor  abilities,  the  honour  and  worship  due 
to  Him  ;  we  can  believe  in  Him,  fear  Him,  pray  to  Him,  give  Him  thanks, 
honour  Him  with  our  substance,  delight  in  His  ordinances  and  commandments ; 
we  can  avoid  the  wilful  commission  of  sin,  we  can  cause  our  light  so  to 
shine  before  men  that  seeing  it  they  may  be  led  to  glorify  our  heavenly  Father. 
Now  our  text  affirms  of  those  who  practise  such  righteousness — first,  that  they 
are  righteous ;    and,   secondly,   that  they  are  righteous  as   Christ   is  righteous. 

I.    He    THAT    DOETH   RIGHTEOUSNESS    IS   RIGHTEOUS.       SomC  WOUld  objCCt  tO  the  USC   of 

this  language  in  reference  to  any  human  being.  They  think  that  human  nature  is 
SO  inevitably  depraved  that  no  terms  except  those  of  the  most  debasing  import  are 
applicable  to  any  works  which  proceed  from  it,  even  in  its  regenerate  state.  But 
however  partial  some  may  be  to  such  distressing  views  of  human  nature,  the 
Scriptures  do  not  authorise  them.  They  unequivocally  state  the  fact  of  man's 
depravity,  but  they  confine  themselves  to  general  declarations  of  the  same,  such  as 
"  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness,"  "  the  imagination  of  man's  heart  is  evil 
from  his  youth,"  "  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God,"  without 
attempting  to  fix  the  degree  of  our  common  corruption — a  forbearance  which  it 
would  be  wise  in  all  to  imitate.  H.  He  is  righteous  even  as  Christ  is 
RIGHTEOUS.  The  apostle  appears  to  mean  that,  as  Christ's  righteousness  was  His 
own  personal  righteousness,  and  not  by  imputation,  so  that  righteousness  which  is 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

by  faith  shall  be  accounted  the  believer's  personal,  which,  through  the  meritorious 
obedience  of  Christ,  shall  avail  to  final  justification.  {A.  Williams,  M.A.)  Sin  and 
its  destruction : — I.  "  He  that  committeth  sm  is  of  the  devil."  The  word 
rendered  "  committeth,"  implies  continued  action.  It  is  expressive  of  a  habit 
rather  than  of  an  act.  It  assumes  that  the  sinner  is  under  the  influence  of  Satan. 
His  power  over  the  body  and  the  physical  faculties  of  the  mind  is  fearfully  exposed 
in  the  history  of  demoniacal  possessions  in  the  gospel  narrative.  There  is  evidence 
no  less  clear  and  irresistible  of  his  influence  over  moral  principles.  "  The  lusts  of 
your  father  ye  will  do,"  "  the  spirit  that  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience." 
There  is,  more,  however,  in  the  expression  of  the  text.  It  implies  that  not  only 
are  sinners  subject  to  Satan,  but  that  they  are  employed  by  him  to  aid  him  in 
influencing  others  to  evil.  II.  The  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning.  "  From 
the  beginning  "  must  be  explained  of  a  Hmited  period,  and  refers  probably  to  the 
commencement  of  the  present  dispensation.  His  conduct  toward  our  first  parents 
IS  the  model  of  what  he  has  ever  done  toward  their  descendants.  And  it  is 
deserving  of  notice  how  those  whom  he  does  succeed  to  influence  are  made  to 
resemble  him.  As  he  does  to  them,  so  do  th-ey  to  others.  They  are  seduced  by 
Satan  and  they  become  seducers.  They  are  deceived  by  him,  and  they  try  to 
deceive  others.  Such  is  the  progress  of  sin.  It  knows  no  limit.  Once  set  in 
motion,  it  continues  with  accelerated  pace  to  pursue  its  course.  At  the  same  time 
we  are  reminded  by  the  view  of  sin  and  Satan  now  before  us,  that  there  is  no 
effectual  restraint  put  upon  iniquity,  nor  any  reformation  produced  by  all  the 
sorrow  and  suffering  which  it  entails.  True,  the  opportunity  of  indulgence  may  be 
withdrawn,  and  then  the  sin  is  not  committed,  or  a  partial  and  temporary  change 
may  be  produced.  But  mere  suffering  can  effect  no  more.  The  Spirit  of  God 
alone  can  heal  the  malady.  III.  "  For  this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was 
manifested,  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  The  work  of 
Christ  is  a  fuU  counterpart  to  that  of  Satan.     (J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8.    He  that  coounitteth  sin  is  of  the  devil ;  for  the  devil  sinneth  from 
the  heginning. — The  existence  of  the  devil  and  the  origin  of  evil : — I.  Eefute  thb 

THREE    THEORIES   IN    WHICH   THE   DEVIL-DENTINO    DOCTRINES   ARE    COMPRISED.       1.     The 

doctrine  that  two  principles,  of  good  and  evQ,  eternally  existed,  and  that  the  devil 
is  only  the  evil  principle  personified.  2.  The  theory  that  the  devil,  specified  in  the 
Bible,  is  only  the  personification  of  fallen  human  nature.  3.  The  theory  that 
sinful  actions  are  the  only  devil  that  the  Bible  guards  us  against.     II.  Explain 

THE   ORIGIN    of   EVIL,    AND   EXHIBIT    THE   REAL   EXISTENCE    OF     SaTAN,    AS    ESTABLISHED 

BY  REASON  AND  REVELATION.  {W .  Bames.)  Children  of  the  devil : — 1.  The  un- 
regenerate  sinner,  Uving  in  the  habitual  practice  of  sin,  is  of  Satan,  because  his 
will  harmonises  with  Satan's  will ;  and  it  follows,  therefore,  that  all  the  powers 
and  faculties  which  he  possesses,  influential  as  they  are  upon  those  with  whom  he 
associates,  become  instrumental  to  the  working  out  of  the  dictates  of  Satan's  will 
rather  than  God's  will.  2.  The  unregenerate  sinner,  living  in  the  habitual  indul- 
gence of  sin,  is  under  the  despotic  influence  of  Satan,  whose  slave  and  vassal  he  is. 
He  may  be  a  free  member  of  a  free  community,  but  his  heart,  his  intellect,  hia 
body,  all  are  bound  in  unresisting  submissiveness  to  Satan.  3.  The  unregenerate 
sinner,  living  in  the  habitual  indulgence  of  sin,  must,  if  unreclaimed  by  sovereign 
grace,  share  the  final  end  of  Satan.  If  he  is  of  the  devil  in  sinning,  he  must  be  of 
the  devil  in  suffering.  (G.  Fisk,  LL.B.)  For  this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was 
manifested,  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  deviL — Satan's  work* 
destroyed : — I.  The  fact — that  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested  1.  By  His 
mysterious  incarnation.  2.  By  His  personal  ministry.  3.  By  the  promulgation 
of  His  gospel.  4.  By  the  presence  of  His  Spirit.  11.  The  design  of  this  mani- 
festation— "  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devU."  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Christ  a  destroyer: — I.  The  works  of  the  devxl.  What  these  may  be  in  the 
unseen  world  we  know  not ;  we  find  enough  of  them  here  in  our  world  to  astonish 
us.  1.  Moral  evil,  sin,  is  one  of  these  works.  It  is  this  which  the  apostle  has 
more  especially  in  his  mind  here,  and  which  we  may  regard  as  the  foundation  of 
all  the  rest.  2.  What  we  call  natural  evil,  suffering,  is  another  of  his  works.  It 
grows  out  of  sin.  3.  And  then  comes  discord,  another  work  of  Satan.  Man  and 
his  God  were  walking  together  at  first  in  a  blessed  amity.  Satan  came  in  and 
severed  between  them.  And  think  of  the  contentions  which  have  ever  been  going 
on  between  man  and  man  in  nations,  societies,  churches,  and  even  families — Satan 
has  fostered  them  aU ;    nay,  given  rise  to  them  all.     4.  And  then  there  is  the 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  241 

deception  which  prevails  in  our  world.  We  must  trace  this  also  to  Satan.  He  i3 
called  in  Scripture  "  the  father  of  lies,"  of  all  lies,  but  more  especially  of  all 
spiritual  Mes.  Well  knowing  that  he  caimot  keep  religion  altogether  out  of  the 
world,  he  deludes  men  with  false  religions.  5.  Another  work  of  Satan  is  the 
obscurity  he  has  thrown  here  over  Jehovah's  glory.  He  seems  to  have  baffled  God 
in  all  His  purposes  as  to  our  v/orld  ;  to  have  brought  to  nothing  all  the  designs  of 
His  goodness  towards  it  when.  He  created  it.  6.  And  one  thing  more  must  be 
added — death.  This  crowns  the  work  of  Satan.  H.  The  manifestation  of  the 
Son  of  God  to  destroy  them.  Even  the  omnipotent  Son  of  God  cannot  be  a 
Saviour  unless  He  is  at  the  same  time  a  destroyer.  The  works  of  Satan  must  be 
demolished,  or  God's  great  work  of  mercy  cannot  be  accomplished.  IH.  The 
DESTETJCTioN  OF  THESE  woEKS.  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  effects  their  destruction  in  a 
wonderful  character.  Had  we  been  told  that  the  Son  of  the  Highest  was  about  to 
manifest  Himself  in  our  world  as  a  Destroyer,  we  should  have  expected  Him  to 
appear  among  us  in  His  glorious  majesty,  withering  Satan,  as  He  will  do  hereafter, 
by  "  the  brightness  of  His  coming."  But  the  Lord  is  wiser  than  we.  This  would 
have  been  a  display  of  the  Divine  power  only.  The  Lord  would  not  thus  honour 
Satan.  He  lays  aside  His  majesty  when  He  comes  forth  to  this  work  of  destruction. 
Satan  and  his  works  shall  be  overthrown  by  one  of  those  very  creatures  whom 
Satan  has  long  triumphed  over.  2.  If .  the  character  was  wonderful  in  which  our 
Lord  achieved  this  work,  the  means  whereby  He  achieved  it  were  still  more  so. 
"Through  death,"  we  are  told,  "He  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death, 
that  is,  the  devil."  {C.  Bradley,  M. A.)  The  design  of  Christ's  incarnation: — 
I.  As  for  THE  MANIFESTATION  OF  THE  SoN  OF  GoD,  though  it  principally  relates  to 
the  actual  coming  of  Christ  into  the  world,  yet  it  is  a  term  of  a  larger  comprehen- 
sion, and  so  ought  to  carry  our  notice  both  to  passages  before  and  after  His  nativity. 
We  find  Him  first  exhibited  in  promises,  and  those  as  early  as  the  first  need 
of  a  Saviour,  even  immediately  after  the  fall ;  by  such  a  hasty  provision  of  mercy, 
that  there  might  be  no  dark  interval  between  man's  misery  and  his  hope  of 
recovery  (Gen.  iii.  15).  But  when  at  length  prophecy  ripened  into  event,  and 
shadows  gave  way  upon  the  actual  appearance  of  the  substance,  in  the  birth  of 
Christ,  yet  then,  though  the  Son  of  God  could  be  but  once  born,  He  ceased  not  to 
be  frequently  manifested ;  there  was  a  choir  of  angels  to  proclaim  His  nativity,  and 
a  new  star  to  be  His  herald.  Christ  was  the  light  of  the  world ;  and  nothing  is 
more  manifest  or  visible  than  that  which  manifests  both  itself  and  all  things  else  ; 
and  needs  no  invitation  to  the  eye,  but  will  certainly  enter,  unless  it  be  forcibly 
kept  out.  But  the  Jews  were  purposed  not  to  believe  their  eyes;  to  question 
whether  it  was  day  when  the  sun  shined.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  Jews 
rejected  the  Son  of  God,  not  because  He  was  not  tnanifested,  but  because  they 
dehghted  to  be  ignorant,  and  to  be  sceptics  and  unbeUevers  even  in  spite  of  evidence. 
n.  The  end  of  His  manifestation,  "  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."' 
1.  I  reduce  the  works  of  the  devil,  destroyed  by  the  manifestation  of  the  Son  of 
God,  to  these  three — (1)  Delusion.  (2)  Sin.  (3)  Death.  There  is  a  natural 
coherence  between  these :  for  sin  being  a  voluntary  action,  and  so  the  issue  of  the 
will,  presupposes  a  default  in  the  understanding,  which  was  to  conduct  the  will  in 
its  choices;  and  then  when  the  delusion  and  inadvertency  of  the  understanding 
has  betrayed  the  will  to  sin,  the  consequent  and  effect  of  sin  is  death.  Christ 
therefore,  that  came  to  repair  the  breaches,  and  cure  the  miseries  of  human  nature, 
and  to  redeem  it  from  that  frenzy  into  which  it  had  cast  itself,  designs  the  removal 
and  conquest  of  aU  these  three.  2.  I  come  now  to  show  what  are  the  ways  and 
means  by  which  He  destroys  them.  (1)  As  a  prophet  He  destroys  and  removes  that 
delusion  that  had  possessed  the  world,  by  those  Divine  and  saving  discoveries  of 
truth  exhibited  in  the  doctrine  and  religion  promulged  by  Him.  (2)  As  for  the 
second  work  of  the  devU,  sin,  this  the  Son  of  God  destroyed  as  a  priest,  by  that 
satisfaction  that  He  paid  down  for  it ;  and  by  that  supply  of  grace  that  He  pur- 
chased, for  the  conquering  and  rooting  it  out  of  the  hearts  of  behevers.  By  the 
former  He  destroys  the  guilt  of  sin,  by  the  latter  the  power.  (3)  As  for  the  third 
and  last  work  of  the  devil,  which  is  death ;  this  Christ,  as  He  is  a  king,  destroys 
by  His  power :  for  it  is  He  that  has  "  the  keys  of  life  and  death,  opening  where 
none  shuts,  and  shutting  where  none  opens."  At  the  command  of  Christ  "  the 
sea  shall  give  up  its  dead,"  the  graves  shall  open,  and  deUver  up  their  trust ;  and 
all  the  devourers  of  nature  shall  make  a  faithful  restitution.  (R.  South,  D.D.) 
The  purpose  of  the  incarnation : — I.  The  mtstert  of  Christ's  incarnation — the 
Son  of  God  was  manifested.    1.  The  propriety,  to  whom  this  work  of  subduing 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

the  devil  and  destroying  his  works,  properly  belongs ;  that  is  God.  (1)  He  only 
had  right  to  do  it ;  whether  we  consider  Him  either  as  the  Judge,  or  as  the  party 
wronged.  (2)  He  only  had  strength  and  power  to  effect  this  destruction  of 
Satan's  works.  2.  The  appropriation  of  this  work.  It  is  ascribed  to  the  second 
Person  in  the  glorious  Godhead ;  to  the  Son  of  God.  And  that  the  Son  of  God 
should  undertake  this  work,  there  are  two  congruities.  (1)  The  first  congruity  is 
grounded  upon  His  relation,  in  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God.  And  suitable  to  this 
there  were  two  works  of  the  devil  to  be  destroyed ;  and  none  so  fit  to  do  it  as  the 
Son  of  God.  (a)  The  first  work  of  Satan,  was  to  make  us  degenerate  from  our 
original,  and  to  become  the  children  of  the  devil ;  that  was  our  woeful  condition 
(John  viii.  44).  This  work  must  be  destroyed  by  our  spiritual  adoption ;  that 
rescues  us  out  of  that  cursed  family,  and  reduces  us  to  a  new  sonship,  makes  us 
become  the  children  of  God.  Now,  who  so  fit  to  make  us  adopted  sons  as  the 
natural  Son  of  God?  (h)  The  second  work  of  the  devil  was  the  defacing  and 
destroying  that  holy  image  of  God,  in  which  we  were  created,  and  so  stamping 
upon  our  souls  that  blemish  of  the  devil's  similitude.  Now,  who  so  fit  to  deface 
the  image  of  Satan,  and  to  repair  the  blessed  image  of  God  upon  our  souls,  as  the 
Son  of  God,  who  is  the  lively  express  image  of  God  the  Father  (Eom.  viii.  29)  ? 
(2)  A  second  congruity  is  grounded  upon  that  special  attribute  which  is  ascribed 
to  the  Son  of  God  ;  that  is,  the  attribute  of  wisdom.  Well,  did  craft  and  subtlety 
ruin  us?  Here  is  wisdom  of  God  to  restore  us  (1  Cor.  iii.  19).  3.  The  manner  of 
effecting  this  work,  the  dispensation  observed  in  it,  that  is  called  here  His  mani- 
festation. (1)  It  is  a  manifestation,  that  is  the  representation  of  that  which  was 
before,  but  did  not  appear  before.  (2)  Christ's  incarnation  is  the  appearing  of 
Him,  who  before  was  invisible.  (3)  Christ  is  now  reaUy  and  actually  exhibited  to 
the  sons  of  men ;  before  He  was  promised  only,  but  now  that  promise  is  fully  per- 
formed to  us.  (4)  This  degree  and  temper  of  His  manifestation  was  thus  ordered 
and  proportioned  for  these  considerations,  (a)  This  manifestation  under  the  veil 
of  His  flesh  was  fitted  for  our  capacity,  we  could  not  otherwise  have  beheld  Him. 
We  can  fix  our  eyes  upon  the  sun  when  it  is  under  a  cloud ;  we  cannot  do  so  when 
it  is  in  its  fuU  splendour,  (h)  This  manifestation  was  under  the  veil  of  the  flesh  to 
make  way  for  the  exercise  of  faith  ;  and  faith  was  to  have  a  principal  part  in  the 
work  of  our  redemption.  And  the  property  of  that  is  to  beUeve  that  which  we  see 
not.  And  therefore,  that  our  faith  might  have  what  to  believe.  He  concealed  His 
Divinity  under  the  veil  of  His  humanity,  (c)  His  manifestation  was  under  the 
veil  of  the  flesh,  as  the  fittest  way  to  conquer  and  destroy  the  devil,  (i.)  It  was  a 
fit  way  to  requite  the  devil.  He  wrought  our  ruin  by  a  counterfeit  incarnation, 
appearmg  to  our  first  parents  in  another  habit ;  and  Christ  works  Satan's  ruin  by  a 
real  incarnation,  (ii.)  This  was  done  to  bring  on  the  devU  to  this  encounter,  by 
which  he  might  be  destroyed.  He  durst  not  have  assaulted  our  Saviour  appearing 
in  His  glory.  II.  The  work  and  employment  of  our  incarnate  Saviour.  It  was 
"to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  The  fruit  and  benefit  of  our  Saviour's 
incarnation  hath  other  expressions  in  Scripture  (Matt,  xviii.  11 ;  1  Tim.  i.  15 ; 
John  vi.  41,  x.  10).  These  are  all  comprehended  in  this  of  St.  John,  it  was 
•'  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  1.  What  is  that  which  Christ  sets  Himself 
against  and  opposes  ?  They  are  the  works  of  the  devil.  So  then,  in  general,  the 
work  for  which  Christ  came  into  the  world  is  a  spiritual  work,  to  oppose  spiritual 
wickedness.  The  gospel  is  conversant  in  mortifying  of  sins,  not  in  invading  of 
possessions,  as  Bernard  speaks.  (1)  See  the  extension  of  the  object  that  Christ 
comes  to  destroy,  (a)  Sin,  that  is  the  work  of  the  devil,  (b)  Death,  that  is  the 
work  of  the  devil;  and  Christ  destroys  both.  (2)  The  limitation.  That  which 
Christ  came  to  destroy  is  the  works  of  the  devil,  those  and  only  those.  The  works 
of  God,  those  Christ  came  not  to  destroy,  but  to  preserve  and  restore,  to  improve 
and  better  them  (Isa.  Iviii.  12) ;  the  souls  of  men,  to  recover  them ;  the  lives  of 
men,  He  came  not  to  destroy,  out  to  save  (Luke  ix.  56).  It  must  teach  all  under- 
takers of  works  of  destruction  to  carry  a  steady  hand  in  so  perilous  a  work.  They 
had  need  of  three  caveats ;  (a)  Look  to  thy  warrant  and  authority.  Every  man  is 
not  to  be  a  destroyer,  even  of  those  things  that  deserve  to  be  destroyed,  (b)  Take 
heed  you  mistake  not  a  work  of  God  for  a  work  of  the  devil,  (c)  When  these  two 
works  meet  in  one — the  work  of  God  and  the  work  of  the  devil — then  separate  the 
precious  from  the  vile,  discern  and  distinguish  them.  2.  The  opposition  which 
Christ  makes  against  the  works  of  the  devU.  It  is  called  a  destroying.  It  is  a  full 
word,  of  great  vehemence  and  intention.  Christ  came  not  only  to  abate  the  power 
of   Satan,   and   to   bring  him  under,   as  Saul  did   with  Agag,   or  the   Israelites 


CHAP.  HI.]  I.  JOHN.  243 

did  with  the  Canaanites :  spared  their  lives,  but  subdued  them  only,  and  made  them 
tributaries.  It  is  charged  on  them  as  a  sin  (Psa.  cvi.  34).  No ;  sin  and  Satan  are 
to  be  devoted  to  utter  destruction.  Not  only  restrain  sin,  but  root  it  out  and 
destroy  it.  And  that  we  may  do  this,  we  must  beget  in  us  a  destroying  affection. 
What  is  that?  Hatred — a  double  hatred.  (1)  Hatred  of  enmity,  that  must  be 
against  the  devU;  hate  him  with  a  perfect  hatred.  (2)  Hatred  of  abomination, 
that  must  be  against  sin,  the  work  of  the  devil.  These  two,  the  hatred  of  enmity 
against  Satan,  and  the  hatred  of,  loathing,  and  antipathy  against  sin :  that  will 
make  us  imitate  the  work  of  Christ,  in  destroying  of  sin.  And  this  Christ  doth  in 
three  degrees,  tiU  sin  be  utterly  destroyed,  (a)  He  destroys  the  condemning  power 
of  sin  by  purchasing  the  pardon  of  sin,  and  confers  this  upon  us  in  our  justifica- 
tion, (b)  He  destroys  the  dominion  and  reigning  power  of  sin  by  inspirations  of 
His  grace,  thereby  mortifying  sin  in  our  sanctification.  (c)  He  destroys  the  very 
being  of  sin ;  roots  up  the  bitter  root  of  sin  by  His  final  and  finishing  grace  in 
our  glorification.  Thus  do  thou — (i.)  Sue  for  the  pardon  of  sin.  (ii.)  Strive 
against  the  power  of  sin.  (iii.)  Long  for  the  final  aboUshing  of  sin.  III.  Thb 
DESIGN  AND  INTENDMENT  OF  THIS  woBK  I  "  For  this  purpose."  1.  This  destroying 
of  sin  and  Satan  and  so  the  rescuing  of  us  from  both,  was  His  intention. 
He  foresaw  our  fall,  and  pitied  our  misery,  and  forecasts  our  recovery  :  His  eternal 
thoughts  of  grace  and  mercy  were  employed  about  us.  2.  This  work  was  His 
primary  intention.  The  main  end  of  His  coming  into  the  world  was  to  destroy 
Satan  and  to  free  us  from  his  bondage  and  captivity.  3.  This  destroying  of 
Satan's  works  is  His  effectual  and  real  intention.  Did  He  purpose  it?  Then 
surely  He  will  accomplish  it,  and  effectually  perform  it.  (Bj).  Brownrigg.) 
The  first  promise  accomplished;  or,  the  head  of  the  serpent  bruised  by  the 
seed  of  the  woman : — The  text  is  a  distinct  doctrine,  viz.,  that  the  Son  of  God 
was  manifested  for  this  purpose,  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.     I.  To  offeb 

BOMB    THINGS   WITH   RELATION    TO    THIS    EENOWNED    CHAMPION.        1.    He   is   a  pCrSOn   of 

a  noble  extract  and  pedigree ;  He  is  the  Son  of  God  by  eternal  generation.  His 
Father's  first-born,  and  therefore  higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth.  2.  This 
renowned  person,  the  Son  of  God,  had  an  ancient  kindness  for  our  family ;  for  He 
from  eternity  "rejoiced  in  the  habitable  parts  of  the  earth,  and  His  delights  were 
with  the  sons  of  men."  8.  That  He  might  be  in  a  capacity  to  help  and  relieve  ua 
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  He  marries  our  nature  into  a  personal  union  with  Him- 
self. Law  and  justice  required  that  the  same  nature  that  sinned  should  suffer.  4. 
This  renowned  Champion  is  one  of  a  very  martial  and  heroic  spirit ;  He  fears  no 
enemy  that  stands  in  His  way  (Isa.  hx.  16-18).  5.  He  is  one  that  is  successful  in 
all  His  enterprises :  He  never  lost  a  battle,  victory  follows  Him  in  His  train.  6.  He 
is  incomparable  for  power  and  wisdom;  hence  His  name  is  "Christ  the  power  of 
God,  and  Christ  the  wisdom  of  God."    II.  To  offeb  a  few  thoughts  concernino 

THE  GRAND  ENEMY  OF  MANKIND,  THAT  THE  SoN  OF  GoD  HAD  IN  HiS  EYE  WHEN  He 

appeared  upon  THE  STAGE,  AND  THAT  IS  THE  DEVIL.  1.  That  he  was  ouce  an 
angel  of  light,  and  had  his  habitation  at  first  in  glory.  2.  Pride  and  ambition  was 
the  sin  of  the  devU.  3.  Being  cast  out  of  heaven,  he  was  filled  with  the  madness 
of  revenge  and  enmity  against  God.  4.  By  virtue  of  the  curse  of  the  broken  law, 
the  devil  comes  to  have  a  legal  title  to,  and  dominion  over,  every  son  of  Adam  by 
nature.  6.  The  enemy  into  whose  hands  we  are  fallen  is  of  aU  others  the  most 
dangerous  and  terrible.  (1)  He  is  a  very  powerful  enemy.  (2)  He  is  a  subtle  and 
cunning  enemy.  (3)  He  is  an  experienced  enemy.  (4)  A  most  vigilant  enemy. 
(5)  He  is  a  most  fierce  and  raging  enemy.  (6)  He  is  a  numerous  enemy.  His 
name  is  legion.  I  will  teU  you  of  some  works  of  the  devil  brought  about  by  sin. 
1.  The  dishonour  of  God.  2.  The  disturbing  of  the  creation.  3.  The  ruin  of  man. 
4.  The  erection  of  his  own  kingdom  of  sin  and  darkness.  IH.  The  manifestation 
OF  THE  Son  of  God  in  order  to  His  destroying  these  works  of  the  devtl.  1. 
He  was  manifested  initially  in  the  first  promise  (Gen.  iii.  15).  2.  He  was 
manifested  typically  to  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  Mosaic  economy.  The 
tabernacle,  the  temple,  the  passover,  the  manna,  the  rock  that  followed  them,  the 
sacrifices  and  ceremonies  of  that  dispensation — what  else  were  they  but  the 
"shadows  of  good  things  to  come"?  3.  To  this  there  was  added  a  prophetical 
manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God.  4.  He  was  manifested  personally  in  the  fulness 
of  time  by  the  assumption  of  the  nature  of  man  (Gal.  iv.  4).  5.  There  is  a 
declarative  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel.  6. 
He  is  manifested  sacramentally.  7.  Christ  is  manifested  in  a  spiritual  and 
efi&cacious  way  in  the  day  of  conversion.    8.  There  is  the  public  and  solemn 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God  at  the  last  day  (Eev.  i.  7).  Thus  you  see 
how  it  is  that  the  Son  of  God  is  manifested ;  and  in  every  one  of  these  mani- 
festations He  had  in  view  the  destruction  of    Satan   and  his  works.    IV.  To 

SPEAK     OF     THE     SoN      OF     GoD     DESTROYING     THE      WOEKS     OF     THE     DEVIL.         1.    Ths 

first  thing  is,  to  prove  that  it  was  the  great  business  of  the  Son  of  God  to 
destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  (1)  Was  it  the  plot  of  hell  to  have  God  dis- 
honoured in  all  His  attributes  and  perfections  by  the  sin  of  man  ?  Well,  Christ 
counteracts  the  devil  in  this ;  for  He  brings  a  great  revenue  of  glory  to  the  crown 
of  heaven  by  the  work  of  redemption.  (2)  It  was  the  work  of  the  devil  to  disgrace 
the  holy  law  of  God,  by  breaking  it  himself,  and  teaching  man  to  break  in  upon 
it;  but  the  work  of  Christ  is,  to  "magnify  the  law,  and  to  make  it  honourable." 

(3)  Was  it  the  work  of  the  devil  to  disturb  God's  government  in  the  world,  and 
to  cast  all  into  disorder?  Well,  God  the  Father  lays  the  government  upon 
Christ's  shoulders  on  purpose  that  He  may  restore  everything  into  the  order 
wherein  He  had  set  them  at  first  (Kom.  viii.  19,  &c.).  (4)  Was  it  the  devil's  work 
to  establish  his  own  kingdom  of  darkness  in  this  lower  world,  by  establishing  error, 
ignorance,  unbeUef,  atheism,  pride,  carnality,  profanity,  and  all  manner  of  sin  and 
wickedness?  Well,  it  is  the  work  of  Christ  to  pull  down  these  strongholds  of 
Satan's  kingdom.  (5)  Was  it  the  devU's  work  to  break  all  fellowship  and 
friendship  betwixt  God  and  man?  Well,  it  is  the  work  of  Christ  to  bring  them 
into  friendship  one  with  another ;  therefore  He  is  called  a  Mediator,  or  a  Peace- 
maker. (6)  Was  it  the  work  of  the  devil  to  bring  man  under  the  curse  and 
condemnation  of  the  law,  that  so  he  might  be  in  the  same  condition  with  himself  ? 
Well,  it  is  the  work  of  Christ  to  "redeem  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 
snade  a  curse  for  us."  (7)  Was  it  the  work  of  the  devU  to  deface  the  image  of 
God  which  He  stamped  upon  man?  It  is  the  work  of  Christ  to  restore  it.  2. 
The  second  thing  here  is,  to  inquire.  How  is  it  that  Christ  destroys  the  works 
of  the  devU?  Christ  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil  four  ways.  (1)  By  the 
virtue  of  His  blood.  (2^  By  the  light  of  His  Word.  (3)  By  the  power  and 
efficacy  of  His  Spirit.  (4)  By  the  prudence  of  His  government  and  administration. 
8.  The  third  thing  was,  to  observe  upon  some  particular  times  and  seasons 
wherein  Christ  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil.  (1)  The  day  of  Christ's  death 
gave  a  notable  blow  unto  the  devil's  kingdom.  (2)  The  day  of  Christ's  resurrection 
gave  a  signal  blow  to  the  works  of  the  devil ;  for  He  "rose  for  our  justification."  (3) 
The  day  of  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  was  a  notable  destruction  unto  Satan 
and  his  works;  for  "  when  He  ascended  up  on  high,  He  led  captivity  captive" ;  He 
opened  a  passage  between  this  world  and  heaven,  through  the  territories  of  the 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  by  which  all  His  friends  might  follow  Him  to  glory. 

(4)  In  the  day  of  Pentecost  Christ  gave  another  stroke  to  the  devil  and  his  works. 

(5)  The  day  of  a  sinner's  believing  in  Christ  is  a  time  when  Satan's  works  are 
destroyed.  (6)  Times  of  espousals,  nearness  betwixt  God  and  a  soul,  are  times  of 
destroying  the  works  of  the  devU.  (7)  When  at  any  time  an  honourable  testimony 
is  given  to  the  Lord,  to  the  doctrine,  discipline,  worship  and  government  of  His 
Church,  in  a  day  of  uncommon  defection  and  backsliding.  (8)  When  a  believer 
dies,  and  goes  away  to  glory,  under  a  guard  of  angels,  along  that  road  that  Christ 
opened.  4.  The  fourth  thing  here  was,  to  give  the  reasons  why  Chi-ist  the  Son  of 
God  is  manifested  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  (1)  Christ  encounters  this 
enemy,  and  destroys  his  works,  because  it  was  His  Father's  will  and  pleasure;  and 
He  did  always  these  things  that  pleased  His  Father,  rejoicing  always  before  Him. 
(2)  Christ  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil,  because  it  was  for  His  own  honour  to 
engage  in  this  expedition.  (^)  Christ  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil,  out  of  the 
ancient  and  wonderful  love  tnat  He  did  bear  to  man  upon  earth.  (4)  Out  of  regard 
to  His  own  law,  which  the  devil  by  his  works  had  dishonoured.  (5)  Christ  destroys 
the  works  of  the  devil  that  He  may  "  still  this  enemy  and  avenger."  (6)  He 
destroys  the  work  of  the  devU,  for  the  manifestation  of  all  the  Divine  perfections. 

V.    The   LAST   thing    in    the   method   was   the   use  of  THE   DOCTRINE,  WHICH  I  SHALL 

DESPATCH  IN  THE  FOLLOWING  INFERENCES.  1.  See  hcHce  a  glorious  ray  of  the  God- 
head or  supreme  independent  Deity  of  the  glorious  Redeemer.  2.  See  hence  how 
the  kindness  and  love  of  God  hath  appeared  toward  man  upon  earth.  3.  See 
hence  the  evil  of  sin,  and  the  folly  of  those  that  are  in  love  with  it,  and  give  them- 
Belves  up  to  its  power  and  service.  4.  See  hence  a  good  reason  why  the  believer  is 
at  war  with  sin  in  himself,  and  wherever  he  finds  it.  6.  See  hence  why  hell  and 
earth  took  the  alarm  when  Christ  appeared  in  the  world.  6.  See  one  great  reason 
why  believers  breathe  so  much  after  manifestations  of  the  Lord.    7.  From  this 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  245 

doctrine  we  may  see  how  much  it  is  our  concern  to  keep  up  the  memorials  of  a 
Bedeemer's  death,  and  why  the  truly  godly  love  to  flock  to  a  sacrament.  Use 
second  may  be  of  trial,  whether  the  Son  of  God  was  ever  savingly  manifested  to 
thy  soul.  1.  If  ever  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested  in  thy  soul,  thou  wilt  be  for 
pulling  down  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  for  building  up  the  works  of  the  Son  of 
God.  (1)  You  will  pull  down  self-righteousness,  and  put  on  the  righteousness  of 
Christ.  (2)  You  will  be  much  employed  in  pulling  down  the  image  of  the  first 
Adam,  and  in  setting  up  the  image  of  the  second  Adam  in  your  souls.  (3)  You  will 
be  clear  for  pulling  down  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh,  and  for  setting  up  the  wisdom  of 
God  above  it.  2.  If  ever  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested  savingly  unto  thy  soul, 
the  union  of  the  two  natures  in  the  person  of  Christ  wiU  be  the  wonder  of  thy  soul. 
3.  It  will  be  your  great  design,  in  attending  ordinances,  to  have  new  manifestations 
of  His  glory,  as  David  (Psa.  xxvii.  4,  Ixiii.,  Ixxxiv.,  <fec.).  4.  You  will  be  con- 
cerned to  manifest  His  glory  to  others.  The  last  inference  is  this.  Is  it  so  that  the 
Son  of  God  was  manifested?  See  hence  noble  encouragement  to  aU  honest 
ministers  and  Christians  to  make  a  stand  against  the  defections  of  the  day  we 
live  in.  (E.  Erskine,  D.D.)  The  works  of  the  devil  destroyed  : — I.  First,  the 
WORKS  OF  THE  DEVIL.  This  vcry  strong  expression  is  descriptive  of  sin ;  for  the 
preceding  sentence  so  interprets  it.  1.  This  name  for  sin  is  first  of  all  a  word  of 
detestation.  Sin  is  so  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  good  men  that 
its  various  forms  are  said  to  be  "  the  works  of  the  devil."  Think  of  that,  ye 
ungodly  ones — the  devil  is  at  work  in  you,  as  a  smith  at  his  forge.  2.  Next, 
it  is  a  word  of  distinction :  it  distinguishes  the  course  of  the  ungodly  man  from  the 
life  of  the  man  who  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  you  have  not  the  life  of 
God  in  you,  you  cannot  do  the  works  of  God.  The  mineral  cannot  rise  into  the 
vegetable  of  itself,  it  would  require  another  touch  from  the  creative  hand ;  the 
vegetable  cannot  rise  into  the  animal  unless  the  Creator  shall  work  a  miracle ;  and, 
even  so,  you  as  a  carnal  man  cannot  become  a  spiritual  man  by  any  spontaneous 
generation ;  the  new  life  must  be  imparted  to  you  by  the  quickening  Spirit.  3.  The 
language  before  us  is,  next,  a  word  of  descent.  Sin  is  "of  the  devil,"  it  came  from 
him ;  he  is  its  parent  and  patron.  Sin  is  not  so  of  the  devil  that  we  can  lay  the 
blame  of  our  sins  upon  him,  for  that  is  our  own.  It  is  our  work  because  we 
wUlingly  yield.  Let  us  be  thoroughly  ashamed  of  such  work  when  we  find  that 
the  devil  has  a  hand  in  it.  4.  Consider,  next,  that  we  have  here  a  word  ol 
description.  The  work  of  sin  is  the  work  of  the  devil  because  it  is  such  work  as 
he  delights  in.  He  has  led  the  human  race  to  become  accomplices  in  his 
treason  against  the  majesty  of  heaven,  allies  in  his  rebellion  against  the 
sovereignty  of  God  most  high.  The  works  of  the  devil  make  up  a  black  picture : 
it  is  a  thick  darkness  over  all  the  land,  even  a  darkness  that  may  be  felt. 
n.  The  pobpose  of  God — "  For  this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested, 
that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  Yes,  mark  that  word,  "  destroyed," 
not  limited,  nor  alleviated,  nor  neutralised,  but  destroyed.  1.  The  work  which 
lies  in  this  purpose  is  assuredly  a  Divine  work.  The  Lord  who  can  create  can 
certainly  destroy.  2.  And  there  is,  to  my  mind,  about  it  the  idea  of  a  con- 
quering work.  When  are  the  palaces  and  the  fortifications  of  great  kings 
destroyed?  Not  tiU  the  kings  themselves  have  been  overthrown  in  fair  fight; 
but  when  their  power  is  broken  then  it  is  that  the  conquerors  raze  the  castle 
and  burn  the  stronghold.  3.  This  means  also  a  complete  work.  The  product  of 
evil  is  not  to  be  cut  down  for  a  time  and  left  to  grow  again.  4,  It  is  a  complete 
work  and  a  conclusive  work ;  for  the  Lord  Jesus  will  so  break  the  head  of  the 
old  dragon,  that  he  shall  never  wear  the  crown  again.  Sin  in  every  shape  and 
form  the  Lord  shall  destroy  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth  for  ever.  III.  Our  text 
plainly  tells  us  how  this  is  to  be  done— by  the  manifestation  of  the  Son 
OF  God.  Behind,  and  under,  and  over  the  works  of  the  devil  the  Lord  had 
ever  the  design  that  this  evil  should  be  permitted  that  He  might  bafiie  it 
with  love,  and  that  the  glory  of  His  grace  might  be  revealed.  My  text  has 
in  it  to  my  mind  a  majestic  idea,  first,  of  the  difficulties  of  the  case — that 
the  Son  of  God  must  needs  be  manifested  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil; 
and  then,  secondly,  of  the  ease  of  His  victory.  1.  First,  Christ's  manifestation, 
even  in  His  incarnation,  was  a  fatal  blow  to  the  works  of  Satan.  Did  God 
come  down  to  men?  Was  He  incarnate  in  the  infant  form  that  slept  in 
Bethlehem's  manger  ?  Then  the  Almighty  has  not  given  up  our  nature  to 
be  th^  prey  of  sin.  2.  Next,  look  to  the  life  of  Christ  on  earth,  and  see  how  He 
tbor<i  <iestroyed  the  works  of  the  devil.    It  was  a  glorious  duel  in  the  wilderness 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

when  they  stood  foot  to  foot — the  champions  of  good  and  evil !  All  our  Lord's 
preaching,  all  His  teaching,  all  His  labour  here  below  was  in  order  to  the  pulling 
away  the  corner  stone  from  the  great  house  of  darkness  which  Satan  had  built  up. 
3.  But  oh,  it  was  in  His  death  that  Jesus  chiefly  overthrew  Satan  and  destroyed 
his  works.  Man,  accepting  this  great  sacrifice,  loves  and  adores  the  Father  who 
ordained  it,  and  so  the  works  of  the  devil  in  his  heart  are  destroyed.  4.  Our  Lord's 
rising  again,  His  ascension  into  glory,  His  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father, 
His  coming  again  in  the  latter  days — all  these  are  parts  of  the  manifestation  of  the 
Son  of  God  by  which  the  works  of  the  devil  shaU  be  destroyed.  So  also  is  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel.  If  we  want  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil  our  best 
method  is  to  manifest  more  and  more  the  Son  of  God.  5.  Lastly,  on  this  point,  our 
blessed  Lord  is  manifested  in  His  eternal  power  and  kingdom  as  enthroned  in 
order  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil;  for  "the  government  shall  be  upon  His 
shoulders,  and  His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  the  mighty  God,  the  Father  of 
the  ages."  IV.  A  few  words  of  inquiry  as  to  the  experience  of  ail  this  in  our- 
selves. Has  the  Son  of  God  been  manifested  to  you  to  destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil  in  you?  1.  At  first  there  was  in  your  heart  an  enmity  to  God;  for  "the 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."  Is  that  enmity  destroyed  ?  2.  The  next 
work  of  the  devil  which  usually  appears  in  the  human  mind  is  self-righteous  pride. 
Have  aU  those  rags  gone  from  you  ?  Has  a  strong  wind  blown  them  right  away  ? 
Have  you  seen  your  own  natural  nakedness  ?  3.  When  the  Lord  has  destroyed 
self -righteousness  in  us,  the  devil  generally  sets  us  forth  another  form  of  his  power, 
and  that  is  despair.  But  if  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  been  manifested  to  you, 
despair  has  gone,  that  work  of  the  devil  has  been  aU  destroyed,  and  now  you  have 
a  humble  hope  in  God  and  a  joy  in  His  mercy.  What  next?  4.  Have  you  any 
unbehef  in  your  heart  as  to  the  promises  of  God  ?  Down  with  it !  Christ  was 
manifested  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  All  mistrusts  must  die.  Not  one  of 
them  must  be  spared.  Do  fleshly  lusts  arise  in  your  heart  ?  In  whose  heart  do 
they  not  arise  ?  The  brightest  saint  is  sometimes  tempted  to  the  foulest  vice.  Yes, 
but  he  yields  not  thereto.  He  cries,  "  Away  with  them !  "  It  is  not  meet  even  to 
mention  these  vile  things ;  they  are  works  of  the  devil,  and  to  be  destroyed.  Do 
you  quickly  become  angry  ?  I  pray  God  you  may  be  angry  and  sin  not ;  but  if  you 
are  of  a  hasty  temper,  I  entreat  you  to  overcome  it.  Do  not  say,  "  I  cannot  help 
it."  You  must  help  it,  or  rather  Christ  must  destroy  it.  It  must  not  be  tolerated. 
Oh,  there  is  to  be  in  every  true  believer  the  ultimate  abohtion  of  sin.  What  a 
prospect  this  is  !     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  9.  Whosoever  is  bom  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin;  for  his  seed  remaineth 
In  Mm  :  and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  bom  of  God. — The  usurper  deposed  and 
the  conqueror  vanquished : — I.  The  important  doctrine  here  asserted.  "  Whoso- 
ever is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin."  1.  This  doctrine  is  implied  in  all  the 
precepts  of  the  law  of  God,  whether  they  relate  to  evils  prohibited  or  to  duties 
enjoined.  2.  This  doctrine  is  implied  in  all  the  injunctions  of  the  New  Testament, 
which  are  expressly  enjoined  on  those  who  profess  the  religion  of  Christ.  3.  This 
doctrine  is  impMed  in  all  those  Scriptures  which  speak  of  holiness  as  the  privilege 
of  the  people  of  God,  and  as  indispensable  to  alJ  men.  4.  This  doctrine  is,  if 
possible,  stiU  more  plain  from  a  consideration  of  what  the  Scriptures  say  concerning 
those  who  live  in  the  practice  of  sin.  II.  The  argument  by  which  this  doctrine 
IS  established.  "  For  his  seed  remaineth  in  him,  and  he  cannot  sin  :  because  he  is 
bom  of  God."  1.  The  practice  of  sin  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  man  who  is 
born  of  God.  2.  The  practice  of  sin  is  contrary  to  the  impulse  of  that  Divine 
principle  which  is  deposited  in  the  heart  of  the  man  who  is  born  of  God.  From  this 
subject  we  learn — 1.  What  is  the  nature  of  the  true  religion.  2.  What  is  the  unfailing 
conduct  of  all  those  who  are  truly  religious.  3.  What  is  the  lamentable  condition  of 
aU  who  live  in  the  practice  of  sin.  (W.  Lupton.)  Sonship  exclusive  of  sin : — I.  The 
change,  OR  the  WORK  OF  grace  IN  THE  sinner.  1.  "  BoHi  of  God."  (See  Johu  i.  12, 13.) 
As  water  cannot  rise  above  its  fountain,  so  can  no  change  in  man  be  better  or  greater 
than  its  cause.  If  it  come  from  the  flesh  it  must  be  like  it,  earthly  and  sinful. 
When  it  comes  from  the  Spirit,  then  it  must  be  like  Him,  spiritual,  holy,  and 
heavenly.  2.  "  His  seed  remaineth  in  him."  It  is  immaterial  whether  "  his  "  seed 
be  understood  of  God  or  of  the  believer.  It  is  that  seed  which  God  has  sown  in 
his  heart.  It  is  God's  as  the  author  of  it.  It  is  the  believer's  as  the  subject  of  it. 
How  is  this  figure  calculated  to  supplement  and  illustrate  the  former  one.  First, 
the  sinner  is  born  of  God  by  means  of  the  truth.     He  is  left  no  longer  ignorant  of 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  247 

sin,  but  is  taught  to  know  its  vileness  and  evil  consequences.  He  is  no  longer 
ignorant  of  himself,  but  has  been  enlightened  to  see  the  depravity  of  his  heart. 
Second,  it  is  in  the  same  way  the  life  of  faith  and  holiness  thus  begun  is 
maintained  in  him.  The  idea  is  specially  noticed  in  the  text,  "His  seed  remaineth 
in  Him."  .It  is  in  its  own  nature  imperishable.  The  truth  ever  abides  the  same. 
The  believer  ever  sees  sin  as  he  saw  it  at  the  first,  vile  and  ruinous.  He  ever  sees 
himself  as  he  did  at  the  beginning,  exposed  to  ruin  if  he  indulges  it.  He  ever 
sees  the  Saviour  as  gracious  and  glorious  as  He  appeared  at  the  first.  His  claims 
do  not  diminish  in  his  view,  nor  does  he  ever  find  reason  to  change  his  conclusions 
respecting  this  world  and  the  next,  time  and  eternity.  II.  The  effects  that  abb 
DECLABED  TO  EESULT  FEOM  IT.  "He  doth  not  commit  sin,  and  he  cannot  sin."  As 
two  figures  were  used  to  describe  the  change,  so  are  there  two  assertions  to  declare 
the  results.  The  one  is  the  assertion  of  a  fact,  and  the  other  is  an  argument  to 
explain  and  confirm  it.  1.  The  fact — •"  He  doth  not  commit  sin."  Let  it  be 
observed  this  is  said  of  every  converted  man.  "  Whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not 
commit  sin."  He  does  not  sin  knowingly,  wilfully,  and  habitually.  We  say  of  a 
man  versed  in  literature,  he  is  learned,  although  he  is  ignorant  of  many  things. 
In  like  manner  we  speak  of  men,  and  say  they  are  strong,  although  in  some  respects 
they  may  be  weak.  We  judge  of  them  by  that  which  is  prominent  and  paramount 
in  them.  2.  The  second  expression,  explanatory  and  confirmatory  of  this  fact,  is 
still  stronger,  "He  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God."  To  Uve  in  sin  is 
contrary  to  the  new  nature  of  which  he  has  been  made  a  partaker.  The  nature 
cannot  and  does  not  sin.  Had  he  no  other  nature  he  would  never  sin.  And  there 
are  many  reasons  why  he  cannot.  (1)  It  is  contrary  to  his  views.  He  sees  sin  to 
be  the  greatest  of  all  evils,  and  holiness  to  be  the  highest  of  all  good.  (2)  It  is 
contrary  to  his  tastes  ;  he  dislikes  sin  and  he  loves  holiness.  (3)  It  is  contrary 
to  his  most  determined  purposes.  The  language  of  David  is  not  strange  to  him 
(Psa.  xvii.  3).  It  were  unreasonable  to  suppose  such  a  man  could  live  in  sin.  (4)  It 
is  contrary  to  his  habits.  He  has  served  God  and  found  His  service  to  be  Uberty. 
(5)  It  is  contrary  to  his  interests.  He  knows  that  "  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all 
things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  He 
is  not  the  fool  to  "  sin  against  his  own  soul."  {J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Sins  of  the 
regenerate : — Various  expositions  are  given  of  this.  1.  He  ought  not  to  sin. 
Cannot  indeed  is  sometimes  taken  for  ought  not  (Acts  iv.  20).  But  this  is  not 
the  meaning  of  cannot  here,  ought  not ;  for  an  unrenewed  man  ought  not  to  sin  any 
more  than  a  regenerate  man.  But  the  apostle  attributes  here  something  peculiar 
to  the  regenerate,  adding  the  reason,  "because  he  is  born  of  God."  2.  He  cannot  sin 
so  easily.  He  may  sin  easily  in  respect  of  the  frailty  of  the  flesh,  but  not  so  easily  in 
regard  of  the  abiding  of  the  seed  in  him,  which  helps  him  to  beware  of  sin.  Grace 
being  a  Divine  habit,  hath  the  nature  of  a  habit,  which  is  to  incline  the  person  to  acts 
proper  to  that  habit,  and  facilitate  those  acts,  as  a  man  that  hath  the  habit  of  an  art  or 
trade  can  with  more  ease  work  in  it  than  any  other.  3.  He  cannot  sin,  as  he  is 
regenerate.  A  gracious  man,  as  a  gracious  man,  cannot  sin  ;  for  grace,  being  a  good 
habit,  is  not  capable  of  producing  acts  contrary  to  its  nature.  Sin  in  a  regenerate  man 
proceeds  not  from  his  grace,  but  from  his  corruption.  4.  He  cannot  sin  as  long  as 
he  is  regenerate,  as  long  as  the  seed  remains  in  him,  as  long  as  he  follows  the 
motions  of  the  Spirit  and  grace,  which  are  able  to  overcome  the  motions  of 
concupiscence,  but  he  may  give  up  the  grace :  as  an  impregnable  tower  cannot  be 
taken  as  long  as  it  is  defended  by  those  within,  but  they  may  fling  away  their  arms 
and  deliver  it  up.  Sin  may  be  considered  in  two  ways,  viz.,  as  to — 1.  The  act  of  sin. 
Thus  a  believer  sins.  2.  The  habit  of  sin,  or  custom  in  it,  when  a  man  runs  to  sin 
freely,  willingly,  and  is  not  displeased  with  it.  Thus  a  believer  does  not  commit 
sin.  Being  God's  son,  he  cannot  be  sin's  servant ;  he  cannot  sin  in  such  a  manner 
and  so  absolutely  as  one  of  the  devil's  children,  one  born  of  the  devil.  Doctrine : 
There  is  a  mighty  difference  between  the  sinning  of  a  regenerate  and  a  natural 
man.  A  regenerate  man  doth  not,  neither  can,  commit  sin  in  the  same  manner  as 
an  unregenerate  man  doth.  The  sense  of  this  "  cannot "  I  shall  lay  down  in  several 
propositions.  1.  It  is  not  meant  exclusively  of  lesser  sins,  or  sins  of  infirmity. 
2.  A  regenerate  man  cannot  live  in  the  customary  practice  of  any  known  sin,  either 
of  omission  or  commission.  (1)  Not  in  a  constant  omission  of  known  duties. 
(2)  Not  in  a  customary  commission  of  any  known  sin.  I  shall  confirm  this  by  some 
reasons,  because  upon  this  proposition  depend  aU  the  following.  1.  Eegeneration 
gives  not  a  man  a  dispensation  from  the  law  of  God.  2.  It  is  not  for  the  honour  of 
God  to  suffer  a  custom  and  course  of  sin  in  a  renewed  man.    3.  It  is  against  the 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.ui. 

nature  of  the  covenant.  In  the  covenant  we  are  to  take  God  for  our  God,  i.e.,  for  our 
chief  good  and  last  end.  4.  It  is  against  the  nature  of  our  first  repentance  and 
conversion  to  God.  True  repentance  is  "  a  breaking  off  iniquity  by  righteousness  " 
(Dan.  iv.  27).  5.  It  is  against  the  nature  of  habitual  grace,  which  is  the  principle 
and  form  of  our  regeneration.  6.  A  regenerate  man  cannot  have  a  fixed  resolution 
to  walk  in  such  a  way  of  sin,  were  the  impediments  to  it  removed.  7.  A  regenerate 
man  cannot  walk  in  a  way  doubtful  to  him,  without  inquiries  whether  it  be  a  way 
of  sin  or  a  way  of  duty,  and  without  admitting  of  reproofs  and  admonitions, 
according  to  his  circumstances.  8.  A  regenerate  man  cannot  have  a  settled, 
deliberate  love  to  any  one  act  of  sin,  though  he  may  fall  into  it.  9.  A  regenerate 
man  cannot  commit  any  sin  with  a  full  consent  and  bent  of  wiU.  {S.  Gharnock.) 
The  sins  of  the  regenerate  : — The  apostle  having  exhorted  the  saints  to  whom  he 
writes  in  the  former  chapter  to  abide  in  Christ  and  to  do  righteousness  (vers.  28,  29), 
follows  on  this  exhortation  with  several  arguments  that  a  true  Christian  is  not 
only  bound  to  do  so,  but  that  he  indeed  doth  so.  1.  From  that  hope  which  hath  eternal 
happiness  for  its  object  (vers.  2,  3).  Where  this  hope  is  truly  founded  it  will 
inflame  us  with  a  desire  after  holiness.  2.  From  the  contrariety  of  sin  to  the  law 
of  God.  A  Christian  who  is  guided  by  this  law  wiU  not  transgress  it.  3.  From 
the  end  of  Christ's  coming,  which  was  to  take  away  sin  (ver.  5).  4.  From  the 
communion  they  have  with  Christ ;  abiding  in  Him.  5.  From  the  first  author  of 
sin,  the  devil;  he  that  sins  hath  a  communion  with  the  devil  (ver.  8),  as  he  that 
doth  righteousness  hath  a  communion  with  Christ.  6.  From  the  new  nature  of  a 
Christian,  which  hinders  bim  from  sin  (ver.  9).  (Bp.  Hackett.)  "  Cannot 
gin  "  ; — He  cannot  sin  any  more  than  a  good  mother  can  kill  her  child.  She  might 
be  able  in  a  thousand  ways  to  kUl  the  child,  but  her  heart  would  forbid  it  and  make 
the  impossibility  absolute.  {J.  B.  Figgis,  M.A.)  "  Cannot  sin"  : — The  ideas  of 
Divine  sonship  and  sin  are  mutually  exclusive.  As  long  as  the  relationship  with 
God  is  real,  sinful  acts  are  but  accidents ;  they  do  not  touch  the  essence  of  the 
man's  being.  The  impossibility  of  sinning  in  such  a  case  lies  in  the  moral  nature 
of  things.  (Bp.  Westcott.)  "  Cannot "  ; — Some  of  you  are  men  in  business.  I 
go  into  your  shop  or  warehouse,  and  I  ask  you  the  price  of  a  certain  article.  You 
say  it  is  so  much.  I  offer  you  one-half  or  two-thirds  of  what  you  have  said  is  the 
price.  You  say,  "  I  cannot  take  it."  Now,  why  cannot  you  take  what  I  offer  you? 
It  is  not  the  want  of  freedom  in  your  will  to  decide  on  accepting  my  proposal ;  nor 
is  it  the  want  of  physical  power  in  your  arm  to  accept  my  oifer.  You  have  both  the 
one  and  the  other,  and  yet  you  repeat  your  former  statement, "  I  cannot  take  it  " ; 
and  you  speak  truly.  You  cannot  take  it,  because  it  would  be  unjust,  because  it 
would  tend  to  bring  ruin  on  your  business,  and  to  reduce  yourself  and  family  to 
beggary.  You  cannot  take  it  consistent  with  your  safety  and  happiness.  Just  so 
he  that  is  bom  of  God  cannot  commit  sin  consistent  with  his  well-being.  It  would 
be  rebeUion  against  God,  and  would  bring  injury,  if  not  ruin,  upon  his  soul. 
(c7.  Seymour.)  The  failings  of  Christians  : — With  true  insight  into  the  case, 
quaint  Thomas  Fuller  alleges  that  "  the  failings  of  Christians  be  rather  in  the 
branches  and  leaves  than  in  the  roots  of  their  performances."  Sin  unnatural  to  the 
regenerate  nature  : — "  It  would,"  says  Thomas  Manton,  "  be  monstrous  for  the  eggs 
of  one  creature  to  bring  forth  a  brood  of  another  kind,  for  a  crow  or  a  kite  to  come 
from  the  egg  of  a  hen.  It  is  as  unnatural  a  production  for  a  new  creature  to  sin." 
Each  creature  brings  forth  after  its  own  kind.  Out  of  a  dove's  nest  we  expect  only 
doves  to  fly.  The  heavenly  life  breeds  birds  of  paradise,  such  as  holy  thoughts, 
desires,  and  acts  ;  and  it  cannot  bring  forth  such  unclean  birds  as  lust,  and  envy, 
and  malice.  The  life  of  God  infused  in  regeneration  is  as  pure  as  the  Lord  by 
whom  it  was  begotten,  and  can  never  be  otherwise.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  10.  In  tMs  the  children  of  God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil: 
whosoever  doetb  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God,  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his 
brother. — Two  classes    of    men : — I.    Men   are   divided   into  two  classes,  thk 

CHILDBEN    of    GoD    AND    THE     CHILDREN    OF    THE    DEVIL.         This    aSSUmptioU    iS    Very 

contrary  to  the  prevailing  views  and  practices  of  men.  Many  make  no  inquiry 
to  what  class  they  belong.  Some  who  have  thought  upon  it  consider  it  is  not 
possible  to  obtain  satisfaction,  and  they  dismiss  it  from  their  minds.  They  are 
satisfied  to  Uve  in  entire  uncertainty.  Or  if  they  do  classify  men,  themselves  included, 
it  is  a  very  different  summary  from  that  of  the  apostle.  Their  reckoning  makes 
many  classes.  They  are  as  numerous  as  the  phases  of  human  society.  Think, 
then,  of  this  Divine  distinction.      Some  are  the  children  of  God.      They  have  been 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  249 

bom  of  Him.  This  is  the  one  class.  But  how  different  is  the  other  ?  They  are 
"the  children  of  the  devil."  Like  him  they  have  fallen  from  their  original 
righteousness.  They  have  been  under  his  influence  ever  since  they  came  into  the 
world.  These  are  the  only  two  classes  known  to  God.  The  Scriptures  never 
recognise  any  other  here.  Neither  shall  any  but  these  be  found  at  the  last 
Judgment.  11.  This  distikction  may  be  manifested.  "  In  this  the  children  of  God 
are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil."  This  statement  may  be  understood 
with  reference  to  ourselves  or  others.  Contemplate  it  in  both  relations.  1.  If  we 
are  the  children  of  God  this  ought  to  be  manifest  to  ourselves.  2.  It  is,  however,  its 
manifestation  to  others  that  appears  to  be  specially  spoken  of  in  the  text.  The 
proofs  are  such  as  are  cognizable  by  others.  To  a  large  extent  the  evidence  of  con- 
version to  ourselves  and  to  others  is  the  same.  In  our  own  case,  however,  there  is 
consciousness,  which  cannot  be  had  in  the  case  of  others.  The  two  states  in 
question  are  the  most  contrary  to  one  another  that  can  possibly  be  conceived.  The 
change  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  the  most  marked  and  decided  of  which  the 
human  mind  can  be  the  subject.  Might  not  such  a  change  be  expected  to  be 
manifest  ?  Its  necessary  and  habitual  operation  is  a  constant  testimony  to  its 
existence.  It  is  like  the  ointment  that  betrays  itself.  The  flowing  stream  is  proof 
of  a  living  fountain.  And  if  the  life  be  holy  there  must  be  a  cause  that  lies  deeper 
than  any  human  purpose.  III.  The  evidences  by  which  they  abe  made  manifest. 
Two  are  mentioned — "  He  that  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God,  neither  he 
that  loveth  not  his  brother."  It  is  observable  that  these  evidences  are  put  in  the 
negative  form,  and  an  important  lesson  is  suggested  by  it.  The  absence  of  well- 
doing is  sufficient  for  condemnation.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  "  cease  to  do  evU," 
we  must  "  learn  to  do  well."  1.  "  He  that  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God." 
A  man  who  is  not  exhibiting  righteousness  in  his  deportment  gives  no  proof  that  he 
is  born  of  God.  2.  With  this  general  deportment  a  special  grace  is  associated — 
"Neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother."  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  distinguishing 
character  of  a  good  and  a  bad  man  : — I.  The  chaeacter  and  maek  of  differencb 
BETWEEN  A  good  AND  BAD  MAN.  "  Whosoevcr  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God  "  ; 
which  implies,  on  the  contrary,  that  whosoever  doeth  righteousness  is  of  God. 

1.  Who  they  are  that  in  the  apostle's  sense  may  be  said  not  to  do  righteousness. 
(1)  They  that  live  in  the  general  course  of  a  wicked  life,  in  the  practice  of  great  and 
known  sins.  (2)  They  who  live  in  the  habitual  practice  of  any  one  known  sin,  or 
in  the  neglect  of  any  considerable  part  of  their  known  duty.  (3)  They  who  are 
guilty  of  the  single  act  of  a  very  notorious  crime  ;  as  a  deliberate  act  of  blasphemy, 
of  murder,  perjury,  fraud,  or  oppression,  or  of  any  other  crime  of  the  like 
enormity.  2.  Who  they  are  that  in  the  apostle's  sense  may  be  said  to  do 
righteousness.  In  short,  they  who  in  the  general  course  of  their  lives  do  keep  the 
commandments  of  God.  I  choose  rather  to  describe  a  righteous  man  by  the  actual 
conformity  of  the  general  course  of  his  actions  to  the  law  of  God,  than  by  a  sincere 
desire  or  resolution  of  obedience.  For  a  desire  may  be  sincere  for  the  time  it  lasts, 
and  yet  vanish  before  it  comes  to  any  real  effect.  No  man  believes  hunger  to  be 
meat,  or  thirst  to  be  drink ;  and  yet  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  truth  and  sincerity  of 
these  natural  desires.  No  man  thinks  that  a  greedy  desire  to  be  rich  is  an  estate, 
or  that  ambition,  or  an  insatiable  desire  of  honour  is  really  advancement ;  just  so, 
and  no  otherwise,  a  desire  to  be  good  is  righteousness.      II.  By  this  mark  every 

MAN  MAY,  WITH   DUE    CARE  AND   DILIGENCE,  ARRIVE    AT    THE    CERTAIN   KNOWLEDGE  OF  HIS 

SPiBiTUAi,  STATE  AND  CONDITION.  1.  By  this  character,  as  I  have  explained  it,  he 
that  is  a  bad  man  may  certainly  know  himself  to  be  so,  if  he  will  but  consider  his 
condition  and  do  not  wilfully  delude  himself.  For  the  customary  practice  of  any 
known  sin  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  sincere  resolutions  and  endeavours  against  it. 

2.  By  this  character,  likewise,  they  that  are  sincerely  good  may  generally  be  weU 
assured  of  their  good  condition,  and  that  they  are  the  children  of  God.  And  there 
are  but  two  things  necessary  to  evidence  this  to  them — that  the  general  course  ol 
their  actions  be  agreeable  to  the  laws  of  God ;  and  that  they  be  sincere  and  upright 
in  those  actions.      III.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  notwithstanding  this,  so 

UANY    PERSONS    ARE    AT    SO    GREAT    UNCERTAINTY    ABOUT     THEIR     SPIRITUAL     CONDITION. 

1.  We  wiU  consider  the  grounds  of  the  false  hopes  of  men  really  bad  concerning  their 
good  condition.  (1)  Some  rely  upon  the  profession  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  their 
being  baptized  into  it.  But  this,  so  far  from  being  any  exemption  from  a  good 
life,  is  the  most  solemn  obligation  to  it.  (2)  Others  trust  to  their  external  devotion ; 
they  frequent  the  church  and  serve  God  constantly,  they  pray  to  Him  and  hear  His 
Word,  and  receive  the  blessed  sacrament.    But  this  so  far  from  making  amenda 


250  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

for  the  impiety  of  our  lives,  spoils  all  the  acceptance  of  our  devotions.  (3)  Others, 
who  are  sensible  they  are  very  bad,  depend  very  much  upon  their  repentance, 
especially  if  they  set  solemn  times  apart  for  it.  And  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  a 
sincere  repentance  will  put  a  man  into  a  good  condition  ;  but  then  no  repentance  is 
sincere  but  that  which  produceth  a  real  reformation  in  our  lives.  (4)  Others  satisfy 
themselves  with  the  exercise  of  some  particular  graces  and  virtues,  justice,  and 
liberality,  and  charity.  And  is  it  not  a  thousand  pities  that  thy  life  is  not  all  of  a 
piece,  and  that  all  the  other  parts  of  it  are  not  answerable  to  these  ?  (5)  Some  who 
are  very  careful  of  their  outward  conversation,  but  yet  are  conscious  to  themselves 
of  great  secret  vices,  when  they  can  find  no  comfort  from  the  testimony  of  their 
own  consciences,  are  apt  to  comfort  themselves  in  the  good  opinion  which  perhaps 
others  have  of  them.  But  if  we  know  ourselves  to  be  bad,  it  is  not  the  good  opinion 
of  others  which  can  either  alter  or  better  our  condition.  Trust  nobody,  concerning 
thyself  rather  than  thyself,  because  nobody  can  know  thee  so  well  as  thou  mayest 
know  thyself.  2.  The  causeless  doubts  and  jealousies  of  men  really  good  concerning 
their  bad  condition.  (1)  Some  are  afraid  that  they  are  reprobated  from  all  eternity, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  the  children  of  God.  But  no  man  hath  reason  to  think  him- 
self rejected  of  God,  either  from  eternity  or  in  time,  that  does  not  find  the  marks  of 
reprobation  in  himself— I  mean  an  evil  heart  and  Ufe.  (2)  Good  men  are  conscious 
to  themselves  of  many  frailties  and  imperfections;  and,  therefore,  they  are  afraid  of 
their  condition.  But  God  considers  the  infirmities  of  our  present  state,  and  expects 
no  other  obedience  from  us,  in  order  to  our  acceptance  with  Him,  but  what  this 
state  of  imperfection  is  capable  of.  (3)  They  are  afraid  their  obedience  is  not 
sincere,  because  it  proceeds  many  times  from  fear,  and  not  always  out  of  pure  love 
to  God.  For  answer  to  this :  it  is  plain  from  Scripture  that  God  propounds  to 
men  several  motives  to  obedience — some  proper  to  work  upon  their  fear,  some  upon 
their  hope,  others  upon  their  love ;  from  whence  it  is  evident  He  intended  they 
should  all  work  upon  us.  (4)  Another  case  of  doubting  in  good  men  is,  from  a 
sense  of  their  imperfect  performance  of  the  duties  of  religion  and  of  the  abatement 
of  their  affections  towards  God  at  some  times.  But  our  comfort  is,  that  God  doth 
not  measure  men's  sincerity  by  the  tides  of  their  affections,  but  by  the  constant  bent 
of  their  resolutions  and  the  general  tenor  of  their  actions.  (5)  Another  cause  of 
these  doubts  is,  that  men  expect  more  than  ordinary  and  reasonable  assurance  of 
their  good  condition — some  particular  revelation  from  God,  an  extraordinary 
impression  upon  their  minds.  God  may  give  this  when  and  to  whom  He  pleases, 
but  I  do  not  find  He  hath  anywhere  promised  it.  (6)  As  for  the  case  of  melancholy, 
it  is  not  a  reasonable  case,  and  therefore  doth  not  fall  under  any  certain  rules  and 
directions.  3.  There  are  likewise  others,  who  upon  good  grounds  are  doubtful  of 
their  condition,  and  have  reason  to  be  afraid  of  it ;  those,  I  mean,  who  have  some 
beginnings  of  goodness,  which  yet  are  very  imperfect.  The  proper  direction  to  be 
given  them  in  order  to  their  peace  is,  by  all  means  to  encourage  them  to  go  on  and 
fortify  their  resolutions ;  to  be  more  vigilant  and  watchful  over  themselves,  to 
strive  against  sin,  and  to  resist  it  with  all  their  might.  Conclusion :  1.  From 
hence  we  learn  the  great  danger  of  sins  of  omission  as  well  as  commission.  2.  It 
is  evident  from  what  hath  been  said,  that  nothing  can  be  vainer  than  for  men  to 
live  in  any  course  of  sin  and  yet  to  pretend  to  be  the  children  of  God  and  to  hope 
for  eternal  life.  8.  You  see  what  is  the  great  mark  of  a  man's  good  or  bad 
condition :  whosoever  doeth  righteousness  is  of  God,  and  "  whosoever  doeth  not  righ- 
teousness is  not  of  God."  {J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  The  manifestation  of  character : — 
The  persons  opposed  are  the  children  of  God  and  the  children  of  the  devil, 
i.e.,  good  and  bad  men.  It  is  common  in  the  Scripture  to  call  persons,  distinguished 
by  any  quality  or  acquisition,  the  children  of  those  from  whom  it  was  oi'iginally 
derived,  or  by  whom  it  was  pre-eminently  possessed.  1.  This  division  is  the  most 
general  and  universal.  2.  It  is  also  a  division  the  most  serious  and  eventful.  It 
overlooks  everything  adventitious,  and  considers  only  character.  It  passes  by  the 
distinctions  of  speech,  complexion,  rank ;  and  regards  the  soul  and  eternity.  3.  Let 
us  consider,  farther,  what  results  from  these  relations.  According  as  you  are  "  the 
children  of  God,  or  the  children  of  the  devil,*'  you  are  crowned  with  honour 
or  covered  with  disgrace.  4.  Upon  these  connections  innumerable  privileges 
or  evils  depend.  Are  you  the  children  of  God  ?  Heaven  is  your  home. 
And  here  you  shall  want  "  no  good  thing."  But  I  leave  you  to  fill  up 
the  remaining  article,  and  to  think  of  the  children  of  the  wicked  one.  I 
leave  you  to  reflect  upon  the  miseries  they  endure,  from  their  perplexities,  their 
fears,  their  passions,  and  their  pursuits  in  life.      I  leave  you  to  look  forward  to  the 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  251 

horrors  which  will  devour  them  in  a  dying  hour.  11.  The  possibilitt  oi" 
ASCERTAINING  IN  WHICH  OF  THESE  CLASSES  YOU  RANK.  The  children  of  God  and  the 
children  of  the  devil  are  "  manifest."  Observe,  it  is  not  spoken  of  as  a  future,  but 
as  a  present  discovery — they  "  are  "  manifest.  1.  They  are  manifest  to  God.  It  is 
impossible  to  impose  upon  Him ;  He  "  is  not  mocked."  2.  They  are  manifest  to 
others.  The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit.  3.  They  are  manifest  to  themselves.  It 
will  readily  be  acknowledged  that  it  is  not  possible  for  a  man  to  be  wicked  without 
knowing  it.  (1)  Is  it  not  necessary  for  him  to  be  able  to  know  his  character  ?  If 
promises  are  made  to  a  religious  state,  how  can  he  claim  these  promises  unless  he 
can  determine  that  he  is  in  this  state  ?  (2)  What  is  reUgion  ?  An  unintelligible 
mystery  ?  a  charm  ?  an  operation  which  passes  upon  us  and  leaves  no  trace 
behind  ?  Is  it  not  the  most  serious  concern  in  which  we  were  ever  engaged?  Is  it 
not  a  general  and  continued  course  of  action  ?  The  business  of  Hf  e,  to  which  we 
endeavour  to  render  everything  else  subordinate?  Our  prevailing  aim?  And  is 
this  incapable  of  being  known  ?  HI.  The  marks  of  distinction  between  these 
CHARACTERS.  "  In  THIS  the  children  of  God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the 
devil."  In  what  ?  Not  in  temporal  success.  This  is  given  or  withheld  too  indis- 
criminately to  allow  of  our  knowing  love  or  hatred.  In  what  ?  Not  in  religious 
profession.  Judas  and  Demas  were  both  visible  members  of  the  Church  of  God. 
In  what  ?  Not  in  talking — not  in  controversy — not  in  a  sound  creed — not  in  the 
pronunciation  of  the  Shibboleths  of  a  particular  party.  "In  this  the  children  of 
God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil ;  he  that  doeth  not  righteousness  is 
not  of  God,  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother."  1.  The  manner  in  which  the 
subject  is  expressed.  It  is  held  forth  negatively — nor  is  this  without  design.  It 
reminds  us  that  omissions  decide  the  character,  even  where  there  is  no  positive  vice. 
2.  The  union  of  these  excellences  is  worthy  of  our  notice.  We  commonly  see  them 
combined  in  the  Scripture.  It  is  said  of  a  good  man,  "  He  is  gracious,  and  full  of 
compassion,  and  righteous."  3.  From  these  arises  a  criterion  by  which  we  are  to 
judge  of  the  reality  and  genuineness  of  reUgion — not  that  these  are  the  only  marks 
which  we  are  to  employ ;  but  aU  the  rest  will  be  delusive,  if  unaccompanied  with 
this  righteousness  and  love,  (W.  Jay.)  Self -manifestation : — As  there  is  a  God, 
and  a  devil,  a  heaven,  and  a  hell,  a  kingdom  of  glory,  and  a  kingdom  of  darkness, 
BO  there  are  several  sorts  appertaining  to  both  ;  and  at  the  day  of  judgment  there 
shall  be  a  final  separation  made  betwixt  both.  Now  the  one  of  these  two  sorts  are 
in  the  very  text  called  the  children  of  God ;  the  other,  the  "  children  of  the  devil." 
Now  to  speak  of  the  difference  which  is  betwixt  the  children  of  God  and  the  children 
of  the  devil.  This  difference  is  twofold,  either  general  or  particular.  The  general 
is  the  doing  or  not  doing  of  righteousness ;  the  negative  is  here  only  named,  but  in 
it  as  in  all  negative  rules  the  afl&rmative  is  included.  By  righteousness  is  under- 
stood that  holy  and  righteous  course  which  God  requireth  of  us,  whether  in  general 
as  we  be  Christians,  or  in  particular  according  to  our  places  and  callings  allotted 
unto  us  by  God.  The  rule  of  righteousness  is  the  Scripture ;  in  it  the  Lord  hath 
showed  what  is  good,  that  only  deserves  to  be  entertained  as  our  Spiritual  Counsellor, 
that  alone  is  able  to  make  a  "man  wise  unto  salvation."  The  doing  of  righteousness 
is  twofold.  1.  Legal,  and  2.  Evangelical.  The  legal  doing  is  the  perfection  of  all 
duties,  both  in  manner  and  form,  both  for  the  number  and  measure  of  them ;  which 
kind  of  doing  was  never  found  in  any  mere  man  since  the  faU  of  Adam.  The 
Evangelical  doing  is  mingled  with  much  weakness,  and  is  good  only  in  acceptation 
with  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  Of  this  doing  the  Spirit  of  God  speaketh  here,  and  it 
consists  upon  the  concurrence  of  these  following  particulars.  1.  A  caring  and 
studying  to  prove  what  is  the  good  will  of  God,  how  He  will  be  served,  and  where- 
with He  will  be  pleased.  2.  An  inflamed  love  and  affection  to  that  righteousness 
which  is  pleasing  unto  God.  3.  A  desire,  that  if  it  were  possible,  the  whole  course 
of  the  life  and  conversation  might  be  suitable  thereunto.  4.  A  firmness  of  resolution, 
to  frame  and  set  the  whole  and  continual  endeavour  to  the  performance  of  it.  5. 
A  speedy  applying  of  oneself  therein.  6.  A  careful  catching  of  all  opportunities  to 
help  forward  this  good  purpose.  7.  A  diligent  survey  of  ones  own  courses.  8.  A 
bitter  bewailing  of  slips  and  infirmities,  together  with  a  kind  of  holy  indignation  at 
one's  own  self,  that  he  should  so  grossly  and  ordinarily  sin  against  the  Lord.  9.  An 
increase  of  care  (after  a  soil  received)  and  of  watchfulness,  together  with  a  fear  of 
running  afresh  into  the  same  or  like  offence.  And  as  these  things  cannot  be  in  tin 
unregenerate  person,  so  they  cannot  but  be  in  those  whom  the  Lord  hath  chosen  to 
be  His.  (S.  Hieron.)  Connexion  of  doing  righteousness  with  brotherly  love  as 
^proving  a  Divine  birth : — 1.  Consider  that  old  message  or  commandment,  heard 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

from  the  beginning,  that  we  should  love  one  another.  On  what  is  it  based?  It 
cannot,  since  the  Fall,  be  based  on  our  joint  participation  in  the  ills  to  which  the 
Fall  has  made  us  heirs.  It  is  redemption,  and  redemption  alone,  with  the 
regeneration  which  is  involved  in  it,  that  makes  mutual  brotherly  love  among  men, 
in  its  true  and  deep  sense,  a  practicable  duty,  an  attainable  grace.  It  is  only  one 
who,  "being  born  of  God,  doeth  righteousness  as  knowing  God  to  be  righteous," 
that  is  capable  of  really  loving  his  fellow-man  as  a  brother.  2.  No  such  brotherly 
love  is  possible  for  him  who,  not  doing  righteousness,  is  not  of  God.  His  frame  of 
mind  must  be  that  of  Cain ;  a  frame  of  mind  that  but  too  unequivocally  identifies 
him  as  one  of  the  devil's  children,  and  not  of  God's.  It  was  not  because  he  was 
void  of  natural  affection,  or  because  his  disposition  was  one  of  wanton  cruelty  and 
bloodthu-stiness ;  it  was  not  in  the  heat  of  sudden  passion,  or  in  a  quarrel  about  any 
earthly  good,  that  Cain  slew  his  brother;  but  "because  his  own  works  were  evil, 
and  his  brother's  righteous."  It  is  this  which  chiefly  marks  the  instigation  of  the 
devil ;  and  his  fatherhood  of  Cain,  and  such  as  Cain.  More  than  anything  else  on 
earth ;  infinitely  more  than  any  remains  of  remnants  of  good  that  the  Fall  has  left 
in  human  nature  and  human  society— for  these  he  can  turn  to  his  own  account 
and  make  his  own  use  of — does  that  wicked  one  detest  the  faintest  trace  of  the 
footsteps,  the  sMghtest  breathing  of  the  spirit  of  Him  "  whose  goings  forth  have  been 
from  of  old  "  ;  who  has  been  ever  in  the  world,  the  Wisdom  and  the  Word  of  God, 
the  light  and  the  life  of  men.  Let  the  truth  and  righteousness  of  God  be  brought 
so  near  to  a  man,  by  the  Divine  Word  and  Spirit,  as  to  stir  and  trouble  thoroughly 
his  inward  moral  sense,  whUe  his  desire  and  determination  to  stand  his  ground  and 
not  give  in  remains  unabated,  or  rather  is  inflamed  and  aggravated ;  let  the  process 
go  on ;  and  let  all  attempts  towards  an  accommodation,  between  the  conscience's 
increasing  soreness  and  the  heart's  increasing  self-righteousness  and  self-will,  be 
one  after  another  frustrated  and  foiled  ;  you  have  then  the  making  of  a  Cain,  a  very 
child  of  the  devil,  who,  if  need  be  and  opportunity  serve,  will  not  scruple  to  cut 
short  the  terrible  debate  and  end  the  intolerable  strife  by  slaying  his  brother  Abel ; 
by  "crucifying  the  Lord  of  glory"!  0  my  fellow-siimer,  let  ua  beware  I 
(R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.    Not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked  one,  and  slew  Ms  brother. — 

The  world's  hatred  of  the  godly  : — I.  A  refeeence  to  the  example  of  Cain. 
1.  His  character — "  he  was  of  that  wicked  one."  He  inherited  his  disposition.  He 
was  under  his  influence.  He  did  his  will.  Had  any  one  warned  Cain  of  the 
danger  to  which  he  was  exposed,  there  is  no  doubt  he  would  have  treated  it  as  the 
grossest  insult.  The  fact  proves  there  is  no  iniquity  to  which  Satan  will  not 
prompt,  and  which  he  may  not  one  day  induce  us  to  perpetrate.  We  are,  therefore, 
farther  warned  to  resist  his  encroaches  upon  our  minds.  They  are  deceitful  and 
gradual.  We  need  to  be  ever  watchful  against  his  devices.  Let  us  remember 
the  counsel  of  the  apostle  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  2.  The  conduct  of  Cain — "he  slew  hia 
brother."  How  shall  the  deed  be  designated?  (1)  It  was  unnatural.  Nature  was 
outraged  by  the  force  of  violent  temptation.  (2)  It  was  irremediable.  Satan  will 
ever  endeavour  to  plunge  us  into  some  iniquity  that  cannot  be  recalled.  (3)  It  was 
extreme  in  its  enormity.  We  cannot  give  life,  and  without  a  Divine  permission 
we  should  not  take  it  away.  (4)  It  was  a  sin  which  once  committed  ensures  the 
bitterness  of  the  offender's  future  life.  Cain  soon  found  reason  to  cry,  "  My 
punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear."  No  doubt  Satan  sought  to  persuade  him 
repentance  was  vain,  and  forgiveness  impossible.  3.  But  how  are  we  to  account 
for  it?  "Wherefore  slew  he  him?  Because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  hia 
brother's  righteous."  It  was  envy  that  first  moved  him  to  the  unparalleled  iniquity. 
His  offering  was  rejected,  while  Abel's  was  accepted.  He  was  mortified  by  the 
distinction,  and  would  be  avenged.  It  is  very  instructive  to  mark  the  progress  of 
his  mind  under  the  influence  of  his  envious  feelings.  The  first  notice  is,  "  He  was 
wroth."  It  is  then  added,  "His  countenance  fell."  So  "he  rose  up  against  Abel 
his  brother,  and  slew  him."  What  an  instructive  history !  It  is  the  progress  of 
envy  till  it  ended  in  fratricide.  We  need  to  be  watchful  over  the  movements  of 
our  own  minds.  Impressions  may  be  guided  or  removed  if  early  dealt  with,  but  if 
they  are  allowed  to  strengthen,  it  is  impossible  to  restrain  them.  We  may  be  borne 
away  by  them  as  by  a  resistless  torrent.  II.  A  reflection  founded  upon  it — 
"  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you."  The  world,  of  which  Cain  was 
a  type,  hates  the  godly,  who  are  represented  by  Abel.  1.  Surely,  then,  they  who 
know  the  history  of  the  world  and  the  Church  should  not  marvel.     It  begins  with 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  253 

Cain  and  Abel.  The  same  spirit  has  appeared  in  all  ages,  in  all  places,  and  under 
all  circumstances.  It  has  been  carried  on  upon  the  wide  theatre  of  nations,  the 
narrower  scene  of  communities,  within  the  ch'cle  of  friends,  and  in  the  bosom  of 
families.  2.,  The  causes  of  the  enmity  of  the  world  to  the  Church  remain  as  they 
were  at  the  beginning,  and  therefore  we  should  not  wonder  at  it.  (1)  One  is  the 
exclusive  claim  of  truth.  It  asserts  its  own  supremacy.  "  He  that  is  not  with 
Me,"  says  Christ,  "  is  against  Me."  This  is  intolerable  to  the  world,  and  it  hates 
the  assertion  of  it.  (2)  Another  cause  is  the  nature  of  the  tmth  asserted.  The 
gospel  offers  a  way  of  salvation  that  gives  no  credit  to  man.  (3)  We  must  add 
the  life  which  the  gospel  requires  is  still  more  offensive  than  the  ground  on  which 
it  offers  salvation  (see  1  Pet.  iv.  4).  3.  Important  purposes  are  served  by  the  hatred 
of  the  world,  and  therefore  we  need  not  wonder  at  it.  It  belongs  to  God  to  make 
the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.  He  brings  good  out  of  evil,  light  out  of 
darkness,  and  joy  out  of  sorrow.  It  shows  what  man  is.  His  "  mind  is  enmity 
against  God."  Thus  the  grace  of  God  is  exalted.  That  alone  can  change  the 
human  heart.  At  the  same  time  the  believer  is  thus  subjected  to  a  wholesome 
influence.  As  he  is  useful  and  holy  so  does  the  world  watch  him  with  a  malignant 
eye.  He  needs  to  remember  the  injunction  "  watch  unto  prayer."  (1)  Do  not 
fear  the  world.  With  Cain  it  may  persecute  the  righteous  Abel.  But  the  God  of 
Abel  lives  and  has  prepared  mansions  of  rest  and  glory  above.  (2)  Do  not  provoke 
the  world.  "  Give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak  reproachfully."  "  With 
■well-doing  put  him  to  sUence."     (J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you. — The  world's  hatred — 
God's  love : — The  world's  hatred ;  God's  love  ;  these  are  what  are  here  contrasted. 
And  yet  there  is  one  point  at  least  of  partial  similarity.  The  affection,  in  either 
case,  fastens  in  the  first  instance  upon  objects  opposed  to  itself.  The  world  hates 
the  brethren  ;  God  loves  the  world,  "  the  world  lying  in  the  wicked  one."  And  in 
a  sense,  too,  the  ends  sought  are  similar.  The  world,  which  hates,  would  assimi- 
late those  it  hates  to  itself,  and  so  be  soothed  or  sated ;  God,  who  loves,  would 
assimilate  those  he  loves  to  HimseK,  and  so  have  satisfaction  in  them.  I.  The 
world's  hateed  of  the  brethren.  1.  It  is  natural ;  not  marvellous.  The  Lord 
prepares  His  disciples  beforehand  to  expect  it,  warning  them  not  to  look  for  any 
other  treatment  at  the  world's  hands  than  He  had  met  with.  Notwithstanding  all 
warnings,  and  all  the  experience  of  others  who  have  gone  before  him,  the  young 
Christian,  buoyant,  enthusiastic,  may  fancy  that  what  he  has  to  tell  must  pierce 
aU  consciences  and  melt  all  hearts.  Alas  1  he  comes  in  contact  with  what  is  like  a 
wet  blanket  thrown  in  his  face,  cold  looks  and  rude  gestures  of  impatience,  jeers 
and  jibes,  if  not  harsher  usage  still.  Count  it  not  strange  that  you  fall  into  this 
trial.  WTiy  should  you  ?  Is  their  reception  of  you  very  different  from  what,  but 
yesterday  perhaps,  yours  would  have  been  of  one  coming  to  you  in  the  same 
character  and  on  the  same  errand  ?  Surely  you  know  that  love  to  the  brethren — 
true  Christian,  Christlike  love — is  no  plant  of  natural  growth  in  the  soil  of  corrupt 
humanity ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  fruit  of  the  great  change  by  means  of 
which  a  poor  sinner  "  passes  from  death  unto  life."  2.  It  is  murderous,  as  regards 
its  objects :  "  He  that  loveth  not  its  brother  abideth  in  death  :  whosoever  hateth  his 
brother  is  a  murderer,"  "  Loveth  not,"  "  hateth,"  "  murdereth  "  I  There  is  a  sort  of 
dark  climax  here  I  Not  loving  is  intensified  into  hating,  and  hating  into  murdering. 
The  three,  however,  are  really  one ;  as  the  Lord  teaches  (Matt.  v.  21-24).  Be  on  your 
guard  against  this  spirit  of  the  world  finding  harbour  again  in  your  breasts.  Even 
you  need  to  be  warned  against  the  world's  evil  temper  of  dislike  and  envy.  Consider 
how  insidious  it  is.  Consider  also  its  deadly  danger.  Consider,  finally,  how  natural 
it  is  ;  so  natural  that  only  your  "  passing  from  death  unto  life  "  can  rid  you  of  it, 
and  make  you  capable  of  its  opposite.  Grace  may  overcome  it ;  grace  alone  can 
do  80.  And  even  grace  can  do  so  only  through  continual  watchfulness  and  prayer, 
continual  recognition  of  the  life  through  which  you  pass  from  death,  and  continual 
exercise  of  the  love  which  is  the  characteristic  of  that  life.  H.  Of  this  love,  as  of 
thb  hatred,  two  things  are  said.  1.  It  is  natural  now  to  the  spiritual  mind; 
natural  as  the  fruit  and  sign  of  the  new  life.  2.  It  is  the  very  opposite  of  the 
murderous  hatred  of  the  devil ;  it  is  self-sacrificing,  like  the  love  of  God  Himself. 
(R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  The  world  hating  the  Church  : — These  words  imply  a 
fact,  and  contain  a  warning.  I.  First,  then,  for  the  fact  that  the  unbeleevino 
vrosLD  DID  hate  THE  Church.  It  is  estabUshed,  not  by  sacred  testimony  only, 
but  by  the  concarrence  of  heathen  writers.    11.  The  apostle  not  only  states  the 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

fact  that  the  world  did  "hate  "  the  Christian,  but  he  peoceeds  to  waen  them  not 
TO  "  MARVEL  "  AT  IT.  There  were  two  reasons  that  would  very  naturally  induce 
Christians  so  to  marvel.  1.  The  first  was  derived  from  considering  the  Divine 
origin  of  their  faith.  They  might  be  inclined  to  suppose  that  a  religion  coming 
from  such  a  source,  and  so  confirmed,  would  at  least  secure  its  professors  from 
persecution.  2.  The  singular  innocence  and  harmlessness  of  the  lives  of  its 
professors  might  reasonably  be  expected  to  disarm  malice  of  its  sting.  Now,  for 
the  first  of  these  grounds,  of  their  "  marvel  that  the  world  should  hate  them."  The 
very  pretension  of  the  religion  to  speak  with  authority  from  God,  armed  the  world, 
Jewish  or  heathen,  against  it.  With  the  Jew  it  was  not  like  a  new  sect,  such  as 
the  Herodians,  added  to  the  older  division  into  Pharisees  and  Sadducees.  But  it 
was  a  deposing  Moses  from  his  authority,  and  placing  him  beneath  Him  whom  they 
execrated,  "  the  carpenter's  son  of  Galilee."  Nay,  more,  it  was  not  deposing  Mosea 
only  from  his  place,  it  was  a  loss  of  rank  and  caste  to  themselves  likewise.  For  if 
the  Christian  religion  broke  down  the  wall  of  partition  between  Jew  and  Gentile, 
and  made  both  one,  what  became  of  their  own  fancied  superiority  over  the  rest  of 
mankind  ?  Still  more,  what  became  of  their  own  special  position  as  lords  over  their 
brethren?  Again,  for  the  heathen.  The  Christian  religion  was  not  like  adding 
another  form  of  worship  to  the  ten  thousand  that  were  already  received  in  the 
world,  so  that  it  has  been  said  that  there  were  more  gods  than  people  at  Rome  ; 
but  it  pronounced  every  one  of  these  forms  to  be  foul,  cruel,  pernicious,  and  false. 
Even  some  conviction  that  it  must  have  come  from  God,  was  not  sufl&cient  to 
hinder  those  to  whom  it  was  brought  from  hating  and  murdering  those  who  brought 
it.  But  again,  if  the  suspicion  that  the  religion  came  from  God  were  not  sufficient 
to  deter  the  world  from  persecuting  the  Christian,  neither  would  the  innocency  of 
the  Christian's  life  be  any  defence.  So  far  from  it,  it  would  be  a  special  ground  of 
attacking  them.  Wickedness  has  a  consciousness  that  it  is  in  the  wrong,  and  as  it 
only  can  support  itself  by  having  the  multitude  on  its  side,  so  it  regards  all  good- 
ness as  a  desertion,  an  exposure  of  its  weakness.  And  what  is  the  result?  Clearly, 
that  we  ought  not  to  be  taken  by  surprise  if  we  find  the  very  best  designs,  the  most 
palpable  efforts  of  self-denial,  not  only  misconstrued  and  misrepresented,  but  its 
ground  of  such  opposition  as  the  spirit  of  the  age  wiU  permit.  In  more  tranquil 
days,  there  is  reason  to  apprehend  that  our  faith  may  grow  weak  from  want  of 
exercise,  and  degenerate  into  mere  moraUty  and  conventional  decorum.  {G.  J. 
Cornish,  M.A.). 

Ver.  14.  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love 
the  brethren. — Passing  from  death  to  life  by  love  : — I.  What  we  are  to  understand 

BY  death  and  life.       II.    WhAT  we  are  to  understand  by  the    privilege    of    HAVINa 

PASSED  from  DEATH  TO  LIFE.  1.  This  privilege  implieth  in  it  a  change  of  covenant 
heads.  The  first  Adam  represented  all  his  natural  posterity.  The  second  repre- 
sented all  given  to  Him  by  the  Father.  2.  This  privilege  implies  a  having  passed 
from  law  death,  to  law  life  ;  or  in  other  words,  from  a  state  of  condemnation  to  a' 
state  of  justification.  3.  This  privilege  implies  a  having  passed  from  spiritual  death 
to  spiritual  life  in  regeneration ;  a  having  been  released  from  the  dominion  and 
power  of  sin,  to  enjoy  the  happy  reign  and  influence  of  grace.  This  change  is  not 
the  product  of  nature,  but  whoUy  the  work  of  God.  4.  This  privilege  implies  a 
coming  or  being  taken  into  new  relations — into  a  new  covenant  relation  to  God 
through  Christ — taken  into  God's  family.  HI.  The  fruit  and  evidence  of  this 
privilege,  viz.,  love  to  the  brethren.    1.  Whom  we  are  to  understand  by  brethren. 

(1)  By  brethren  we  are  to  understand  generally  every  man  and  woman — all  mankind. 
All  are  generally  God's  offspring.    All  are  sprung  from  one  common  root,  Adam. 

(2)  But  by  brethren  here  we  are  specially  to  understand  brethren  in  Christ,  believers, 
those  who  belong  to  and  have  the  image  of  Christ  upon  them.  They  are  brethren 
by  birth,  by  nature,  by  relation,  and  by  love.  2.  What  love  to  the  brethren  is.  In 
general  it  is  a  supernatural  warmth,  kindled  in  the  hearts  of  believers  to  one  another, 
begetting  union  of  heart  and  soul,  sympathy  with,  care  for,  and  complacency  and 
delight  in  and  towards  one  another.  Never  before  nor  since  was  this  mora  em- 
phatically expressed  than  in  the  beautiful  description  in  Acts  iv.  32.  (1)  The  rule 
by  which  this  love  of  the  brethren  is  to  be  regulated  and  directed,  is  that  of  God's 
Word.  If  our  outward  walk  and  conversation  are  to  be  regulated  by  it,  sure  no  less 
is  the  exercise  of  the  graces  of  the  Spirit.  (2)  This  love  of  the  brethren  is  not  in- 
consistent with  all  that  regard  we  owe  to  gospel  truth  and  ordinances.  (3)  Nor  is 
this  love  to  the  brethren  inconsistent  with  a  proper  regard  to  the  maintenance  of 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  255 

Church  government  and  discipline — the  reproofs,  admonitions,  and  rebukes  which 
the  Lord  in  love  has  instituted,  and  appointed  to  be  observed  in  His  Church,  and 
which  He  has  promised  to  bless.  (4)  Neither  is  this  love  to  the  brethren  incon- 
sistent with  the  discharge  of  all  the  duties  of  love  they  owe  to  one  another — such  as 
telling  them  of  their  faults,  warning,  admonishing,  and  testifying  against  their  evils, 
as  well  as  having  compassion  for,  and  exercising  beneficence  towards  them.  3.  Now 
this  love  of  the  brethren  evidences  an  interest  in  the  privilege  of  having  passed  from 
death  to  life.  It  is  an  immediate  fruit  of  this  privilege,  and  therefore  a  certain  and 
infallible  evidence  of  it.  (1)  From  its  being  an  evidence  of  regeneration,  in  which 
the  image  of  God  is  communicated — and  love  to  the  brethren  is  a  prominent  part 
of  that  image.  (2)  From  its  being  an  undoubted  evidence  of  justification.  This 
supposeth  and  implieth  access  to  God,  by  and  through  Jesus  the  Mediator  ;  as  well 
as  access  to  a  throne  of  grace.  (3)  From  its  being  an  evidence  of  their  having 
received  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  (4)  From  its  being  an  evidence  of  their  adoption 
(Rom.  viii.  15).  (5)  From  its  being  an  evidence  of  their  union  to  Christ,  and 
belonging  to  His  mystical  body ;  the  members  of  which  are  all  united  to  each  other 
by  bonds  of  the  most  endearing  love  and  affection.     IV.  The  connection  between 

THE    PKIVILEGE    AND    THE    FRUIT    AND    EVIDENCE   OF    IT,    VIZ.,    LOVE    TO    THE    BBETHREN. 

1.  This  connection  is  founded  in  the  purpose  and  promise  of  God.  2.  It  is  founded 
on  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ.  3.  In  the  intercession  of  Christ.  4.  In 
the  order  of  things.  V.  The  believer's  own  knowledge  of  this,  "  we  know."  John 
did  not  know  this  as  an  apostle,  but  as  a  believer :  and  this  may  be,  and  is  known 
by  believers.  1.  From  experience  of  what  passeth  in  their  own  souls.  2.  From  its 
fruits.  "  A  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits  "  ;  and  the  fruits  of  this  love  are  such  as 
pity,  sympathy,  kindness,  and  compassion,  forgiveness,  benevolence,  beneficence. 
3.  From  the  regard  they  pay  to  the  authority  and  testimony  of  God  in  His  Word — 
as  in  the  text.  This  knowledge  is  not  left  to  rest  on  the  testimony  of  people's  own 
experience,  but  is  based  on  the  testimony  of  God  in  the  Scriptures.  Improvement : 
1.  From  this  doctrine  we  may  learn  that,  although  love  to  the  brethren  has  been 
called  one  of  the  lowest  marks  of  grace,  yet  it  is  a  real  and  decisive  one,  and  is 
attended  by  the  highest  authority.  2.  We  may  see  that  real  Christians  are  united 
in  the  firmest  bonds  of  mutual  love  and  affection.  3.  We  may  see  how  little  of  this 
love  appears  among  professed  Christians.  4.  From  this  doctrine  we  may  learn  that 
sin  has  unhinged  the  moral  frame — has  introduced  a  breach  between  heaven  and 
earth.  5.  We  may  learn  that  Christ  is  the  uniting  bond  of  peace,  reconciliation, 
love,  and  fellowship.  (Alex.  Dick.)  The  icorld  contrary  to  the  Christian  : — Air 
and  earth,  fire  and  water,  good  and  evil,  Ught  and  darkness,  are  not  more  contrary 
the  one  to  the  other,  than  are  the  people  of  the  world  and  the  true  members  of  the 
Church.  Their  views  are  contrary,  the  one  class  looking  at  the  things  of  eternity 
merely  in  the  light  of  time,  the  other  looking  at  time  in  the  light  of  eternity.  Their 
tastes  are  contrary,  the  one  being  "  of  the  earth,  earthy,"  the  other  spiritually- 
minded.  Their  pursuits  are  contrary,  the  one  "walking  according  to  the  course  of 
this  world,"  the  other  "walking  with  God."  Their  destiny  shall  be  contrary — 
"  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment,  and  the  righteous  into  life 
eternal."  I.  "  We  have  passed  from  death  unto  life."  Let  it  be  carefully 
observed  this  is  a  change  which  is  declared  to  have  already  taken  place.  "  We  have 
passed."  Whenever  a  sinner  believes  he  is  put  in  possession  of  everlasting  life,  that 
is,  of  the  germ  or  beginning  of  it.  The  words  are  expressive,  however,  not  merely 
of  a  change  that  is  supposed  to  be  past  in  point  of  time,  but  of  one  most  blessed  in 
its  nature.  What  is  so  much  shunned  as  death  ?  And  what  is  so  prized  and  pre- 
served as  life  ?  1.  Death  is  used  in  the  Scriptures  to  express  a  state  of  condemna- 
tion, and  life  one  of  acceptance.  In  the  one  case  there  is  a  sentence  of  death,  and 
in  the  other  of  acquittal.  2.  Death  is  also  used  in  the  Scriptures  to  express  a  con- 
dition of  sinfulness  or  depravity,  and  life  that  of  holiness.  The  sinner  is  pronounced 
to  be  dead ;  and  is  he  not  so  ?  He  has  aU  the  features  of  death  upon  him.  (1)  There 
is  insensibility.  He  is  in  sin,  and  ever  committing  it,  but  he  does  not  seem  to  be 
conscious  of  it.  (2)  There  is  inactivity.  He  possesses  powers  which  he  does  not 
employ.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  office  of  grace  to  make  him  alive  to  God, 
when  it  does  effectually  operate  upon  him  this  is  the  result.  The  sinner  is  made 
"  alive  to  God."  You  have  seen  the  oak  struck  by  the  lightning  of  heaven.  Its 
juices  were  dried  up,  and  its  branches  withered  away.  You  pronounced  it  dead. 
But  the  husbandman  came  :  he  lopped  off  the  withered  boughs.  He  manured  its 
roots  and  watered  its  branches.  The  process  of  decay  was  arrested.  Life  was 
restored.     It  sent  forth  its  foliage  and  bore  its  fruit  as  before.     It  was  a  resurrection. 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

So  it  is  with  the  sinner  under  the  bhght  of  sin,  when  he  is  visited  by  the  grace  of 
the  Spirit.  His  decayed  powers  are  animated  with  a  new  life.  He  puts  forth  the 
powers  in  active  energy,  which  before  were  paralysed  in  spiritual  death.  He  is 
"  passed  from  death  unto  life."  U.  The  evidence  spoken  of  in  the  text,  "  we 
know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren." 
Brotherly  love  is  the  proof  of  conversion  here  cited  by  the  apostle.  1,  There  is  the 
natural  affection  which  binds  us  to  those  with  whom  we  are  allied  according  to  the 
flesh.  It  is  true  there  may  be  this  love  when  there  is  no  grace.  In  that  case 
brotherly  love  is  no  proof  of  the  great  change  of  which  we  have  spoken.  2.  The 
evidence  arising  from  the  exercise  of  brotherly  love  towards  the  people  of  God  is 
still  more  unequivocal.  It  may  be  sometimes  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the 
natural  and  gracious  affection  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  closely  allied  to  us.  But 
where  we  love  the  godly,  simply  because  they  are  such,  the  proof  is  unequivocal- 
Its  peculiarity  is  that,  apart  from  other  considerations,  our  love  is  attracted  by  their 
godliness.  3.  Still,  love  is  not  to  be  confined  to  them.  It  is  to  be  extended  to  all 
men.     And  as  it  is  so  we  strengthen  the  evidence  of  our  gracious  state.     III.  Thb 

ASSUBANCE    OF    OUB    SALVATION,  ARISING  OUT    OF    THIS  EVIDENCE.       "  We  knOW   that  WO 

have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  We  may  know  it 
then.  This  is  assumed.  The  term  is  the  most  expressive  of  certainty  that  could 
be  used.  It  is  not,  we  think  or  hope  or  desire,  but  we  know.  He  ought  to  know  it. 
It  is  not  a  privilege  merely,  but  a  duty.  He  ought  to  know  it  for  the  sake  of  his 
own  holiness.  He  ought  to  know  it  for  the  honour  of  Christ.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
Love  to  the  brethren  a  ground  of  assurance  : — I.  The  love  of  which  the  apostle  speaks 
is  pecuUar  in  its  origin.  It  is  a  very  distinct  thing  from  natural  kindness  and 
amiableness  of  disposition ;  from  what  we  commonly  call  good  nature.  Nature 
cannot  produce  it.  It  is  the  special  effect  of  the  Spirit's  new-creating  power  upon 
the  soul.  n.  It  is  peculiar,  also,  in  its  object.  It  is  not  the  love  of  our  fellow- 
creatures  generally,  but  the  "  love  of  the  brethren,"  in  particular,  on  which  St.  John 
dwells  so  strongly  as  the  evidence  of  a  state  of  salvation.  Not  that  the  Christian 
by  any  means  confines  his  benevolent  regards  to  his  fellow-believers.  But  whilst  he 
thus  comprehends  the  whole  human  race  in  the  circle  of  his  affection,  and  prays  for 
aU,  and  is  ready  to  benefit  all,  there  is  a  still  closer  and  more  endearing  bond  of 
union  by  which  he  is  attached  to  his  fellow-Christians.  Their  principles,  taste, 
habits,  and  pursuits  are  congenial  to  his  own.  HI.  Nor  is  the  love  of  which  we  are 
speaking  less  distinct  from  that  which  sometimes  assumes  its  name  in  its  opbratioh, 
than  in  its  origin  and  object.  1.  It  is  regular  and  consistent  in  its  action.  True 
charity  is  not  an  impulse,  but  a  principle ;  not  an  act,  but  a  habit ;  not  a  momentary 
or  transient  ebullition  of  feeling,  but  a  fixed,  steady,  consistent  motive  of  conduct, 
always  ready  to  administer,  as  far  as  circumstances  may  allow,  to  the  relief  of 
ascertained  distress,  whether  of  soul  or  body.  2.  It  is  self-denying.  Its  basis,  like 
that  of  every  other  Christian  grace,  is  humility.  Pride,  self-will,  self-indulgence, 
are  the  bane  of  Christian  society,  and  rend  asunder  the  body  of  Christ.  So  true  is 
it  that  if  we  would  be  Christ's  disciples  we  must  deny  ourselves.  3.  It  is  active  in 
its  operation.  It  is  an  energetic  principle.  It  is  not  the  profession  of  kindness,  but 
the  reality.  It  is  not  by  kind  speeches  and  courteous  expressions,  but  by  beneficent 
actions  chiefly,  that  we  are  to  evidence  the  sincerity  of  our  regard  to  others.  {R. 
Davies.)  Brotherly  love : — There  are  many  kinds  of  knowledge,  but  the  most 
difficult  is  self-knowledge.  It  is  remarkable  that  St.  John  much  more  frequently 
uses  such  expressions  as  these,  "  We  know  that  we  are  of  God  " ;  "  We  know  that 
we  are  in  Him  "  ;  "  We  know  that  we  dwell  in  Him  "  ;  "  We  know  that  He  abideth 
in  us,"  than  any  other  writer  in  the  whole  Bible.  Let  us  look  first  at  the  thing 
which  is  to  be  known,  and  then  at  the  sign  by  which  we  are  to  know  it.  A  passing 
"  from  death  unto  life."  For  this  is  God's  metaphor  to  express  real  conversion  of 
heart.  The  idea  conveyed  in  the  words  is  of  two  states  separated  as  by  a  gulf ;  and 
there  is  now,  what  one  day  there  will  not  be,  a  transit  from  one  over  to  the  other. 
The  one  side  is  a  land  of  death.  There  everything  that  is  done  is  short  and  un- 
certain. It  is  a  country  of  graves,  and  the  joys  of  pleasure  have  no  resurrection. 
On  the  opposite  shore  everything  in  it  is  essential  light,  because  there  is  a  new 
principle  there ;  that  principle  is  one  which  works  for  ever  and  ever.  The  hght 
grows  brighter  and  brighter  every  day,  whatever  curse  may  pass  over  the  bereaved 
earth.  But  this  is  not  the  only  difference  between  the  opposite  states.  The  former, 
which  we  may  call  the  original  condition  of  every  man,  his  native  country  hes  far 
away,  separate  from  the  source  of  all  true  light,  and  in  God's  language,  is  all  chaos. 
There  is  no  reality  in  it ;  while  the  other  is  brought  under  the  very  sniile  of  God's 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  257 

countenance.  He  moves  and  dwells  there.  Hence,  it  is  peace,  it  is  energy,  it  is 
fruit.  Let  us  notice  the  contrast  more  clearly.  Every  man  who  inhabits  the  first 
state,  is  under  actual  condemnation ,  of  death.  Every  man  who  continues  there  is 
to  die.  But  over  every  soul  on  the  other  side  the  word  is  gone  forth,  "  DeUver  him 
from  going  down  to  the  pit :  I  have  found  a  ransom."  Now  of  the  manner  in  which 
the  passage  is  effected  from  one  shore  to  the  other,  it  does  not  belong  to  my  present 
subject  to  speak.  Sufl&ce  it  to  say  that  the  passage  is  a  great  historical  fact.  And 
the  inquiry  is,  how  may  each  of  us  best  ascertain  whether  or  not  that  transforma- 
tion has  taken  place.  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because 
we  love  the  brethren."  Some  persons,  however,  will  say  that  it  is  such  an  easy 
thing  to  love  Christians.  I  wish  I  could  believe,  but  I  cannot,  that  I  shall  be  safe 
to  infer  I  am  one  of  God's  Christians,  because  I  admire  and  attach  myself  to 
the  lovable  and  really  pious  character.  Who  are  the  "  brethren,"  and  what  is  it  to 
"  love  "  them?  The  brethren  are  those  who  have  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  their  hearts,  even  though  there  be  much  clinging  to  them  that  is  unrefined,  and 
uninteUectual,  and  unpleasing — yea,  even  though  there  be  much  that  is  really  very 
inconsistent  in  them.  And  this  very  comprehensiveness  of  a  catholic  spirit  is  a 
mark  of  a  mind  that  has  had  to  do  with  the  largeness  of  an  Almighty  God.  If  you 
have  "  passed  from  death  unto  life  "  the  friendships  that  you  choose  for  yourselves, 
and  the  relationships  that  you  form  will  be  all  made  upon  one  principle — that  you 
keep  within  the  family  of  grace.  Hence,  it  follows,  that  the  conversation  which  you 
prefer  is  that  which  is  the  most  spiritual ;  for  how  can  you  love  the  brethren,  unless 
you  really  dehght  in  their  themes  ?  So  that  the  world  of  fashion,  and  the  world  of 
pleasure,  and  the  world  of  commonplace,  has  become  insipid,  and  there  is  only  one 
atmosphere  in  which  you  love  to  breathe,  and  that  is  the  atmosphere  of  Jesus  Christ. 
{J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Christian  love: — Do  you  desire  to  know  whether  you  may 
confidently,  though  humbly,  cherish  the  good  hope  through  grace  that  you  are 
numbered  among  Christ's  people  ?  Here  is  the  way,  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  If  that  be  right,  then  every- 
thing is  right.  It  was  the  index  that  registered  how  everything  else  was  ;  even  as 
the  pulse  at  the  wrist  can  tell  the  skilled  observer  something  as  to  how  all  the  functions 
of  material  Ufe  are  going  on.  More  than  this.  Sometimes  the  index  that  registers 
a  great  thing  is  itself  but  a  little  thing.  The  tremendous  pressure  on  the  boiler  of 
the  locomotive  is  indicated  by  an  ascending  and  descending  drop  of  water  in  a  little 
glass  tube.  The  state  of  hundreds  of  solid  miles  of  atmosphere  is  revealed  to  us  by 
the  movements  of  a  slight  pointer  upon  the  dial  of  the  barometer.  But  this  testing- 
pulse  of  the  soul  is  not  a  Uttle  thing  that  indicates  a  great  one ;  it  is  a  great  thing 
in  itself.  As  love  to  God  sums  aU  our  duty  to  God,  so  does  love  to  our  neighbour 
sum  all  our  duty  to  man.  Let  us  think  whether  St.  John  did  not  give  this  counsel 
so  earnestly  and  so  often  because  he  knew  that  it  was,  and  is,  and  always  will  be,  a- 
difficult  thing  to  "  love  the  brethren."  Yes,  there  are  many  feelings  and  tendencies 
in  poor  sinful  human  nature  that  must  be  held  tightly  in  check,  before  Christian 
people  will  succeed  in  loving  one  another.  Many  human  beings  find  it  much  easier 
to  feel  a  general  dislike  to  those  with  whom  they  come  into  anything  like  competi- 
tion, than  to  feel  anything  like  love  towards  them.  Now  let  us  think  what  it  is  that 
is  really  required  of  Christian  people  in  these  days,  in  this  very  artificial  state  of 
society,  amid  these  separations  of  class  from  class,  by  this  great  gospel  command,  to 
"  love  the  brethren,"  "  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves."  Now,  in  interpreting 
such  directions,  we  may  take  two  things  with  us.  One  is,  that  God's  service  is 
always  a  "  reasonable  service  "  ;  that  there  is  never  anything  extravagant  in  what 
Christianity  requires  of  us.  Another  is,  that  when  God  gives  us  a  law.  He  always 
gives  us  one  that  is  accordant  with  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  souls  He  has 
given  us.  In  the  Ught  of  these  things,  we  can  see  what  is  the  love  God  requires  us 
to  bear  to  our  fellow-Christians  and  fellow-creatures.  St.  John  does  not  tell  us  that 
we  are  all  to  think  exactly  alike ;  nor  to  persuade  ourselves  that  those  things  are  of 
no  consequence  about  which  we  cannot  agree.  That  is  not  what  is  meant  by  gospel 
love  towards  all.  No  ;  it  means.  See  a  man's  faults  and  failings,  and  bear  with  hin. 
Hold  your  opinions  strongly,  yet  agree  to  differ,  without  quarrelling.  Be  ready  to 
help  a  poor  overburdened  creature  to  bear  his  burden  ;  and  a  sympathetic  word  will 
go  far  here.  Do  not  exaggerate  the  faults  of  your  friends ;  rather  try  to  see  some- 
thing good  in  them ;  and  if  you  try  hard,  you  may  perhaps  find  a  good  deal.  But 
besides  that  general  kindliness,  let  us  mark  the  httle  things  in  which  Christians  are 
found  to  fail  in  obedience  to  the  law  of  love.  You  know  it  is  very  easy,  and  it 
sounds  smart  to  dwell,  in  conversation,  upon  the  faults  and  follies  of  the  people  you 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

know;  to  exaggerate  these,  and  dwell  on  them  with  weary  iteration.  Now,  never 
have  anything  to  do  with  that  wretched  iU-set  tattle.  Do  not  join  in  it ;  do  not 
listen  to  it.  You  know  when  the  first  Christians  died  the  martyr's  death,  rather 
than  offer  sacrifice  to  idols,  what  was  it  they  were  called  to  do  ?  Why,  the  whole 
thing  was  to  take  up  a  pinch  of  incense  with  their  finger  and  thumb,  and  throw  it 
into  the  fire  on  the  altar  of  Jupiter  or  Minerva.  But  that  little  act  signified  that 
they  apostatised  from  Christ,  and  so  they  died  rather  than  do  it.  And  even  so, 
what  an  awful  light  is  cast  on  little  unkind  sayings  and  doings,  when  we  call  to 
mind  St.  John's  solemn  words,  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto 
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren  "  !  Train  yourselves  to  bring  the  whole  force  of 
your  religion  to  bear  upon  this  matter  ;  the  thing  is  vital.  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.) 
Love  to  the  brethren  a  test  of  piety : — I.  The  love  to  which  St.  John  eefers.  1. 
Love  to  Christians  for  the  sake  of  their  Christianity ;  or,  love  to  the  Church  for  the 
sake  of  Christ,  the  Head  of  the  Church.  2.  St.  John  does  not  speak  of  any  partial 
affection  we  may  entertain  for  individuals,  or  even  classes  of  men,  within  the  Church 
of  Christ.  3.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  we  love,  however  cordially,  all  Christians  of  our 
own  Church  or  sect.  4.  The  "  love  "  to  the  brethren,  which  is  so  sure  a  proof  of 
our  own  safety,  is  not  merely  a  universal  love  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  but  to  the 
Church  of  Christ  in  its  spiritual  character.  11.  How  the  love  in  question  becomes 
the  pledge  or  oue  own  salvation.  1.  It  is,  perhaps,  the  strongest  of  all  proofs 
that  we  love  God ;  and  it  affords  a  sort  of  demonstration  that  we  do  so,  which, 
when  considered,  is  conclusive  to  the  weakest  mind,  or  to  the  most  hesitating  faith. 

2.  It  demands  a  constant  sacrifice,  and  so  constantly  displays  the  strength  of  that 
Divine  principle  of  faith  which  unites  us  to  the  Lord ;  for  the  love  in  question  is  not 
a  mere  sentiment  of  respect  and  admiration,  but  it  is  a  bond  of  the  closest  union. 

3.  It  exposes  us  to  constant  suffering  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  at  least  this  was  the 
case  in  the  apostles'  days,  and,  in  some  degree,  is  so  stUl,  or  else  "  is  the  offence  of 
the  Cross  ceased."  [J.  B.  Marsden,  M.A.)  Life  proved  by  love: — I.  We  know 
that  we  were  dead.  1.  We  were  without  feeling  when  law  and  gospel  were 
addressing  us.  2.  Without  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness.  3.  Without 
power  of  movement  towards  God  in  repentance.  4.  Without  the  breath  of  prayer, 
or  pulse  of  desire.  5.  With  signs  of  corruption  ;  some  of  them  most  offensive.  11. 
We  know  that  we  have  undergone  a  singular  change.  1.  The  reverse  of  the 
natural  change  from  life  to  death.  2.  No  more  easy  to  describe  than  the  death 
change  would  be.  3.  This  change  varies  in  each  case  as  to  its  outward  phenomena, 
but  it  is  essentially  the  same  in  all.  4.  As  a  general  rule  its  course  is  as  follows — 
(1)  It  commences  with  painful  sensations.  (2)  It  leads  to  a  sad  discovery  of  our 
natural  weakness.  (3)  It  is  made  manifest  by  personal  faith  in  Jesus.  (4)  It 
operates  on  the  man  by  repentance  and  purification.  (5)  It  is  continued  by  perse- 
verance in  sanctification.  (6)  It  is  completed  in  joy,  infinite,  eternal.  5.  The 
period  of  this  change  is  an  era  to  be  looked  back  upon  in  time  and  through  eternity 
with  grateful  praise.  III.  We  know  that  we  live.  1.  We  know  that  we  are  not 
under  condemnation.  2.  We  know  that  faith  has  given  us  new  senses,  grasping  a 
new  world,  enjoying  a  realm  of  spiritual  things.  3.  We  know  that  we  have  new 
hopes,  fears,  desires,  delights,  &c.  4.  We  know  that  we  have  been  introduced  into 
new  surroundings  and  a  new  spiritual  society:  God,  saints,  angels,  &c.  5.  We  know 
that  we  have  new  needs ;  such  as  heavenly  breath,  food,  instruction,  correction,  &c. 
6.  We  know  that  this  life  guarantees  eternal  bliss.  IV.  We  know  that  we  live, 
because  we  love.  "  We  love  the  brethren."  1.  For  Christ's  sake.  2.  For  the 
truth's  sake.  3.  For  their  own  sake.  4.  When  the  world  hates  them.  5.  We  love 
their  company,  their  example,  their  exhortations.  6.  We  love  them  despite  the 
drawbacks  of  infirmity,  inferiority,  &c.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christian  love  : — Dr. 
Eaymond  told  us  the  other  night  about  those  geysers  flowing  with  boiling  water. 
The  ice  and  snow  come  down  from  the  mountain-tops,  and  then  they  pour  down 
through  subterranean  channels,  and  in  some  strange  places,  but  where  no  man 
knows,  they  are  heated,  and  come  bubbling  to  the  surface  of  the  earth  again.  We 
know  they  are  warmed,  but  we  know  not  how.  And  we  do  not  need  to  wait  until 
we  find  out  how,  before  we  believe  that  they  are  warm.  And  so  the  hearts  that  are 
cold  and  sensual  and  proud  and  selfish,  whenever  they  are  brought  in  contact  with 
the  heart  of  God  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  are  warmed.  They  come  into  con- 
tact with  Him  and  become  different  men.  The  nation  is  a  different  nation,  the 
civilisation  is  a  different  civilisation,  the  type  of  character  is  a  different  type  of 
character.  Christian  character  is  not  Hindu  character.  It  is  not  African  character. 
It  is  distinctively  Christian  character ;  a  character  warm  with  love,  because  it  haa 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  259 

been  wanned  in  the  secret  places  of  the  Most  High.     (L.  Abbott,  D.D.)        Loving 
the  pictures  of  God  : — If  you  love  an  absent  person,  you  will  love  their  picture. 
What  is  that  the  sailor's  wife  keeps  so  closely  wrapped  in  a  napkin,  laid  up  in  her 
best  drawer  among  sweet-smeUing  flowers  ?     She  takes  it  out  morning  and  evening, 
and  gazes  at  it  through  her  tears.     It  is  the  picture  of  her  absent  husband.     She 
loves  it  because  it  is  like  him.     It  has  many  imperfections,  but  still  it  is  like  him. 
Believers  are  the  pictures  of  God  in  this  world.     The  Spirit  of  Christ  dwells  in  them. 
They  walk  as  He  walked.     True,  they  are  full  of  imperfections  ;  stiU  they  are  true 
copies.    If  you  love  Him,  you  will  love  them ;  you  will  make  them  your  bosom 
friends.     (R.  M.  McCheyne.)         Christian  love  an  evidence  of  Christian  life : — As  it 
would  be  impossible  for  the  insect  in  its  chrysalis  state  to  observe  the  laws  which 
are  made  for  its  transformed  state — for  the  wonn  to  know  the  laws  which  make  the 
summer  fly  seek  the  sunshine  and  live  upon  the  flower — as  it  must  be  "  bom  again  " 
and  enter  upon  a  new  existence  before  it  can  keep  the  laws  of  that  new  existence ; 
BO  only  the  new  creature  can  keep  this  new  commandment.     (C  Stanford,  D.D.) 
He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  abideth  in  death. — Brotherly  love  icanting : — I. 
"  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  abideth  in  death."     The  very  form  of  this 
statement  demands  attention.     It  charges  as  a  crime  the  want  of  a  grace  and  not 
merely  the  perpetration  of  evil.     1.  The  complaint  is,  "he  that  loveth  not  his 
brother."    He  is  devoid  of  the  natural  affection  which  close  affinity  should  create. 
As  for  counting  any  one  a  brother  because  he  is  a  child  of  God,  although  he  has  no 
earthly  relationship  to  him,  he  neither  apprehends  the  idea,  nor  is  sensible  of  any 
obHgation  upon  him,  arising  out  of  it.     2.  His  condition  is  supposed  to  be  the  most 
deplorable.     "Death  "is  the  term  that  is  used  to  describe  it.     It  is  descriptive  at 
once  of  his  guilt  and  depravity,  and  his  insensibility  to  both.     Mark  the  emphasis 
of  the  phrase,  "  abideth  in  death."     Such  a  one  was  and  continues  to  be  dead.     U. 
'•  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer,  and  te  know  that  no  murderer 
HATH  ETERNAL  LIFE  ABIDING  IN  HIM."     This  Statement  is  stronger  than  the  former. 
That  was  negative,  while  this  is  positive.     That  consisted  in  withholding  what  was 
due,  this  in  the  infliction  of  evil.    We  are  reminded  in  this  comparative  statement 
of  the  progress  of  sin.  It  is  never  stationary.   The  want  of  a  grace  wiU  soon  become 
the  germ  of  a  great  sin.   The  man  that  loveth  not  his  brother  wiU  soon  learn  to  hate 
his  brother.    In  finding  out  arguments  to  justify  his  neglect,  he  wiU  not  fail  to  dis- 
cover reasons  to  inflame  his  hatred.     The  conclusion  of  the  apostle  respecting  such 
a  one  is  irresistible — "  Ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him." 
The  two  things  are  incompatible  and  cannot  dwell  together.    III.  "  Hereby  per- 
ceive  WE   THE   LOVE   OF   GoD,    BECAUSE    He   LAID   DOWN   HiS   LIFE    FOR    US  ;     AND    WE 

OUGHT  TO  LAY  DOWN  OUR  LIVES  FOR  THE  BRETHREN."  This  is  the  strougcst  argument 
yet  advanced.  It  is  drawn  from  the  conduct  of  God  Himself,  and  from  the  obliga- 
tion that  rests  on  us  to  be  followers  of  Him  as  dear  children.     {J.  Morgan,  D.D.)     , 

Ver.  15.  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer :  and  ye  know  that  no 
xanrderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him. — Sin  measured  by  the  disposition,  not  by  the 
act : — These  are  harsh  words,  some  will  say,  and  many  wiU  deny  that  they  are  just. 
"  I  hate  such  a  one,  it  is  true,  but  I  would  not  harm  him  for  the  world.  There  is 
surely  a  wide  interval  between  the  feeling  of  rancour,  or  even  the  bitter  lasting 
quarrel,  and  the  act  of  Cain  who  was  of  that  wicked  one  and  slew  his  brother." 
As  for  the  spirit  of  the  words  it  is  enough  to  say  at  present  that  they  proceed  from 
the  apostle  of  love,  and  that,  if  true,  they  ought  to  be  known.  Moreover,  if  you  find 
fault  with  him,  you  must  find  the  same  fault  with  Him  from  whom  he  learnt  his 
religion  (Matt.  v.  28).  But  besides  this,  our  feeling  that  we  are  incapable  of  this  or 
that  sin  is  not  to  be  entirely  trusted  (2  Kings  viii.  13-15).  So  too  our  great  poet 
portrays  to  us  a  man,  loyal,  upright  hitherto,  conscious  of  no  secret  treachery,  into 
whose  mind  the  infernal  powers  sent  the  thought,  that  he,  now  Thane  of  Cawdor, 
should  be  king  hereafter.  The  thought  ripened  into  a  wish,  the  wish  into  a  plan : 
he  murdered  his  king,  when  asleep  and  a  guest  under  the  protection  of  the  rights  of 
hospitality,  and  from  this  dark  beginning  he  waded  on  through  blood,  to  retain  what 
he  had  grasped,  untU  he  worked  out  his  own  ruin.  The  apostle  says  not  that  all 
hatred  will  end  in  murder — far  from  it-rnor  that  all  hatred  is  equally  intense  and 
equally  reckless,  nor  that  hatred  which  bursts  out  into  great  crime  may  not  imply 
a  worse  state  of  soul  than  such  as  remains  within,  and  does  no  obvious  harm  to 
others.  Nor  does  he  intend  to  confine  the  murderous  quality  to  positive  hatred. 
Want  of  love,  hardened  selfishness,  acting  on  calculation  with  no  rage  or  wrath  in 
it,  may  be  as  deadly,  as  murderous,  as  malignity  or  revenge.    The  apostle  teaches 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

us  in  these  words  that  evil  lies  in  the  heart,  and  that  the  evil  there,  which  meets 
with  some  temporary  or  some  lasting  hindrance,  differs  not  in  kind  from  that 
which  is  ripened  by  opportunity.  It  may  be  for  ever  dormant  as  far  as  the  notice  of 
man  is  concerned.  It  may  never  burst  forth  into  the  poisonous  flower  of  wicked 
action,  yet  the  hatred  within  and  the  hatred  in  the  wicked  action  are  one  and  the 
same,  one  quality  runs  through  both.  The  powder  that  is  explosive  and  the  powder 
that  explodes  do  not  differ.  It  is  just  as  we  measure  the  power  of  a  flood  by  its 
breaking  down  a  dam  or  transporting  heavy  masses  to  a  distance.  There  are 
restraining  influences  which  secure  human  society  from  the  explosion  of  injurious 
passions,  so  that  such  a  crime  as  murder,  common  enough,  if  you  gather  up  all  the 
instances  of  it  in  a  year,  will  excite  wonder  and  awe  in  the  place  where  it  is  com- 
mitted. We  know  that  fear  of  consequences,  conscience,  respect  for  public  opinion, 
pity,  are  as  permanent  and  universal  as  sin  itself  is,  and  that  they  are  the  dam  and 
banks  which  keep  the  stream  of  unregulated  selfishness  from  sweeping  over  society. 
Yet  though  we  call  the  crime  extraordinary,  whenever  it  occurs  we  trace  it  back  to 
some  principle  or  habit.  The  man  who  committed  homicide  was  subject  to  great 
fits  of  rage  which  he  took  no  pains  to  restrain,  or  his  natural  heat  was  increased  by 
strong  drink,  or  he  had  such  a  covetous  temper  that  he  was  tempted  by  it  into 
robbery  and  murder.  All  this  is  obviously  just.  But  with  all  this,  we  have  a  right 
to  say,  that  the  limit  to  which  a  passion,  such  as  hatred  or  lust,  leads,  is  a  fair 
measure  of  its  general  power.  We  apply  to  the  strength  of  hatred,  or  some  other 
evil  passion,  the  same  measurement  which  we  apply  to  the  capacities  of  the  mind. 
A  man  of  genius  seems  at  one  time  to  be  inert  and  without  creative  power :  at 
another,  he  will  produce  a  poem  or  a  picture  that  the  world  admires.  We  measure 
his  genius  by  his  best  productions,  by  what  he  does  in  the  most  favourable  circum- 
stances, not  by  the  vacancy  of  his  dreamy  or  inactive  hours,  where  thought  is 
gathering  strength  for  a  new  flight.  Why  not  judge  of  sin,  and  especially  of  hatred, 
after  the  same  fashion  ?  The  justness  of  the  apostle's  words  is  shown  by  the  awful 
quickness  with  which  resolutions  are  sometimes  taken  to  commit  great  crimes.  We 
flee  into  crime  as  if  the  dogs  of  sinful  desire  were  on  us,  and  we  sought  the  outward 
act  as  a  relief  from  the  agitation  and  war  within  the  soul.  So  strange  do  some  such 
historical  crimes  appear,  that  they  look  like  the  sway  of  destiny.  A  divine  Nemesis, 
or  Ate,  urged  the  man  into  self-ruin.  The  tragedy  of  life  was  not  accomplished  by 
his  own  free  will.  And  when  the  deed  is  done,  unthinking  men  will  ascribe  it  to  the 
force  of  circumstances,  as  if  circumstances  could  have  any  eiJect,  independently  of 
the  passion  or  selfish  desire  itself.  And  the  criminal  himself  may  think  that  he  was 
hardly  a  moral  agent  in  the  deed ;  that  his  own  power  of  resistance  was  destroyed 
by  temptation  against  his  will ;  or,  that  others,  the  most  respectable  men  in  his 
society,  would  do  the  same.  To  all  of  which,  we  reply,  that  the  consent  of  his  soul 
■was  his  sin  ;  that  his  sin  was  weakness  ;  that  if  he  had  wanted  strength  really,  and 
prayed  for  it,  it  would  have  come  down  out  of  heaven,  and  that  whether  others 
would  have  acted  Uke  him  or  not  is  a  point  of  no  importance.  There  was  in  London, 
a  few  years  since,  a  German  tailor,  who  was,  probably,  not  more  dissolute  than 
hundreds  of  others  in  such  a  vast  city,  a  mild,  inoffensive  man,  whom  nobody 
thought  capable  of  dark  deeds  of  wickedness.  He  found  himself  in  a  car  of  an 
underground  raihoad  in  company  with  a  wealthy  man.  They  were  alone,  and  yet, 
as  the  cars  had  a  number  of  stopping-places  in  their  five  or  six  miles'  course,  every 
few  minutes  a  new  passenger  might  come  into  their  compartment.  They  were 
alone,  I  say,  for  a  passenger  had  left  them,  and  the  door  was  shut.  Now,  in  the 
interval  of  three  or  four  minutes,  this  man  had  murdered  the  wealthy  man 
by  his  side,  had  seized  his  purse  and  watch,  and  in  the  hurry  taken  his  hat 
by  mistake,  and  had  left  the  train  the  instant  it  reached  the  next  station.  He  fled 
to  America,  was  seized  on  his  landing,  was  found  to  have  the  dead  man's  hat  and 
watch,  was  handed  over  to  the  English  authorities,  carried  back,  tried,  and  sent  to 
his  execution.  How  terrible  was  this  speed  of  crime !  No  whirlwind  or  water- 
spout, no  thunder-cloud  flying  through  mid-heaven  could  represent  its  swiftness,  and 
yet  here  there  was  nothing  unaccountable,  nothing  monstrous.  He  himself  had 
been  no  prodigy  of  sin,  nor  was  he  now.  The  crime  was  an  epitome  of  his  life,  a  con- 
densed extract  of  his  character.  And  again,  the  apostle's  principle  is  vindicated  by 
the  rapid  deterioration  which  we  often  observe  in  the  hves  of  particular  men.  It 
eeems  as  if  they  had  only  covered  up  their  sins  before,  as  if  an  evil  life  could  not 
begin,  all  of  a  sudden,  but  the  habits  of  sin  must  have  been  suppressed,  perhaps,  for 
B  long  period.  But  it  is  not  so.  They  have  not  grown  suddenly  worse,  but  some 
natural  motives,  which  swayed  them  before,  have  given  way  to  other  natural  motives 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  261 

which  were  for  a  time  counteracted.  Self-indulgence  was  counteracted  by  prudence 
or  by  conscience,  hatred  was  kept  down  or  shut  up  in  the  breast  by  public  opinion. 
Meanwhile  changes  of  life,  more  liberty  of  action,  greater  means  of  self -gratification, 
new  forms  of  society,  new  sentiments  and  opinions,  make  the  road  of  temptation 
leading  to  outward  sin  easier.  According  to  this  view  of  man,  there  is  nothing 
strange  when  hatred  culminates  in  murder,  there  is  no  new  principle  injected,  there 
is,  in  reality,  no  sudden  worsening  of  the  character.  It  is  natural,  not  monstrous 
or  morbid,  that  he  who  indulges  hatred  in  his  heart  should  yield,  when  he  is  tempted 
to  manifest  it  in  the  life.  The  deed  is  the  expression  of  the  feeling,  as  words  are  of 
thoughts.  I  add,  again,  that  if  in  any  given  case  it  were  certain  that  sinful  affec- 
tions would  be  suppressed  and  be  prevented  from  going  out  into  sinful  deeds,  the 
apostle's  principle  would  stiU  be  true.  The  spirit  of  the  extreme  crime  is  kx  the 
unblamed  malice  or  the  unobserved  envy.  It  is  neutralised,  as  the  oxygen  of  air  is 
by  nitrogen.  The  two  in  mechanical  union  form  an  innocuous  atmosphere,  and  yet 
we  know  that  oxygen  alone  would  be  a  principle  of  death.  So  hate  in  the  heart  la 
a  deadly  affection  though  counteracted,  and  although  it  may  be  always  counteracted. 

1.  I  wish  to  remark,  first,  that  sin  deceives  us  until  it  comes  into  manifestation. 
Men  are  apt  to  think  that  they  are  good  enough,  because  no  indications  of  a  corrupt 
character  are  shown  in  their  lives.  And  then,  when  the  time  of  trial  comes  and  they 
yield,  they  excuse  themselves  because  temptation  is  so  strong  and  so  sudden.  In 
neither  case  does  their  moral  judgment  conform  to  the  true  state  of  things.  Principle 
means  that  which  will  stand  the  test,  when  native  characteristics  which  were  on  its 
Bide  have  turned  against  it.  The  measure  of  principle  is  the  strength  of  resistance 
to  attacks  of  temptation,  and  if  hatred  or  lust  is  a  cherished  feeling  of  the  heart, 
there  is  no  possibility  of  resistance  when  circumstances  turn  so  as  to  favour  sin. 

2.  Sins  committed  by  others  may  fairly  suggest  to  us  what  we  ourselves  can  do,  and 
so  in  a  certain  sense  we  may  be  humbled  by  them,  when  we  apply  them  as  the 
measuring  line  of  the  deep  possibilities  of  sin  within  ourselves.  It  was  no  cant  when 
John  Bradford  said,  as  he  saw  a  man  going  to  Tyburn  to  be  hanged  for  crime, 
"  There,  but  for  the  grace  of  God,  goes  John  Bradford."  He  did  not  magnify  his 
Bins,  and  liability  to  great  sins,  in  order  to  magnify  the  grace  of  God,  but  he 
magnified  the  grace  of  God,  because  he  felt  and  found  within  himself  the  same 
sinful  nature  which  he  saw  in  the  unworthiest.  He  read  himself  in  the  history  of 
his  fallen  and  guilty  brother.  3.  Finally,  we  see  what  an  uncompromising  principle 
love  is.  One  may  say  with  truth  love  hates  malevolence,  hates  all  that  is  opposed 
to  itself  in  the  feelings  or  the  manifestations  of  the  inner  life.  Love  is  an  element 
of  a  strong  character  which  views  men  as  they  are  in  all  their  sins,  which  feels  no 
favour  towards  the  principles  by  which  the  worldly,  the  selfish,  the  proud  are 
governed.  And  thus  as  it  looks  on  moral  evil  in  all  its  deformity,  it  can  feel  intense 
pity  towards  the  blind  in  sin,  the  misguided,  the  fallen,  the  unworthy,  and  is  ever 
ready  to  sacrifice  its  own  interests  for  their  good.  (T.  D.  Woolsey.)  Who  is  a 
murderer  ? — Nothing  reveals  the  gulf  that  separates  ancient  from  modern  history 
more  clearly  than  their  respective  estimates  of  human  life.  If,  for  instance,  you 
read  an  account  of  how  Eome  built  up  and  consoUdated  her  conquests,  you  will 
shudder  at  the  terrible  track  of  blood  that  marked  her  advance.  Nor  was  this  so 
much  to  be  wondered  at.  For  what  was  there  to  surround  or  invest  man  as  such 
with  reverence  ?  And  there  was  one  thing  that  stood  fatally  in  the  way  of  any  lofty 
conception  of  humanity  possessing  the  mind  of  the  ancient  world.  That  was  the 
institution  of  slavery.  Nor  was  there  any  restraint  laid  upon  the  prevailing  violence 
by  the  fear  of  a  righteous  judgment  to  come.  Here  modern  history  has  acknow- 
ledged a  new  stream  of  influence,  which  has  come  to  us  through  Christianity,  as 
that  again  received  it  from  an  older  source.  The  opening  pages  of  the  Old 
Testament  teach  us  that  man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  and  on  this  ground 
inculcate  respect  for  human  life  under  the  most  terrible  of  all  possible  penalties : 
"  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed."  The  New  Testa- 
ment enforces  the  same  lesson.  Man  is  not  only  the  bearer  of  the  Divine  likeness, 
but  the  object  of  the  Divine  love — a  love  which  has  given  and  spent  itself  wholly  for 
him.  It  is  impossible  the  world  should  receive  such  teaching  as  this  without  being 
impressed  by  the  awful  sanctity  of  human  life.  To  mutilate  the  image  of  God,  to 
cut  some  poor  soul  short  of  its  allotted  time  for  penitence,  is  not  only  a  crime  against 
society,  an  unspeakable  wrong  against  the  victim  slain,  but  a  sin  against  God  whose 
prerogatives  have  been  usurped  and  His  authority  defied.  But  what  really  is  this  of 
which  we  stand  in  such  natural  and  wholesome  awe  ?  What  makes  the  sin  so 
sinful  ?    Not  merely  the  taking  of  a  life.    It  is  the  motive  or  intention  with  which 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  deed  is  done,  the  deliberate  and  savage  hate  which  has  leaped  beyond  the  barriers 
of  restraint,  and  refused  to  be  satisfied  except  with  blood,  that  invests  it  with  such 
an  atmosphere  of  horror.     "  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer."    But  ia 
not  this  to  confound  feeling  with  action  in  a  somewhat  dangerous  and  hasty  way  ? 
If  he  who  hates  has  already  incurred  the  guilt  of  murder,  may  he  not  argue  that  the 
overt  act  can  make  him  no  worse  than  he  has  already  become  ?    But  this  is  not  to 
be  inferred  from  the  words  of  my  text.     Christianity  does  not  say  that  a  wicked 
thought  is  in  all  respects  equal  to  a  wicked  deed.     If  it  did  so,  it  would  set  itself  at 
variance  with  the  instincts  of  our  own  nature,  and  utterly  confuse  our  moral  con- 
sciousness.    But  what  it  does  say  is,  that  the  guilt  is  identical  in  kind  though  it 
differs  in  degree  ;  that  in  moral  character  they  are  essentially  the  same,  though  they 
differ  in  the  amount  or  depth  of  their  immorality.     We  need  to  look  below  the 
surface  and  test  ourselves  by  what  we  find  there.     "  The  world  is  still  deceived  with 
ornament."    Appearances  are  still  allowed  to  betray  into  a  false  security.     When 
you  look  at  the  smiling  slopes  of  Vesuvius,  at  the  hamlets  nestling  in  its  hollows,  the 
matchless  beauty  of  the  bay  with  all  her  loveliness  sleeping  at  its  feet,  you  can 
scarcely  conceive  of  the  wild  torrent  of  destruction  that  poured  from  its  sides  two 
thousand  years  ago.    But  the  occasional  rumble,  the  dense  columns  of  ascending 
smoke,  the  tremor  of  the  quaking  earth,  remind  you  that  the  mighty  monster  ia 
awake,  and  may  again  let  loose  the  vials  of  his  wrath.     So  we  are  misled  by  the 
smooth  and  superficial  gilding  of  our  modern  civilisation.     Education  has  spread, 
refinement  is  more  general,  a  fashionable  craze  for  culture  is  abroad,  order  is  steadily 
and  sternly  maintained — not  so  much  from  the  love  of  order,  as  because  the  complex 
and  delicate  machinery  of  life  could  not  otherwise  be  kept  at  work.     Some  outbreak 
of  communism,  some  sudden  delirium  of  lawlessness,  some  startling  and  appalling 
crime,  shows  the  diseases  of  the  world  have  not  been  cured,  nor  the  forces  of  evil 
destroyed.     The  germs  that  breed  them,  the  passions  that  explode  into  all  sorts  of 
excess,  are  still  in  our  midst.     It  is  the  same  also  with  ourselves.    We  are  strongly 
tempted  to  take  too  much  for  granted,  to  conclude  there  are  certain  things  of  which 
we  are  quite  incapable.     We  are  blinded  by  the  fact  that  our  position  protects  us 
from  certain  temptations,  or  so  weakens  their  force,  they  cannot  pierce  the  armour 
of  our  respectability.     Nay,  self-interest  may  so  range  us  on  the  side  of  right,  as  to 
put  us  practically  beyond  their  reach.    But  if  we  may  escape  temptations  from 
which  our  position  secures  immunity,  we  may  fall  into  others  to  which  perhaps  it 
especially  exposes  us.    If  it  is  often  difficult  for  us  to  do  wrong,  just  because  so 
many  fences  close  us  in,  and  a  hundred  eyes  would  be  witnesses  of  our  shame,  it  is 
always  easy  to  cherish  the  sinful  feeling  or  desire.     We  may  even  compensate  for 
our  exclusion  from  the  field  of  open  transgression  by  giving  the  reins  to  a  loose  and 
wandering,  an  unhallowed  and  impure,  imagination.     And  how  many  there  are  who 
would  shrink  with  terror  from  the  overt  act,  who  rarely  suspect  they  conceal  the 
seeds  and  roots  of  it  within  themselves  !     Now  what  does  all  this  show?     1.  That 
crime  is  not  to  be  removed  by  external  remedies  alone.     The  house  may  be  swept 
and  garnished,  and  the  evil  spirit  apparently  expelled ;  but  if  another  and  a  better 
occupant  do  not  take  his  place,  and  keep  him  out,  he  will  return,  as  the  parable  tells 
us,  and  the  last  state  will  be  worse  than  the  first.     2.  But  if  something  more  drastic 
than  external  remedies  are  needful,  what  is  to  be  done  ?    Will  the  spread  of  educa- 
tion and  enlightenment  so  refine  the  taste,  that  it  will  reject  the  grosser  forms  of 
indulgence  ?    Alas !  experience  proves  that  some  of  the  most  brilliant  periods  of 
history  have  been  the  most  corrupt,  and  that  the  seat  of  the  disease  lies  too  deep  to 
be  reached  by  such  a  cure.     The  truth  is,  that  all  our  earthborn  experiments  carry 
with  them  the  defect  attaching  to  their  source.     They  are  short-sighted,  or  one- 
sided, and  where  they  see  most  clearly  and  impartially  they  only  confess  their 
impotence,  and  give  up  the  problem  in  despair.     But  while  Christianity  has  so 
unerringly  detected  the  spring  of  all  human  misery,  and  exposed  it  in  its  undis- 
guised malignity,  it  has  also  revealed  an  effectual  cure.   It  brings  with  it  a  salvation 
which  is  no  mere  experiment  or  assault  upon  the  outworks  of  our  foe,  but  which 
goes  straight  to  the  root  of  the  matter.     It  embraces  our  whole  nature — spirit,  soul, 
and  body — and  advances  from  this  centre  to  claim  and  occupy  every  province  of  life. 
And  to  apply  this  to  ourselves.     If  you  do  not  feel  that  you  need  a  Divine  power 
brought  to  bear  upon  your  heart,  have  you  ever  really  examined  the  true  moral 
character   of  your   daily  life  ?     Have   you   considered  what  the  unforgiving  and 
uncharitable  temper,  the  selfish   and   impure  desire,  really  mean — that  they  are 
straws  which  show  how  the  wind  blows,  symptoms  of  a  fatal  disorder,  which  is  not 
to  be  banished  by  passing  moods  of  penitence,  or  the  postures  of  worship  ?    Be 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  263 

assured  there  is  only  one  thing  that  can  save  a  man,  and  that  is  that  grace  of  Christ 
which,  where  sin  has  abounded,  has  much  more  abounded,  which  forgives  us  when 
we  come  to  Him,  and  cleanses  us  from  all  unrighteousness,  shedding  abroad  within 
us  that  love  which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.     (C  Moinet,  M.A.) 

Vers.  16-18.  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  because  He  laid  down  His  life 
for  us ;  and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren. — Lofty  ideals  perilous 
unless  applied  : — Even  the  world  sees  that  the  Incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ  has  very 
practical  results.  Even  the  Christmas  which  the  world  keeps  is  fruitful  in  two  of 
these  results — forgiving  and  giving.  Love,  charity  (as  we  rather  prefer  to  say),  in 
its  effects  upon  all  our  relations  to  others,  is  the  beautiful  subject  of  this  section  of 
our  Epistle.  I.  We  have  here  love  in  its  idea.  "  Hereby  know  we  the  love."  It 
is  continuous  unselfishness,  to  be  crowned  by  voluntary  death,  if  death  is  necessary. 
The  beautiful  old  Church  tradition  shows  that  this  language  was  the  language  of  St. 
John's  life.  Who  has  forgotten  how  the  apostle  in  his  old  age  is  said  to  have  gone 
on  a  journey  to  fiind  the  young  man  who  had  fled  from  Ephesus  and  joined  a  band 
of  robbers ;  and  to  have  appealed  to  the  fugitive  in  words  which  are  the  pathetic 
echo  of  these — "  if  needs  be  I  would  die  for  thee  as  He  for  us  "  ?    II.  The  idea  of 

CHAKITY  IS  THEN  PKACTICALLT  LLLUSTEATED  BY  AN    INCIDENT    OF   ITS    OPPOSITE  (ver.  17). 

The  reason  for  this  descent  in  thought  is  wise  and  sound.  High  abstract  ideas 
expressed  in  lofty  language  are  at  once  necessary  and  dangerous  for  creatures  like 
us.  They  are  necessary,  because  without  these  grand  conceptions  our  moral  language 
and  our  moral  life  would  be  wanting  in  dignity,  in  amplitude,  in  the  inspiration  and 
impulse  which  are  often  necessary  for  duty  and  always  for  restoration.  But  they 
are  dangerous  in  proportion  to  their  grandeur.  Men  are  apt  to  mistake  the  emotion 
awakened  by  the  very  sound  of  these  magnificent  expressions  of  duty  for  the  dis- 
charge of  the  duty  itself.  Every  large  speculative  ideal  then  is  liable  to  this  danger ; 
and  he  who  contemplates  it  requires  to  be  brought  down  from  his  transcendental 
region  to  the  test  of  some  commonplace  duty.  It  is  helpful  compassion  to  a  brother 
who  is  known  to  be  in  need,  manifested  by  giving  to  him  something  of  this  world's 
"good" — of  the"Uving"  of  this  world  which  he  possesses.  IH.  We  have  next 
THE  CHAEACTEKisTics  OF  LOVE  IN  ACTION.  "  My  SOUS,  let  US  Hot  lovc  in  word  HOI  with 
the  tongue  ;  but  in  work  and  truth."  There  is  love  in  its  energy  and  reality ;  in  its 
effort  and  sincerity — active  and  honest,  without  indolence  and  without  pretence.  IV. 
This  passage  supplies  an  argument  against  mutilated  views,  fragmentary  ver- 
sions OF  THE  Christian  life.  1.  The  first  of  these  is  emotionalism,  which  makes 
the  entire  Christian  life  consist  in  a  series  or  bundle  of  emotions.  This  reliance 
upon  feehngs  is  in  the  last  analysis  rehance  upon  self.  It  is  a  form  of  salvation  by 
works,  for  feelings  are  inward  actions.  2.  The  next  of  these  mutilated  views  of  the 
Christian  life  is  doctrinalism — which  makes  it  consist  of  a  series  or  bundle  of  doc- 
trines apprehended  and  expressed  correctly,  at  least  according  to  certain  formulas, 
generally  of  a  narrow  and  unauthorised  character.  According  to  this  view  the 
question  to  be  answered  is — has  one  quite  correctly  understood,  can  one  verbally 
formulate  certain  almost  scholastic  distinctions  in  the  doctrine  of  justification  ?  3. 
The  third  mutilated  view  of  the  Christian  life  is  humanitarianism — which  makes  it 
a  series  or  bundle  of  philanthropic  actions.  There  are  some  who  work  for  hospitals 
or  try  to  bring  more  light  and  sweetness  into  crowded  dwelling-houses.  Their  lives 
are  pure  and  noble.  But  the  one  article  of  their  creed  is  humanity.  Altruism  is 
their  highest  duty.  With  others  the  case  is  different.  Certain  forms  of  this  busy 
helpfulness — especially  in  the  laudable  provision  of  recreations  for  the  poor — are  an 
innocent  interlude  in  fashionable  life ;  sometimes,  alas  !  a  kind  of  work  of  superero- 
gation, to  atone  for  the  want  of  devotion  or  of  purity — possibly  an  untheological 
survival  of  a  belief  in  justification  by  works.  4.  Another  fragmentary  view  of  the 
Christian  life  is  observationism,  which  makes  it  to  consist  in  a  bundle  or  series  of 
observances.  Frequent  services  and  communions,  perhaps  with  exquisite  forma 
and  in  beautifully  decorated  churches,  have  their  dangers  as  well  as  their  blessings. 
However  closely  linked  these  observances  may  be,  there  must  still  in  every  life  be 
interstices  between  them.  How  are  these  filled  up  ?  What  spirit  within  connects 
together,  vivifies,  and  unifies  this  series  of  external  acts  of  devotion  ?  Now,  in 
distinction  from  aU  these  fragmentary  views,  St.  John's  Epistle  is  a  survey  of  the 
completed  Christian  life,  founded  upon  his  gospel.  It  is  a  consummate  fruit  ripened 
in  the  long  summers  of  his  experience.  It  is  not  a  treatise  upon  the  Christian 
affections,  nor  a  system  of  doctrine,  nor  an  essay  upon  works  of  charity,  nor  a 
companion  to  services.    Yet  this  wonderful  Epistle  presupposes  at  least  much  that 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

is  most  precious  of  all  these  elements.  (1)  It  is  far  from  being  a  burst  of  emotion- 
alism. Yet  almost  at  the  outset  it  speaks  of  an  emotion  as  being  the  natural  result 
of  rightly  received  objective  truth  (chap.  i.  4).  (2)  This  Epistle  is  no  dogmatic 
summary.  Yet  combining  its  prcemium  with  the  other  of  the  fourth  Gospel,  we 
have  the  most  perfect  statement  of  the  dogma  of  the  Incarnation.  (3)  If  the 
apostle's  Christianity  is  no  mere  humanitarian  sentiment  to  encourage  the  cultiva- 
tion of  miscellaneous  acts  of  good-nature,  yet  it  is  deeply  pervaded  by  a  sense  of 
the  integral  connection  of  practical  love  of  man  with  the  love  of  God.  (4)  No  one 
can  suppose  that  for  St.  John  religion  was  a  mere  string  of  observances.  This 
Epistle,  with  its  calm,  unhesitating  conviction  of  the  sonship  of  all  to  whom  it  is 
addressed  ;  with  its  view  of  the  Christian  life  as  in  idea  a  continuous  growth  from 
a  birth  the  secret  of  whose  origin  is  given  in  the  gospel ;  with  its  expressive  hints  of 
sources  of  grace  and  power  and  of  a  continual  presence  of  Christ ;  with  its  deep 
mystical  realisation  of  the  double  flow  from  the  pierced  side  upon  the  Cross,  and  its 
thrice-repeated  exchange  of  the  sacramental  order  "  water  and  blood,"  for  the 
historical  order,  "  blood  and  water " ;  unquestionably  has  the  sacramental  sense 
diffused  throughout  it.  The  sacraments  are  not  in  obtrusive  prominence ;  yet  for 
those  who  have  eyes  to  see  they  lie  in  deep  and  tender  distances.  Such  is  the  view 
of  the  Christian  life  in  this  letter — a  life  in  which  Christ's  truth  is  blended  with 
Christ's  love ;  assimilated  by  thought,  exhaling  in  worship,  softening  into  sympathy 
with  man's  suffering  and  sorrow.  It  calls  for  the  believing  soul,  the  devout  heart, 
the  helping  hand.  It  is  the  perfect  balance  in  a  saintly  soul  of  feeling,  creed,  com- 
munion, and  work.  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  The  sacrifice  of  love  : — The  laws  of 
nature  and  the  laws  of  grace  come  from  the  same  Lawgiver,  and  they  have  the  same 
fundamental  quality.  All  life  depends  on  this — that  some  one  is  willing  to  lay  down 
his  life  for  another.  From  the  very  earliest  stages  to  the  very  oldest  and  highest 
this  is  the  condition  not  only  of  progress  but  of  the  continuance  of  life.  The  tree 
grows,  produces  its  leaf,  its  bud,  its  blossom,  its  fruit,  in  order  that  it  may  drop 
seeds  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,  or  give  them  to  the  birds,  that  those  seeds  may 
be  carried  to  the  soil  and  from  them  other  trees  may  spring  up.  And  when  the  tree 
has  given  forth  this  consummation  of  its  life,  its  year's  work  is  over,  and  it  goes  to 
sleep  that  it  may  get  ready  to  repeat  the  operation  next  year.  The  annual  dies  in 
giving  its  life  to  another ;  the  perennial  does  not  die,  but  it  gives  its  life,  then  ceases 
for  a  little  while,  gathers  up  its  forces,  and  resumes  its  life  the  next  year  in  order  to 
repeat  the  gift.  The  babe  is  not  dropped  out  of  the  clouds  into  the  life  of  the 
waiting  family.  The  mother  hazards  her  own  life  that  she  may  give  a  new  life  to 
the  world ;  and  when  she  has  given  it,  then  she  begins  to  devote  her  life  to  it ;  her 
thoughts  concentrate  on  it,  her  life  flows  out  to  it.  It  is  for  this  child  that  the  father 
does  his  work ;  it  is  for  this  child  that  the  mother  gives  her  prayers,  her  night- 
watchings,  her  energies.  Her  own  life  is  laid  down  for  another  life.  The  child, 
we  say,  grows  older,  wiser.  How  does  it  grow  older  ?  how  does  it  grow  wiser  ?  how 
does  it  grow  in  wisdom  and  in  stature  ?  In  stature,  because  a  hundred  lives  are 
busy  all  over  the  world  gathering  fruit  for  it,  and  food  for  it,  and  ministering  to  it ; 
and  wiser,  because  a  hundred  brains  are  thinking  for  it  and  a  hundred  hearts  are 
gathering  equipment  of  love  and  pouring  into  it.  The  teacher  is  giving  her  life  to 
her  pupils,  laying  down  her  life  for  them.  If  she  does  not  care  for  them,  if  she 
simply  goes  into  the  schoolroom  for  her  six  or  eight  hours  to  earn  her  salary,  and 
then  goes  away,  and  no  life  flows  out  from  her,  she  is  a  mere  perfunctory  thing  and 
no  true  teacher.  We  build  a  fence  around  a  tribe  of  Indians  and  shut  them  up  by 
themselves  and  say,  "  Now  grow."  A  hundred  years  go  by,  and  they  are  the  same 
barbarians  they  were  a  hundred  years  before.  Then  we  say,  "  Let  civilisation  see 
what  it  can  do  with  them  " — a  selfish  civihsation.  "  We  will  let  in  the  railroad,  we 
will  let  in  the  trader,  the  whisky-dealer,  we  will  let  in  selfishness."  And  barbarism 
simply  grows  more  barbaric  ;  the  growth  is  degeneracy.  Not  until  you  can  find  an 
Armstrong  or  a  Pratt  who  will  lay  down  his  life  for  them,  not  until  you  can  find 
men  and  women  who  will  devote  their  lives  to  pouring  truth  and  purity  and  life  into 
these  barbaric  minds,  is  there  growth ;  and  the  moment  you  find  such  life  given, 
true  growth  begins.  Life  goes  by  transmission,  and  there  is  no  hope  for  a  lower 
race  except  as  some  higher  race  will  transmit  its  life  thereto.  This  is  the  signifi- 
cance of,  the  fundamental  principle  underlying,  all  foreign  missionary  service. 
Now,  the  Bible  takes  this  generic  law  and  carries  it  up  a  little  higher.  Follow  up 
the  stream  to  its  source  and  you  will  find  the  springs  among  the  hills  ;  and  these, 
you  say,  fed  it.  But  where  did  these  springs  come  from  ?  You  must  look  up,  and 
there  in  the  blue  above  sails  the  clouds ;  and  the  rainfall  from  these  clouds  has  first 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  265 

fed  the  springs  that  fed  the  rills  that  fed  the  streams  that  made  the  river.  So  all 
life,  its  progress,  its  development,  come  from  the  One  above  all,  who  pours  out 
His  life  that  others  may  live.  This  is  what  love  means.  Love  is  life-giving.  Love 
is  not  caress.  The  mother  does  not  love  her  child  simply  because  she  folds  it  to  her 
arms  and  caresses  it  with  her  kisses.  This  is  but  the  expression  of  love.  Love  is 
not  joy.  The  mother  does  not  love  her  child  because  a  strange  joy  thrills  her  heart 
as  she  looks  into  baby's  eyes.  This  is  simply  the  fruit  of  love.  Love  is  giving 
one's  life  to  another.  To  lay  down  one's  life  for  another  is  not,  then,  the  same  as 
to  die  for  another.  That  is  very  clear.  "  Hereby  we  know  love,  that  He  laid  down 
His  life  for  us  ;  and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren."  Ought  we 
all  to  die  for  the  brethren  ?  Not  at  aU.  No  man  thinks  that.  But  we  all  ought  to 
lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren.  That  is  another  matter.  To  live  for  another 
may  involve  with  it  dying  for  another,  and  certainly  does  involve  willingness  to 
die  for  another,  but  the  value  is  in  laying  down  the  life,  not  in  dying.  Here  are  two 
nurses  going  out  into  a  city  that  is  plague-stricken.  One  catches  the  plague,  dies, 
is  buried  in  a  nameless  grave  under  a  nameless  headstone  in  the  cemetery.  The 
other  lives  through  the  plague  and  goes  back  to  her  home.  One  has  laid  down  her 
life  for  the  plague-stricken  city  as  truly  as  the  other.  To  lay  down  one's  life  is  not 
to  die  ;  it  is  only  to  be  willing  to  die.  But  no  man  does  lay  down  his  life  truly  and 
really  for  another  unless  he  is  willing  to  die.  If  a  young  man  goes  into  the  medical 
profession,  and,  when  pestilence  appears  in  a  house,  he  says,  "  I  cannot  go  there  ;  I 
should  risk  my  life  and  the  life  of  my  children,"  he  has  not  laid  down  his  Ufe.  The 
value  of  Christ's  life  was  not  in  the  crucifixion.  It  was  not  by  His  death  that  He 
saved  the  world.  I  know  how  that  sentence  wiU  be  picked  out,  and  perhaps  sent 
abroad,  and  I  misinterpreted ;  nevertheless,  I  repeat  it — it  is  not  by  His  death  He 
saves  the  world,  but  by  laying  down  His  life  for  the  world.  Passion  week  began 
when  He  was  born.  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  His  life  was  laid  down  for 
humanity.  So  to  lay  down  one's  life  does  not  necessarily  involve  pain  and  suffering. 
It  may  or  may  not.  You  may  be  a  lover  without  pain  ;  you  cannot  be  a  saviour  with- 
out pain.  And  when  the  Christ  came  into  the  world,  bringing  the  message  of  infinite 
and  eternal  love,  it  was  not  the  spear-thrust  that  made  Him  the  Saviour — it  was  the 
spear-thrust  that  proved  Him  the  Saviour ;  it  was  the  spear-thrust  that  showed  that 
there  was  such  love  in  this  heart  of  the  Chi'ist  that  He  was  wUling  to  die  for  love's 
sake.  The  Cross  is  the  glory  of  Christ,  because  it  shows  how  far  love  would  carry 
Him  in  laying  down  His  life  for  sinful  man.  Christ's  Cross  is  witness  of  the  Divine 
life  that  is  saving  the  world.  Christ  lays  down  His  life  for  us.  We  are  to  lay  down 
our  lives  for  one  another.  This  is  the  simple  lesson  of  this  communion  Sunday — 
Life  poured  out  from  one  full  heart  into  another  empty  heart ;  from  one  joyous 
heart  into  an  aching  heart ;  from  one  pure  heart  into  a  sinful  and  shameful 
heart.     [Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.) 

Vers.  17-21.  But  whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and  seeth  his  brother  have  need, 
and  shutteth  up  his  bowels  of  compassion  from  him,  how  dwelleth  the  love  of 
God  in  him  "!  —Righteousness  essential  to  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  in  ourselves 
and  before  God : — The  lesson  here  is  sincerity.  Beware  of  seK-deception.  It  is  easy 
to  imagine  what  you  would  do  to  win  or  help  a  brother ;  and  you  may  please  your- 
selves by  carrying  the  imagination  to  any  length  you  choose.  You  will  lay  down  your 
life  for  one  who  is,  or  who  may  be,  a  brother !  And  yet  you  cannot  lay  down  for 
him  your  love  of  this  world's  good ;  your  love  of  ease  and  selfish  comfort ;  your 
fastidious  taste ;  your  proud  or  shy  reserve.  John  brings  out  into  prominence  a 
general  principle  connecting  conscience  and  faith,  with  immediate  reference  to  his 
particular  topic  of  brotherly  love.  The  principle  may  be  briefly  stated.  There  can 
be  no  faith  where  there  is  not  conscience ;  no  more  of  faith  than  there  is  of  con- 
science. In  plain  terms,  I  cannot  look  my  God  in  the  face  if  I  cannot  look  myself 
in  the  face.  If  my  heart  condemns  me,  much  more  must  He  condemn  me  who  is 
greater  than  my  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things.  Eeserving  the  special  application 
of  this  principle  to  the  grace  of  brotherly  kindness,  I  ask  you  for  the  present  to 
consider  it  more  generally  with  reference  to  the  Divine  love ;  fii-st,  as  you  have  to 
receive  it  by  faith ;  and,  secondly,  as  you  have  to  retain  it  and  act  it  out  in  your 
loving  walk  with  God  and  man.  I.  I  am  a  receiver  of  this  love.  And  it  concerns 
me  much  that  my  faith,  by  which  I  receive  it,  should  be  strong  and  steadfast,  which, 
however,  it  cannot  be  unless  my  conscience,  in  reciving  it,  is  guileless.  The  plain 
question  then  is.  Are  you  dealing  truly  with  God  as  He  deals  truly  with  you  ?  Are 
you  meeting  Him,  as  He  meets  you,  in  good  faith  ?   Ig  all  real  and  downright  earnest 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

with  you  ?    Or  are  you  toying  and  playing  with  spiritual  frames  as  if  it  were  all  a 
mere  affair  of  sentimentalism  ?    Is  there  a  sort  of  half-consciousness  in  you  that 
you  would  reaUy  apprehend  and  welcome  the  mediation  of  Christ  better  than  you 
do  if  it  were  meant  merely  to  estabhsh  a  relation  between  God  and  you,  so  far  amicable 
as  to  secure  your  being  let  alone  now  and  let  off  at  last ;  and  that  in  consideration 
of  certain  specified  and  ascertainable  acts  of  homage,  without  its  being  insisted  on 
that  God  and  you  should  become  so  completely  one  ?  If  your  heart  misgive  you  and 
condemn  you  on  such  points  as  these,  it  is  no  wonder  that  you  have  not  peace  with 
Him  "  who  is  greater  than  your  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things."    II.  Not  only  as 
receiving  God's  love  does  it  concern  me  to  see  to  it  that  my  heart  condemns  me  not, 
but  as  retaining  it  and  acting  it  out  in  my  walk  and  conduct.     Otherwise,  "  how 
dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  me?  "    It  is  a  great  matter  if  the  eye  be  single,  if  your 
heart  do  not  condemn  you.   The  consciousness  of  integrity  is,  of  itself,  a  well-spring 
of  peace  and  power  in  the  guileless  soul.     The  clear  look,  the  erect  gait,  the  firm 
step,  the  ringing  voice,  of  an  upright  man,  are  as  impressive  upon  others  as  they 
are  expressive  of  himself.     But  that  is  not  all.     The  assurance  or  confidence  of 
which  John  speaks  is  not  self-assurance  or  self-confidence.     No.     It  is  "  assurance 
before  God";  it  is  "confidence  toward  God."     Why  does  the  apostle  make  "our 
heart  condemning  us  "  so  fatal  to  our  "  assuring  our  heart  before  God  "  ?    It  is 
because  "  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things."   He  assumes  that 
it  is  with  God  we  have  to  do,  and  that  we  feel  this.   Our  own  verdict  upon  ourselves 
is  comparatively  a  small  affair ;  we  ask  the  verdict  of  God.     (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.) 
Shutting  up  comjMssion : — Pure  and  undefined  religion  is  the  imitation  of  God. 
Whatever  else  may  characterise  the  men  who  have  passed  from  death  unto  Ufe,  this  is 
characteristic  of  them  all.     Now,  assuming  this,  look  at  the  immense  interrogation 
which  he  proposed  in  our  present  text.    A  man  is  presented  to  us  who  professes  to 
be  a  son  of  the  Lord  Almighty,  but  his  profession  was  unsubstantiated.    I.  The  man 
WHOSE  RELIGION  IS  VAIN  HAS  THIS  world's  GOODS  ;  of  the  things  which  are  necessary 
for  the  vigorous  maintenance  of  life  he  has  enough  and  to  spare.     Before  his  wants 
ever  recur  there  is  the  supply.     God  daily  loadeth  him  with  His  benefits.     H.  He 
SEETH  HIS  BROTHER  HAVE  NEED.      It  is  Hot  with  Other s  as  it  is  with  him.      By 
treacherous  and  sore  calamity  they  are  afflicted  in  mind,  or  body,  or  estate ;  per- 
haps from  ascertainable  causes,  perhaps  from  causes  not  ascertainable,  they  are 
destitute  of  daily  food.     He  sees  it  plainly.     HI.  He  shuts  up  the  bowels  of  his 
COMPASSION.     There  may  be  the  clamorous  appeal,  he  is  deaf  to  that ;  there  may  be 
the  eloquent  appeal  of  the  silent  heart.     It  is  just  the  same,  and  lest  his  bowels, 
peradventure,  should  yearn,  he  locks  them  up  and  bids  them  remain  unmoved. 
Why  should  he  interfere  ?    People  should  be  more  careful ;  there  should  be  a  great 
deal  more  frugality ;  the  institutions  of  the  country  should  prevent  such  calamities. 
Such  applications  are  nothing  to  him,  and  now,  at  all  events,  he  means  to  be 
excused.    IV.  How  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?    Does  he  resemble  God  ? 
I  know  your  answer.     That  man  an  imitator  of  God,  who  causeth  the  sun  to  shine 
upon  the  just  and  the  unjust !     That  man  an  imitator  of  Him  who  "  giveth  us  rain 
from  heaven  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness  "  !   That 
man  an  imitator  of  Him  who  "  dealeth  not  with  us  after  our  sins,  who  rewardeth 
us  not  according  to  our  iniquities  "  !     Impossible  !     How  can  he  be  ?      God  ia 
merciful,  he  is  unmerciful ;  God  is  communicative,  he  is  parsimonious ;  God  is 
compassionate,  he  is  unrelenting;  God  bindeth  up  the  broken  in  heart  and  healeth 
their  wounds,  he  irritates  the  broken  in  heart.     There  is  no  similarity  whatever. 
You  might  call  light  and  darkness  one.     (IF.  Brock.)        Charity  to  the  poor: — 
I.  Who  ABE  THEY  that   are   obliged   to   works   of   charity?    All  are  obliged 
to  do  something  towards  supplying  the  wants  of  others  whom  God  hath  blessed 
with   greater   abundance  than   is  sufficient  for  the  supply  of   their   own.    It  is 
not  the  value  of  the  gift  which   God  regards,   but  the  honest  purpose  of   the 
giver,     n.  Who    are    they    towards    whom    works    of    charity    ought    to    be 
exercised  ?    By  the  "  needy  "  you  are  not  to  understand  absolutely  every  needy 
man,  but  every  one  who  being  in  need  is  not  able  by  honest  means  to  provide  for 
himself.     Those  are  before  all  others  the  objects  of  charity,  who  want  food  and 
raiment  sufficient  for  the  sustenance  of  their  bodies.     The  reason  of  this  is  that  life 
is  the  foundation  of  all  other  blessings  in  this  world.     We  are  bound,  according  to 
our  abilities,  not  only  to  preserve  the  life  of  others,  but  to  secure  their  happiness 
too.     And  in  this  work  sickness  and  pain  are  principally  to  be  regarded.     When 
life,  health,  and  liberty  are  secure,  the  law  of  charity  grows  to  be  more  undermined, 
yet  I  think  we  should  not  say  that  it  entirely  ceases.     For  the  having  what  is 


CHAP,  ui.]  I.  JOHN.  267 

barely  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  life  is  but  the  first  and  lowest  degree  of  happi- 
ness. III.  Whence  the  value  of  charity  arises,  or  what  it  is  that  makes  the 
outward  act  of  giving  to  become  acceptable  to  God.  That  which  the  apostle 
condemns  here  is  the  shutting  up  our  bowels  against  the  cries  of  the  needy. 
God  can  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked,  heal  the  sick,  and  deliver  the  prisoner 
from  captivity  without  drawing  anything  from  our  stores.  But  as  He  has  other- 
wise ordered  things.  He  hath  given  us  affections  suitable  to  the  conditions  in  which 
He  hath  placed  us,  and  made  us  by  nature  humane  and  mefciful.  When  the  heart 
is  open,  it  is  impossible  that  the  hands  can  be  shut.  There  is  a  pleasure  in  giving, 
which  a  truly  compassionate  mind  is  no  more  able  to  resist  than  it  can  forbear  to 
commiserate.  IV.  The  want  op  a  charitable  and  benevolent  disposition  is 
INCONSISTENT  WITH  THE  LOVE  OF  GoD.  {U.  StebhinQ,  D.D.)  The  duty  of 
charitable  distribution: — I.  The  principle  on  which  this  great  duty  is  unalterably 
FOUNDED.  All  the  goods  of  nature,  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  the  fishfes  of  the  sea,  were  given  to  man  for  his  sustenance 
and  use.  But  as  the  necessities  of  man  impel  him,  no  less  than  his  passions  lead 
him,  to  a  state  of  civilisation  and  society,  so  the  necessary  effect  hath  been  a 
limitation  of  this  common  right  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  goods  of  nature  by  the 
estabhshment  of  particular  properties.  It  must  be  granted  that  in  most  of  the 
kingdoms  of  the  earth  the  inequalities  of  property  are  too  great,  either  for  the 
public  peace  of  the  whole,  or  the  private  happiness  of  the  iudividuals,  whether  rich 
or  poor.  To  prevent  therefore,  or  to  remedy  these  dreadful  evils,  the  great 
principle  of  Christian  charity  comes  in.  And  on  this  principle  it  appears  that  our 
care  of  the  necessitous  is  by  no  means  to  be  considered  as  a  voluntary  act  of 
virtue,  which  we  may  perform  or  remit  at  pleasure.    11.  The  various  motives 

which    may   urge    the    rich   to    the    CONSISTENT   AND    CONTINUED  PRACTICE    OF   IT.       1. 

And  first,  on  account  of  their  present  satisfaction  of  mind,  and  with  a  view  to  a 
rational  and  true  enjoyment  of  wealth,  they  ought  to  attend  to  the  continued  practice 
of  this  duty.  Love,  hope,  peace,  and  joy  are  the  constant  companions  of  the  com- 
passionate soul.  2.  Again,  as  the  rich  ought  religiously  to  attend  to  the  great  work 
of  charitable  distribution  as  the  necessary  means  of  regulating  their  own  desires,  so 
the  welfare  of  their  famihes  and  children  ought  to  be  a  farther  motive  to  their 
exemplary  practice  of  this  duty.  The  noblest  and  most  valuable  inheritance  that  a 
father  can  leave  his  child  is  that  of  an  honest  and  generous  mind.  3.  The  last 
motive  I  shall  urge  for  the  performance  of  this  great  duty  is  the  security  of  your 
future  and  eternal  welfare  in  a  better  world  than  this.  A  selfish  attention  to  wealth 
tends  strongly  to  withdraw  our  affections  from  God  and  virtue.  HI.  The  proper 
METHODS  AND  OBJECTS  OF  IT.  1.  And  here  it  wUl  be  necessary,  first,  to  show  the 
invaUdity  of  a  plausible  pretence,  which  would  destroy  the  very  essence  of  this 
duty.  It  is  pretended  that  the  principle  of  a  charitable  distribution  is  superfluous, 
because,  if  the  rich  do  but  spend  or  squander  the  incomes  of  their  estates,  the 
money  will  distribute  itself,  and  like  blood  circulating  from  the  heart  will  fall  into 
all  the  various  channels  of  the  body  poUtic,  in  that  just  proportion  which  their 
respective  situations  may  demand.  The  objection  is  plausible,  yet  void  of  truth. 
For,  first,  supposing  the  effects  to  be  such  as  are  here  represented  with  respect  to 
the  necessitous,  yet  they  would  be  bad  with  regard  to  the  rich  themselves.  But 
farther.  This  kmd  of  distribution  by  mere  expense  can  never  effectually  relieve  the 
necessitous.  Insolence  and  oppression  are  its  certain  consequences.  Again,  there- 
fore, this  method  of  distribution  can  never  be  effectual,  because  they  who  stand 
most  in  need  can  never  be  succoured  by  it.  For  the  mere  act  of  expending  wealth 
can  never  affect  any  of  the  lower  ranks,  but  those  who  labour.  But  the  helpless 
young,  the  sick,  and  aged  must  languish  and  die  in  misery.  Nay,  what  is  yet 
worse,  while  the  helpless  innocent  are  thus  left  destitute  of  reUef,  the  associates  of 
wickedness  are  often  fed  to  the  f uU.  2.  A  second  excuse  for  an  exemption  from  this 
duty  must  hkewise  here  be  obviated,  which  is  the  pretended  suflBciency  of  poor  laws 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  necessitous.  But  that  they  can  never  stand  in  the  place 
of  a  true  spirit  of  charity  will  appear  from  considering  them  either  in  their  forma- 
tion or  execution.  If  they  are  formed  merely  on  the  principles  of  prudence  and 
poUcy,  void  of  a  charitable  zeal,  they  will  always  be  of  a  rigid,  and  often  of  a  cruel 
complexion.  Again,  laws  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor  must  ever  be  defective 
in  their  execution  unless  inspirited  by  true  charity,  because,  on  the  same  principle 
as  already  laid  down,  they  must  generally  be  executed  in  a  despotic  manner.  Also 
they  never  can  effectually  separate  the  good  from  the  bad,  the  worthy  from  the 
■worthless,  so  as  to  relieve  and  reward   the  one  in  preference  to  the  other.    It 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

now  remains  that  we  point  out  the  proper  objects  of  this  great  Christian  duty. 
First,  all  they  who,  through  natural  infirmity,  age,  sickness,  or  accidental  disaster, 
are  rendered  incapable  of  self-support  by  labour.  Among  this  number,  more 
particularly,  we  are  bound  to  relieve  our  neighbouring  poor.  Our  neighbour's  real 
wants  are  better  known  to  us  than  theirs  who  are  farther  removed  from  our 
observation.  Again,  among  this  number  a  selection  ought  to  be  made  of  the  most 
worthy,  not  to  the  total  exclusion  of  even  the  worthless,  but  as  an  encouragement 
to  virtue.  Beyond  these  common  objects  of  our  charity  there  is  stQl  a  higher  sphere 
for  beneficence  to  shine  in — on  those  who,  by  inevitable  misfortunes,  have  been 
reduced  from  wealth  to  a  state  of  necessity.  Beyond  these  objects  of  our  charitable 
assistance  here  enumerated,  there  yet  remains  one,  which  deserves  a  particular 
consideration.  I  mean  the  children  of  the  necessitous.  (John  Brown,  D.D.) 
On  Christian  beneficence : — I.  The  source  of  Christian  beneficence.  Many 
possess  a  constitutional  benevolence  of  disposition.  But  nothing  short  of  the  love 
of  God  can  ensure  obedience  to  His  will  in  any  department  of  duty,  and  no 
inferior  motive  can  be  regarded  by  Him  with  acceptance.     II.  The  indispensable 

NECESSITY    OF    BENEFICENCE    AS   A    BRANCH   OF    CHRISTIAN     CHARACTER.       BeneficCnCe   13 

a  positive  law  of  the  Divine  government,  and  cannot  be  dispensed  with,  save  by 
incurring  the  guilt  of  disobedience  against  the  supreme  authority  of  God.  Christian 
beneficence  is  most  comprehensive,  extending  to  the  entire  nature  of  man.  III. 
The  principles  by  which  beneficence  ought  to  be  regulated  deserve  serious 
considi:i;ation.  "  To  consider  the  case  of  the  poor"  is  an  obligation  as  imperative 
as  that  of  relieving  it.  Indiscriminate  alms-giving  is  a  serious  evil  to  both  giver 
and  receiver.  Let  the  understanding  be  Divinely  enlightened,  and  the  bowels  of 
compassion  not  be  shut  against  the  brother  who  hath  need,  and  we  may  safely 
commit  to  your  own  judgment  and  feelings  the  extent  of  your  benefactions.  IV. 
Its  dependence  upon  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love.  {John  Smyth,  D.D.)  My  little  children,  let  us  not 
love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue ;  but  in  deed  and  in  truth. — Deceptive  friendli- 
ness : — I.  Expressions  op  courtesy  which  have  no  root  in  the  heakt.  II. 
Blandishments  to  gain  an  end.  III.  Manifestations  of  superficial  good- 
nature and  friendliness  which  cannot  stand  the  test  of  times  of  adversity. 
IV.  Expressions  of  sympathy  without  help.  {R.  Abercrombie,  M.A.)  Charity 
in  deed  better  than  in  thought : — When  you  see  a  plan  in  an  architect's  office  that  is 
very  new  and  very  pretty  to  look  at,  you  say,  "  Ah !  nothing  has  been  done  with 
it,"  but  when  you  see  a  plan  that  is  smudgy,  and  torn,  and  almost  broken  through 
where  it  has  been  folded,  you  know  that  the  man  has  done  something  with  it. 
Now,  do  not  fall  in  love  with  the  plan,  and  think  it  very  pretty,  but  never  carry  it 
out.  When  Dr.  Guthrie  wanted  his  ragged  schools  founded,  he  called  on  a  certain 
minister,  who  said,  "  Well  you  know,  Mr.  Guthrie,  there  is  nothing  very  new  in 
your  scheme ;  I  and  Mr.  So-and-so  have  been  thinking  over  a  similar  plan  to 
yours  for  the  last  twenty  years."  "Oh!  yes,"  said  Dr.  Guthrie,  "I  dare  say; 
but  you  have  never  carried  it  out."  So  some  people  are  always  thinking  over 
some  very  fine  plan  of  their  own;  but  while  the  grass  grows  the  steed  starves. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  19-22.  And  hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shaU  assure  our 
hearts  before  Him. — The  connection  between  faith  and  the  state  of  the  heart : — I. 
There  is  a  certain  blessing  or  privilege  here  spoken  of — "  then  have  we  confi- 
dence toward  God."  Confidence,  literally  fulness  of  speech,  because  this  is  one  of 
the  principal  ways  in  which  confidence  displays  itself ;  the  heart  is  enlarged,  the 
mouth  is  opened,  and  thus  the  whole  soul  pours  forth  its  feelings  without  restraint 
and  without  disguise.  It  is  a  very  remarkable  part  of  our  nature  this,  in  virtue  of 
which  we  are  impelled  to  make  those  whom  we  love  and  confide  in  the  depositaries 
of  the  most  sacred  treasures  of  our  breasts.  As  confidence  is  enkindled,  reserve 
disappears,  like  as  the  winter's  frost  that  binds  up  the  bosom  of  the  earth  is  melted 
before  the  summer's  sun.  And  as  it  is  in  the  intercourse  between  man  and  man,  so 
is  it  in  the  intercourse  between  man  and  God.  The  degree  in  which  we  can  reveal 
to  Him  all  our  sins,  wants,  and  sorrows  will  ever  be  in  proportion  to  our  confidence 
in  Him.  It  is  a  nio»t  blessed  state  of  mind  ;  if  we  are  believers  we  must  know  it  in 
some  measure.  There  is  a  firm  foundation  laid  for  it  in  the  gospel ;  the  atonement 
realised  by  faith  will  produce  this  in  the  soul,  and  nothing  else  will.  II.  Notice  a 
CERTAIN  HINDRANCE  SPOKEN  OF  as  Standing  in  the  way  of  the  enjoyment  of  confidence 
toward  God.     "  If  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  269 

all  things."  There  is  something  in  the  very  constitution  of  our  nature  which  would 
shake  our  confidence  toward  God,  if  our  own  heart  condemned  us.  III.  A  certain 
INDISPENSABLE  QUALIFICATION  for  the  enjoyment  of  confidence  toward  God  :  "  If  our 
heart  condemn  us  not."  This  is  discouraging  at  first  sight.  It  seems  to  place  us 
at  a  hopeless  distance  from  this  blessing.  You  say,  perhaps,  you  look  into  your 
heart,  and  you  see  there  nothing  but  sin,  darkness,  disorder,  unbelief  ;  nothing  that 
a  holy  God  can  approve  of.  Indeed  I  Nothing  ?  No  grace  evident  there,  no 
repentance,  no  love  to  the  Saviour,  no  spirituality,  no  desire  after  communion 
with  God  ?  A  most  extraordinary  kind  of  religion  yours !  And  what  is  the 
tendency,  and  I  fear  actual  effect  of  a  one-sided  experience  like  this?  It  is 
twofold :  First,  as  affects  the  people  of  the  world.  They  say.  What  difference  is 
there  between  us  and  those  who  call  themselves  the  Lord's  people  ?  2.  And  then  as 
affects  Christians  themselves.  For  this  exclusion  of  all  inward  evidence  tends  to 
beget  a  want  of  watchfulness,  and  leads  more  or  less  to  the  losing  sight  of  the  moral 
element  in  Christianity.  It  prevents  them  from  cultivating  that  personal  holiness 
which  is  indispensable  to  the  fruition  of  a  spiritual  being.  IV.  A  certain  practical 
TEST  on  which  the  heart's  verdict  of  itself  must  be  based,  favourable  or  unfavourable, 
"  Hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  Him." 
"  Hereby."  This  carries  us  back  to  something  going  before.  We  cannot  trust  to 
mere  emotions,  however  deep.  These  emotions  must  be  brought  to  some  practical 
test ;  and  here  it  is.  What  are  we  doing  for  the  brethren  ?  We  say,  perhaps,  we 
love  God.  But  let  us  test  the  genuineness  of  this  emotion.  He  that  loveth  God, 
loveth  his  brother  also.  If  you  lack  assurance  it  is  not  a  simpler  faith  you  need, 
nor  a  freer  gospel,  but  a  faithful  dealing  with  your  conscience  as  to  particular  sins 
of  omission  and  commission.  You  must  do  more  for  God.  You  must  do  more  for 
your  fellow-creatures.  V.  A  certain  moral  or  ethical  ground  on  which  God 
ANSWERS  PRATER — "  Whatsocver  we  ask  we  receive,  because  we  keep  His  command- 
ments," &c.  I  think  we  are  too  apt  to  view  faith  as  the  only  condition  of  acceptable 
prayer.  There  are  two  elements  in  prayer  that  never  must  be  lost  sight  of — the 
evangelical,  and  the  ethical  or  moral.  When  we  view  faith  only  as  the  condition  of 
acceptable  prayer,  we  are  keeping  hold  only  of  the  evangelical  element.  But  mark, 
how  to  correct  this  error,  this  one-sided  view  of  prayer,  the  passage  before  us  brings 
under  our  notice  the  ethical  element,  "  Because  we  keep  His  commandments  and  do 
those  things  that  are  well  pleasing  in  His  sight."  Ah !  don't  we  need  this  ?  We 
think  we  can  do  great  things  with  our  simple  faith — and  so  we  would  were  it  the 
faith  that  worketh  by  love,  purifieth  the  heart,  and  overcometh  the  world.  But  this 
bare,  naked  faith  of  ours,  which  looks  only  to  promises  and  aims  only  at  what  we 
call  salvation,  is  imperfect,  and  will  not  answer  all  ends.  (A.  L.  R.  Foote,  D.D.) 
Heartsease  :-  -I.  "  Hereby  shall  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth."  There  is  no 
gainsaying  the  logic  of  this  whole  passage.  The  children  of  God,  by  a  spiritual 
necessity,  "  do  justly,  and  love  mercy."  H.  And  how  much  that  is  not  glorious 
REMAINS  IN  EVERT  LIFE  !  Oh,  the  iniquity  of  our  holy  things !  Remove  the  smooth 
blue  stone  that  lies  in  the  sun  with  the  glass-blades  waving  round  it — so  clean  and 
smooth  and  quiet  it  looks — remove  it  and  you  see  creeping  things  innumerable — 
things  that  hate  the  light,  that  love  dampness  and  darkness.  And  so  in  Ufe. 
Beneath  the  surface  honesty,  how  much  dishonesty  do  we  find !  Beneath  the 
surface  truthfulness — the  court  of  justice  veracity — how  much  untruth — ^what 
falsity — what  shams.  What  lies  we  tell  ourselves — what  false  testimonials  we 
give  ourselves  !  Beneath  the  surface  purity  of  life,  what  uncleanliness  of  thought, 
desire,  imagination  !  Beneath  the  surface  love,  what  self-love,  what  meannesses. 
Beneath  our  best  deeds,  what  a  mixture  of  motives  that  will  not  bear  the  light — 
hideous  things  that  love  darkness  and  dirt!  III.  What  appeal  lies  from  the 
VERDICT  OF  CONSCIENCE?  What  auswcr  can  there  be  to  these  self-accusations? 
What  can  we  say  to  our  own  heart  ?  "  Hereby  shall  we  know  that  we  are  of  the 
truth,  and  shall  assure  " — shall  persuade,  pacify,  silence — "  our  heart  before  Him 
whereinsoever  our  heart  shall  condemn  us."  "  We  are  of  the  truth."  The  im- 
perfections are  manifold.  The  inconsistencies  are  glaring,  and  yet  the  endeavour  to 
love  proves  that  the  holy  place  is  not  empty  yet.  Travellers  tell  us  that  the  mirage  in 
the  desert  is  so  like  a  lake  of.  water,  that  not  until  they  actually  enter  it  can  the 
deception  be  discovered.  But  if  a  stream  of  water  never  so  small  were  seen  entering 
the  lake,  or  a  rill  flowing  out  of  it,  they  would  know  at  once  that  what  lay  before 
them  in  the  distance  was  real — was  fact,  and  not  phantom.  Well,  if  a  stream  that 
makes  for  righteousness  is  flowing  into  your  life,  cleansing  and  sweetening  and 
fertilising  your  thoughts,  aims,  and  affections,  and  if  another  stream  of  kindness  is 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

flowing  out  of  your  lives  to  others,  fertilising  and  gladdening  hearts  else  fruitless 
and  joyless,  then  you  may  be  certain  that  your  religion  is  not  a  make-believe,  not  a 
piece  of  self-deception,  but  a  reality.     You  are  of  the  truth.     God  is  there.    IV. 
"  God  is  greater  than  our  heart."     The  heart  means  the  whole  inner  moral  life — 
the  conscience.     That  is  the  greatest  thing  in  each  of  us — that  which,  without  being 
consulted,  magisterially  approves  and  condemns.    But  "God  is  greater  than  our 
heart."    The  heart  condemns  sin.    God  condemns  sin  and  forgives  the  sinner.    God 
is  greater  !     Conscience  sees  the  flaws  in  our  life.     God  sees  them  too,  and  mends 
them.     God  is  greater !     Conscience  is  the  iron  pen  that  writes  down  without  pity 
aU  that  has  been  in  man's  life.     God  is  love,  and  blots  out  the  handwriting  that 
was  against  us.     "  God  is  greater  than  our  heart."     This  is  the  true  heartsease — 
the  flower  whose  fragrance  soothes  the  restless  soul — faith  in  the  love  of  God.  "Let 
not  your  hearts  be  troubled.    Believe  in  God.    Believe  also  in  Me."     V.  "  Beloved, 
IF  OUR  heart  condemn  US  NOT  " — And  there  are  blessed  moods  when  the  heart  lies 
hushed  and  silent  before  God— when  conscience  lays  its  sceptre  and  crown  at  the 
feet  of  Christ,  and  all  that  is  within  us  stands  up  to  bless  the  Lord,  who  forgiveth 
aU  our  iniquities.    Now  in  these  blessed  hours  we  "  have  boldness  toward  God,  and 
whatsoever  we  ask  we  receive  of  Him,  because  we  keep  His  commandments,  and  do 
the  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight."    We  know  at  such  times  that  we  are  one 
with  God.     We  love  what  He  loves.    We  hate  what  He  hates.     His  commandments 
are  our  law.    And  we  pray  to  Him  freely,  confidently,  unhesitatingly,  speaking  to 
Him  as  to  One  of  whose  sympathy  we  feel  sure.     {J.  M.  Gibbon.)        Truth : — The 
word  "truth"  is  the  characteristic  word  in  the  teaching  of  the  beloved  disciple,  the 
Apostle  St.  John;  he  always  speaks  of  those  who  belong  to  the  Lord  as  those  "  who 
are  of  the  truth."     A  Christian  life  is  expressed  by  him  as  "doing  the  truth,"  or 
"  walking  in  the  truth."     It  describes  the  very  essence  of  the  Christian  life ;  it 
describes  that  which  is  the  fundamental  principle,  without  which  the  Christian  life 
is  impossible.     The  power  of  the  Christian  life  is,  of  course,  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  Himself ;  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  soul  is  the  power  by  which  the  Christian  lives, 
but  the  form  which  the  Christian  life  takes  is  more  fuUy  expressed  by  the  word 
"truth"  than  by  any  other  word  that  we  can  use.     Let  us  consider,  then,  what  ia 
the  kind  of  character  which  is  shown  in  the  man  who  walks  in  the  truth  and  does  the 
truth.     1.  The  characteristic  of  such  a  life  is  in  the  first  place  that  openness  which 
is  described  by  St.  John  when  he  says  that  such  a  man  "  cometh  to  the  Ught."    He 
dislikes  concealment ;  he  desires  that  he  shall  be  fuUy  known,  he  has  nothing  to 
hide,  he  lives  frankly  among  his  fellows,  concealing  nothing  whatever  in  his  actions 
or  in  his  purposes.    2.  The  characteristic  which  goes  along  with  that  is  the  simplicity 
of  purpose  which  marks  the  man ;  because  the  man  who  has  two  purposes,  generally 
speaking,  desires  to  put  one  in  front  and  keep  the  other  behind.     He  desires  to  serve 
God  openly  before  his  fellows,  and,  perhaps,  to  have  some  little  consideration  for 
something  else  in  his  own  soul ;  but  the  man  who  is  thoroughly  true  in  his  life  as 
he  is  open,  so  is  he  simple ;  he  has  but  one  aim  all  through,  that  of  pleasing  his 
heavenly  Father.     He  knows  nothing  else  that  can  be  supreme  over  his  life.     3.  A 
further  characteristic  of  such  a  character  is  courage.     He  is  the  truly  brave  man. 
As  he  has  but  one  purpose  he  is  never  ashamed  to  confess  it,  and  is  he  who,  at  all 
moments,  in  spite  of  all  opposition,  and  in  spite  of  quiet  contempt  and  indifference, 
is  never  ashamed  of  Christ,  never  ashamed  to  say  that  he  is  a  Christian,  never 
ashamed  to  refuse  to  join  what  he  knows  his  Master  has  condemned.    Now  this  is 
the  character  of  the  man  whose  hfe  is  true.   But  let  us  come  down  to  details.   What 
is  it  that  He  would  have  us  do  and  say  and  think  and  feel  ?    The  characteristic  of 
the  man  who  is  really  true  in  his  service  to  the  true  Lord,  is  that  he  is  thoroughly 
trustworthy.    Never  can  it  be  said  of  any  true  child  of  God  that  he  shall  be  found 
wanting  in  that  elementary  truth  which,  even  in  those  who  believe  not,  may  yet  be 
found,  and  give  them  a  standing  in  the  eyes  of  all.     But  go  a  little  further.    Look 
not  only  at  his  dealings,  but  also  at  his  speech.    And  here  I  wish  I  could  use  the 
emphasis  I  could  desire ;  because  most  assuredly  the  choice  by  our  Lord  and  by  St. 
John  of  such  a  word  as  "  truth,"  to  be  the  special  description  of  the  Christian  life, 
lays  upon  Christians  a  tenfold  responsibility  in  regard  to  truth  of  speech,  of  not 
allowing  the  Christian  name  to  be  lowered  by  giving  way  to  all  the  many  temptations 
which  surround  every  one  to  swerve  from  exact  fact,  not  allowing  at  any  time  the 
tongue  to  betray  the  soul  by  uttering  that  which  is  not  true,  and  true  all  through  ; 
never  allowing,  for  instance,  the  impulse  of  vanity  to  make  a  man  say  a  word  which 
will  bring  praise  to  himself  which  he  does  not  really  deserve ;  never  allowing,  in  the 
very  slightest  degree,  a  word  to  pass  the  lips  which  shall  claim  for  us  a  higher 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  271 

Christian  rank  than  we  deserve,  or  any  grace  which  we  do  not  possess.  It  can  be 
done  without  any  word  which  is  in  itself  false  ;  it  can  be  done  in  such  a  way  as  to 
give  a  false  impression  without  exactly  contravening  the  truth ;  but  the  Christian 
will  scorn  it  in  his  soul  for  the  sake  of  his  Master  Christ,  whom  he  knows  to  be  the 
very  Messenger  of  truth,  whose  kingdom  is  the  kingdom  of  truth.  The  Christian 
will  feel  that  everything  which  is  false,  even  if  it  be  but  a  trifle,  even  if  it  be  but 
one  of  those  things  which  people  are  so  ready  to  condone,  mars  the  brightness  of 
the  Christian  aspect.  Need  I  go  on  to  say  that,  whether  the  falsehood  be  prompted 
by  vanity  or  by  fear,  it  is  equally  abhorrent  to  the  true  Christian  spirit.  And  then 
look  at  the  thoughts.  There,  too,  the  Christian  aim  will  be  to  seek  the  truth,  and 
to  be  true  to  himself ;  he  will  not  pretend  to  believe  what  he  does  not  believe,  and 
he  wiU  not  pretend  to  disbelieve  what,  in  his  secret  soul,  he  really  does  believe. 
Wait  until  you  have  clearer  light,  but  never  lower  your  Lord  and  Master  by  thinking 
to  serve  Him  by  any  falsehood,  either  within  you  or  without.  Be  true  to  your  own 
self,  true  to  your  own  convictions,  and  fear  not.  The  man  who  is  thoroughly  true 
will  inevitably  find  that  the  longer  he  lives,  turning  his  soul  to  the  Lord  and  casting 
himself  on  the  power  of  Christ,  the  more  certain  does  it  become  that  the  Lord  is, 
indeed,  the  King  of  Truth,  that  truth  belongs  to  Him,  and  that  in  the  Lord  it  will 
be  found  ;  for  the  power  by  which  men  hold  fast  to  the  truth,  and  speak  and  do  and 
live  the  truth,  is  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  alone  is  the  source  of  truth.  {Bj}.  Temple.) 
For  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all 
things. — Conscience    condemning   or   acquitting : — I.  Thebe    is    in    every   one    a 

NATURAL    conscience,    WHICH    ACQUITS    OK    CONDEMNS    HIM     ACCOBDING    TO    THE    TENOR 

OF  HIS  LIFE  AND  ACTIONS.  The  vcry  heathens  were  sensible  of  this.  Juvenal  says 
of  a  guilty  conscience :  How,  like  so  many  furies,  it  haunts  and  torments  the 
wicked  man,  and  proves  the  executioner  of  vengeance  on  him  in  the  horrors  of  his 
own  breast.  And  agreeable  to  this  is  that  observation  of  St.  Paul  (Rom.  ii.  14).  If 
it  be  objected  that  we  see  many  wicked  men  go  on  without  check  in  their  sins,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  none  more  gay  or  more  happy,  to  this  it  may  be  answered,  in  the 
fii'st  place,  that  we  cannot  always  form  a  judgment  of  the  inward  peace  of  men's 
minds  by  outward  appearances  ;  and  that,  for  aught  we  know,  the  man  who  appears 
so  outwardly  happy  may  yet  be  far  from  being  at  peace  within.  Or,  supposing  a 
wicked  man  be  really  free  from  upbraidings  of  his  conscience,  yet  it  is  not  difficult 
to  assign  reasons  which  may  help  us  to  account  for  it.  As,  1.  It  is  possible  that 
men  may  be  able  so  to  palliate  or  excuse  their  errors  to  themselves.  Or,  2.  It  is 
possible  that  men  may  pursue  a  wicked  course  so  long,  and  with  so  much  obstinacy, 
as,  in  a  great  measure,  to  wear  out  the  impression  made  upon  them  by  their  con- 
science, and  to  stifle  its  reflections.  Yet  some  severe  affliction  or  calamity,  the 
approach  of  sickness  or  of  death,  is  generally  known  to  awaken  in  the  minds  of  men 
those  terrors  of  conscience  which  before  seemed  quite  suppressed.  If  it  be  still 
objected  that  there  have  been  some,  after  all,  who,  after  a  dissolute  course  of  life, 
have  died  without  appearing  to  have  felt  any  great  uneasiness  of  conscience,  I 
answer,  supposing  there  may  have  been  some  few  examples  of  this  kind,  yet  they 
are  so  very  rare  that  we  may  justly  look  upon  them  as  a  sort  of  monsters  in  the 
moral  world.  1.  From  hence  we  cannot  but  perceive  and  admire  the  goodness  of 
God,  who,  to  restrain  men  from  the  ways  of  sin,  has  endued  them  with  a  natural 
principle  of  conscience — such  as  generally  applauds  them  when  they  do  their  duty, 
and  condemns  them  whensoever  they  transgress  it.  2.  From  hence  may  be  drawn 
a  good  argument  in  proof  of  a  future  judgment.  3.  Hence  we  plainly  see  the  folly 
of  endeavouring  to  shake  off  the  painful  reflections  of  a  bad  conscience  by  a  free 
indulgence  to  pleasure,  by  drink  or  company.  4.  From  what  has  been  said  we 
cannot  but  be  sensible  of  the  exceeding  comfort  and  advantage  of  a  good  conscience. 

II.  If,  upon  a  EEVIEW  of  our  past  lives,  our  own  conscience  condemn  us,  WE  HAVE 
EEASON  TO  THINK    THAT    GOD,    WHO    KNOWS    A    GREAT    DEAL   MORE    OF    US    THAN    WE  DO  OF 

OURSELVES,  WILL  LIKEWISE  ASSUREDLY  CONDEMN  US.  1.  The  sclf -Condemnation  here 
meant  is  not  that  of  the  true  penitent,  who,  though  he  has  abandoned  every  sinful 
course,  yet  cannot  but  reflect  upon  his  former  sins  with  horror,  and  justly  condemns 
himself  for  them ;  but  that  which  arises  from  the  conscience  of  a  wicked  life  still 
followed.  2.  It  may  not  be  amiss  to  consider  the  case  of  another  sort  of  persons, 
who,  though  not  conscious  to  themselves  of  having  lived  in  any  unrepented  sin,  are 
yet  apt  to  entertain  very  perplexing  doubts  of  their  spiritual  state.  This  is  the  case 
of  some  good  Christians,  who,  through  the  weakness  of  their  understandings,  or  the 
tunorousness  of  their  natures,  are  often  subject  to  melancholy  fears.  But  such  as 
these  would  do  weU  to  consider  that  these  groundless  fears  are  not  so  properly  the 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

judgment  of  their  conscience  as  the  effect  of  a  disordered  and  a  weak  imagination. 
3.  There  is  yet  another  sort  of  persons  whose  case  it  may  be  well  to  consider, — viz., 
that  of  those  who  lead  such  mixed,  uncertain  lives,  that  it  is  a  matter  of  some 
difficulty  to  themselves,  as  well  as  others,  to  determine  whether  they  are  in  a  state 
of  grace  and  salvation  or  not.  These  are  such  as  sin  and  repent,  and  sin  again,  and 
this  in  a  perpetual  round,  so  that  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  sin  or  religion  be  the 
most  prevailing  principle  in  them.  Now  such  as  these  can  have  no  just  ground  to 
hope  well  of  their  condition  till  they  have  brought  themselves  to  a  more  steady 
course  of  life.     III.  If,  upon  a  sekiods  and  impartial  examination  of  our  lives, 

OUB  OWN  consciences  ACQUIT  US,  THEN  MAY  WE  HOPE  THAT  GoD  WILL  LIKEWISE  GRACIOUSLY 
ACQUIT  US,  AND  THAT  WE  ARE  ENTITLED  TO  HiS  FAVOUR  AND  FORGIVENESS.  (C.  PeteVS.  M.A.) 

Reason  the  jiulge  of  religious  actions : — I.  The  apostle's  reasoning  in  the  text 
supposes  that  there  is  a  necessary  and  essential  difference  between  good  and 
EVIL,  and  that  men  are  naturally  conscious  of  this  difference,  and  of  the  consequent 
desert  of  their  actions  accordingly.  And  this  is  true,  not  with  regard  to  the 
dictates  of  natural  reason  only,  but,  in  those  who  profess  themselves  Christians,  it 
is  true  also  with  regard  to  the  terms  or  conditions  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  II. 
The  apostle's  argument  proceeds  upon  this  further  supposition,  that  God  who  is 
THE  Judge  of  all,  makes  generally  the  same  judgment  of  men's  actions  as  their 
own  reason  does,  only  much  more  perfect  in  the  same  kind,  as  having  a  knowledge 
infinitely  more  perfect  and  unerring  than  theirs.  For,  whatever  a  man's  own  eyes 
plainly  see,  he  cannot  doubt  but  a  person  of  better  eyes  must  see  the  same  more 
perfectly.  And  whatever  a  man  free  from  passion  and  wilfulness,  upon  calm  con- 
sideration, clearly  discerns  with  his  own  mind,  he  is  very  sure  the  Infinite  and  All- 
knowing  Mind  cannot  but  discern  still  more  clearly  and  distinctly.     III.  How  fab 

THE  truth  OE  this  RULE  IS  AFFECTED  BY  THAT  FALSE  APPLICATION  WHICH  THE  WRONG 
JUDGMENT    OF    AN    ERRONEOUS   CONSCIENCE    IS    APT    TO    MAKE    OF    IT.       It    is    Certain   men 

are  naturally  conscious  of  the  difference  of  good  and  evil,  and  of  the  consequent 
desert  of  their  own  actions.  It  is  natural  for  them  to  apprehend  that  this  judg- 
ment of  their  own  consciences  is  the  judgment  that  God  also  passes  upon  them ; 
and  Scripture  clearly  affirms  that  it  is  so.  Whence  then  is  it  that  many  truly  pious 
persons  have  been  under  the  strongest  melancholy  apprehensions  that  God  would 
condemn  them  ;  and  on  the  contrary,  many  impious  men  seem  to  have  been  fully 
persuaded  that  they  have  been  doing  God  service,  even  by  unrighteous  actions  ?  It 
proceeds  from  hence  ;  that  in  some  cases,  through  innocent  and  pitiable  weakness ; 
in  other  cases,  through  wicked  and  corrupt  prejudice,  men  set  their  own  passions 
of  fear  or  presumption  in  the  judgment-seat  of  reason  and  conscience.  (S.  Clarke, 
D.D.)  The  nature  and  advantages  of  a  good  conscience  : — The  advantage  of 
having  a  good  conscience  is  acknowledged  both  by  those  who  possess  and  by  those 
destitute  of  it.  The  one  class  knows  its  value  by  the  solid  enjoyment  which  it 
confers ;  the  other,  very  frequently,  by  the  wretchedness  with  which  the  want  of  it 
is  attended.  I.  With  regard  to  the  nature  of  a  good  conscience,  it  is  properly 
defined  in  the  text  as  one  which  does  not  condemn  us.  1.  There  are  those  whose 
consciences  do  not  condemn  them,  who  yet  cannot  be  said  to  have  a  good  conscience. 
(1)  Those  persons,  for  instance,  who  are  misinformed  as  to  the  line  of  conduct  for 
them  to  pursue,  and  who,  in  consequence  of  such  misinformation,  are  led  to  the 
commission  of  even  the  most  fearful  enormities,  may,  very  probably,  not  be  con- 
demned by  their  own  consciences ;  nay,  very  possibly,  may  be  perfectly  acquitted 
by  them,  if  not  highly  applauded.  (2)  Again,  there  is  another  large  class  of 
persons,  who,  whatever  attention  they  may  occasionally  pay  to  some  of  its  duties, 
yet  manifest  on  the  great  subject  of  religion  no  small  measure  of  indifference. 
The  conscience  of  these  persons  does  not  condemn  them ;  it  leaves  them  to  con- 
clude that  all  who  in  any  measure  exceed  them  in  paying  to  religion  that  attention 
which  its  incomparable  importance  demands,  are  justly  liable  to  the  charge  of 
enthusiasm,  and  of  being  righteous  overmuch.  (3)  Once  more,  the  apostle  speaks  of 
some  persons  as  being  "  past  feeling  "  (Eph.  iv.  19) ;  and  as  having  their  conscience 
seared  with  a  hot  iron  (1  Tim.  iv.  2).  Wearied  at  length  and  exhausted  by  making 
ineffectual  remonstrances,  this  faculty  loses  all  its  sensibility,  and  becomes  totally 
obdurate.  2.  There  is  another  position,  which  at  first  view  may  appear  equally, 
though  in  a  different  way,  inconsistent  with  the  representation  of  the  apostle ; 
namely,  that  there  are  those  whose  consciences  do,  at  times  more  especially,  con- 
demn them,  who  yet  are  favourably  regarded  by  the  Most  High,  and  who  have 
ground  for  that  confidence  towards  Him  which  yet  they  are  not  able  to  exercise. 
Whatever  they  read  or  hear,  it  all,  as  they  conceive,  makes  against  them  ;  they  are 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  273 

ready  to  regard  almost  every  threatening  of  the  Word  of  God  as  pronouncing  their 
condemnation,  and  to  consider  themselves  as  having  as  little  to  do  with  the  comfort- 
able promises  of  the  gospel.  For  this  species  of  religious  depression  various 
causes  may  be  assigned.  It  may  possibly  be  ascribable  to  physical  causes,  and 
originate  in  bodily  distemper.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  justly  attributed  to  the  malice 
of  Satan,  who  would  endeavour  to  persuade  us  that  God  is  as  much  our  enemy  a3 
he  himself  is.  Or,  it  may  be  owing  to  mistakes  respecting  the  nature  of  the 
Christian  covenant,  and  the  grounds  of  our  acceptance  with  God.  3.  Who,  then, 
we  at  length  inquire,  are  those  persons  who  may  conclude  that  they  are  in  a  right 
state,  from  the  circumstance  of  their  conscience  not  condemning  them?  The 
persons  who  can  form  this  conclusion  are  those  who  have  acquired,  among  other 
things,  a  correct  knowledge  of  what  is  essential  to  the  Christian  character.  And 
having  obtained  this  knowledge  of  the  Christian  character,  they  search  deeply  into 
their  own.  His  repentance,  and  faith,  and  love,  and  obedience,  though  not  perfect, 
are  yet  genuine.  II.  Its  advantages.  1.  It  is  no  small  advantage  that  those  who 
possess  it  are  exempt  from  the  disquiet  and  terror  of  an  evil  conscience.  (1)  The 
condemnation  of  a  man's  own  heart.  (2)  The  anticipation  of  a  still  more  tremen- 
dous condemnation  at  the  hands  of  God.  2.  There  are  positive  advantages  also 
of  a  most  important  nature  which  belong  to  such  persons,  and  which  are  com- 
prehended under  the  expression  in  the  text.  The  person  who  has  a  good  conscience 
has  confidence  towards  God — (1)  In  prayer.  (2)  In  a  season  of  suffering.  (3)  In 
the  hour  of  death.  Let  me,  in  conclusion,  recommend  each  of  you  to  make  that 
application  of  the  subject.  1.  Do  you  say  that  your  conscience  does  not  condemn 
you;  and  that  you,  therefore,  if  any  one  can,  may  well  entertain  a  confidence 
towards  God ;  and  that,  notwithstanding  you  have  never  seriously  examined 
whether  your  conscience  is  quiet  on  good  grounds,  and  your  confidence  well 
founded  ?  It  is  for  you  to  search  deeply  your  own  hearts  in  order  to  ascertain 
whether  traces  are  to  be  found  there  of  that  repentance,  and  faith,  and  love,  and 
obedience,  which  form  the  only  evidence  of  a  well-founded  confidence.  2.  But 
does  your  conscience  already  condemn  you,  and  that  on  good  grounds?  You 
have,  indeed,  reason  for  alarm,  under  the  conviction  that  God  is  greater  than 
your  heart.  3.  Finally,  are  you  in  the  number  of  those  who  may  conclude  that 
they  are  in  a  right  state,  from  the  circumstance  of  their  conscience  not  condemning 
them?  Kemember  that  the  continuance  of  your  peace  is  closely  connected  with 
the  continuance  of  your  watchfulness  against  sin,  and  of  your  activity  in  well- 
doing. (T.  Natt,  B.D.)  Self-condemnation: — 1.  Self-condemnation.  "For  if 
our  heart  condemn  us."  1.  Some  possibly  may  stand  self-condemned  on  the  ground 
of  indulging  in  particular  sins.  2.  Others  may  feel  inwardly  accused  on  account 
of  their  indifference  to  the  interests  of  their  souls.  3.  But  there  are  some  whose 
hearts  may  condemn  them  on  the  ground  of  the  nominal  and  formal  character  of 
their  religion.  4.  With  many  the  guilt  of  unbelief  may  be  the  ground  of  self- 
accusation.  5.  The  hearts  of  some  may  charge  them  with  hypocrisy.  II.  Self- 
condemnation   CONFIBMED   AND  AUGMENTED   BY  DiVINE  DECISIONS.      "  God   iS  grcatct 

than  our  hearts  and  knoweth  all  things."  1.  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts  in 
knowledge,  and  knows  therefore  the  whole  extent  of  our  sin.  2.  God  is  greater 
than  cur  heart  in  purity,  and  sees  therefore  the  utmost  evU  and  malignity  of  sin. 
3.  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts  in  justice,  and  knoweth  therefore  the  whole 
amount  of  our  desert.  (Essex  Remembrancer.)  The  lower  courts  : — The  fault  of 
many  is  that  they  will  not  lay  spiritual  things  to  heart  at  all,  but  treat  them  in  a 
superficial  manner.  This  is  foolish,  sinful,  deadly.  We  ought  to  put  our  case  upon 
serious  trial  in  the  court  of  our  own  conscience.  Certain  of  a  better  class  are 
satisfied  with  the  verdict  of  their  hearts,  and  do  not  remember  the  higher  courts; 
and  therefore  either  become  presumptuous,  or  are  needlessly  distressed.  We  are 
about  to  consider  the  judgments  of  this  lower  court.  Here  we  may  have — 1,  A 
CORRECT  VERDICT  AGAINST  OURSELVES.  Let  US  sum  up  the  proccss.  1.  The  court 
Bits  under  the  King's  arms,  to  judge  by  royal  authority.  The  charge  against  the 
prisoner  is  read.  Conscience  accuses,  and  quotes  the  law  as  applicable  to  the  points 
alleged.  2.  Memory  gives  evidence.  As  to  the  fact  of  sin  in  years  past,  and  of 
Bin  more  lately  committed.  Items  mentioned.  Transgressions  of  the  command- 
ments. Failure  in  motive,  spirit,  temper,  &c.  3.  Knowledge  gives  evidence  that 
the  present  state  of  mind  and  heart  and  will  is  not  according  to  the  Word.  4.  Self- 
love  and  pride  urge  good  intents  and  pious  acts  in  stay  of  proceedings.  Hear  the 
defence  I  But  alas!  it  is  not  worth  hearing.  The  defence  is  but  one  of  "  the  refuges 
of  lies."    5.  The  heart,  judging  by  the  law,  condemns.    Henceforth  the  man  lives 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

as  in  a  condemned  cell  under  fear  of  death  and  hell.  If  even  our  partial,  half- 
enlightened  heart  condemns,  we  may  well  tremble  at  the  thought  of  appearing 
before  the  Lord  God.  The  higher  court  is  more  strictly  just,  better  informed,  more 
authoritative,  and  more  able  to  punish.  God  knows  all.  Forgotten  sin,  sins  of 
ignorance,  sins  half  seen  are  all  before  the  Lord.  What  a  terrible  case  is  this ! 
Condemned  in  the  lower  court,  and  sure  to  be  condemned  in  the  higher !  n. 
An  incorrect  verdict  against  ourselves.  The  case  as  before.  The  sentence 
apparently  most  clear.  But  when  revised  by  the  higher  court  it  is  reversed,  for 
good  reasons.  1.  The  debt  has  been  discharged  by  the  man's  glorious  Surety.  2. 
The  man  is  not  the  same  man ;  though  he  has  sinned  he  has  died  to  sin,  and  he 
now  lives  as  one  born  from  above.  3.  The  evidences  in  his  favour,  such  as  the 
atonement  and  the  new  birth,  were  forgotten,  undervalued,  or  misjudged  in  the 
lower  court.  4.  The  evidence  looked  for  by  a  sickly  conscience  was  what  it  could 
not  find,  for  it  did  not  exist,  namely,  natural  goodness,  perfection,  unbroken  joy, 
&c.  The  judge  was  ignorant,  and  legally  inclined.  The  verdict  was  therefore  a 
mistaken  one.  III.  A  correct  verdict  of  acquittaI;.  Our  heart  sometimes  justly 
"  condemns  us  not."  1.  The  argument  for  non-condemnation  is  good :  the  follow- 
ing are  the  chief  items  of  evidence  in  proof  of  our  being  gracious — (1)  We  are 
sincere  in  our  profession  of  love  to  God.  (2)  We  are  filled  with  love  to  the  brethren. 
(3)  We  are  resting  upon  Christ,  and  on  Him  alone.  (4)  We  are  longing  after  holi- 
ness. 2.  The  result  of  this  happy  verdict  of  the  heart  is  that  we  have — (1)  Con- 
fidence towards  God  that  we  are  really  His.  (2)  Confidence  as  to  our  reconciliation 
with  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  (3)  Confidence  that  He  will  not  harm  us,  but  will  bless 
us.  (4)  Confidence  in  prayer  that  He  will  accept  and  answer.  (5)  Confidence  as 
to  future  judgment  that  we  shall  receive  the  gracious  reward  at  the  last  great  day. 
IV.  An  incorrect  verdict  of  acquittal.  1.  A  deceived  heart  may  refuse  to  con- 
demn, but  God  will  judge  us  all  the  same.  2.  A  false  heart  may  acquit,  but  this 
gives  no  confidence  Godward.  3.  A  deceitful  heart  pretends  to  acquit  while  in  its 
centre  it  condemns.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Self-condemnation: — I.  What  the  con- 
demnation OF  A  man's  own  heart  IS.  It  is  a  judicial  act,  and  hath  the  accuser, 
witness,  and  judge,  ready  against  the  malefactor ;  which,  in  external  judicatures, 
are  the  distinct  parts  of  different  persons.  For  the  knowledge  of  the  law  being  lodged 
in  the  heart,  and  the  consciousness  of  its  own  transgression  lying  uppermost  there 
also,  nothing  hinders  the  sentence  from  proceeding  immediately,  insomuch  that  the 
bare  knowledge  of  evil  committed  is  in  the  heart  or  conscience  self-condemnation. 

n.    Do  AIX  WILFUL  and   PRESUMPTUOUS    SINNERS   FEEL  AND   SUFFER  THIS  CONDEMNATION 

OP  THEIR  OWN  HEARTS  ?  Why  should  a  man's  own  heart  condemn  him  ?  Cannot 
self-love  bribe  off  the  evidence  ?  May  not  the  favour  and  partiahty,  which  faction 
seldom  fails  of  in  its  defence,  blind  the  eyes  or  corrupt  the  judgment  of  a  man's 
own  conscience  in  his  favour  ?  No  1  the  heart  judges  for  the  God  of  truth,  and 
cannot  but  declare  the  truth.  That  there  are  some  examples  to  the  contrary,  let 
these  two  things  be  considered — 1.  That  we  cannot  know  what  wicked  men  feel  in 
their  own  breasts  ;  the  most  cheerful  countenance,  to  appearance,  may  have  a  very 
aching  heart.  But,  if  for  a  time  he  shall  also  cheat  himself  into  a  false  peace,  it 
must  be  by  such  opiates  as  lay  asleep  the  thinking  powers  of  the  soul.  2.  Never- 
theless, God  by  His  Holy  Spirit  takes  His  own  time  to  awaken  the  wicked,  and  to 
bring  their  sins  before  the  bar  of  their  conscience  (Psa.  1. 18-23).  It  is  possible  to  live 
in  sin  without  anxiety,  but  repentance  will  bring  this  self-condemnation  home  to  our 
hearts  before  ever  we  can  sue  to  God  for  His  mercy.  The  longer  we  are  without 
it  the  greater  will  be  its  torture  at  last.  For  it  is  not  peace,  but  stupidity  of  mind  ; 
not  happiness,  but  the  delusions  of  Satan,  that  keep  the  conscience  quiet  in  the 
ways  of  perdition.  HI.  God  will  judge  us  according  to  the  sentence  of  our  own 
HEARTS  (Jer.  xvii.  10).  If  God  is  just  in  His  laws,  He  will  be  just  in  executing 
their  sentence,  and  not  acquit  the  sinner  that  accuses  and  condemns  Himself,  as 
guilty  and  impenitent.  And  it  will  be  the  greatest  aggravation  of  our  misery,  that 
having  brought  it  on  ourselves,  we  condemn  ourselves  to  it.  He  that  will  not  see 
his  day  of  grace  shall  find  his  punishment  in  the  utter  despair  of  it.  1.  Resolve  to 
act  in  uprightness  and  integrity  of  heart  in  all  we  do  ;  let  us  carefully  consult  the 
dictate  of  our  own  conscience,  as  ever  we  hope  to  avoid  its  merciless  rebukes  in  the 
last  day.  2.  Let  no  pretence  or  subterfuge  tempt  us  to  sins  which  our  conscience, 
informed  by  the  law  of  God,  must  needs  condemn.  3.  Of  all  our  actions  our 
religious  worship  has  the  greatest  sincerity  of  heart;  and  of  all  parts  of  our 
\\nrship  the  Holy  Sacrament  calls  for  the  utmost  integrity.  {W.  Whitjield.) 
A'd  knoweth  all  thin^ — All  things  known  to  God  : — This  may  seem  a  principle, 


CHAP,  m.]  I.  JOHN.  275 

and  therefore  not  to  be  doubted,  and  consequently  needless  to  be  proved.  I.  Prove 
THE  PBOPOsiTiON.  1.  First  from  Scripture  (John  xxi.  17  ;  Heb.  iv.  13).  2.  From 
reason ;  and  here  our  first  argument  shall  be  drawn  from  His  works  of  creation  and 
providence.  It  is  impossible  that  He  that  made  all  things  should  not  also  know 
all  things.  Who  is  it  that  cannot  readily  acknowledge  and  read  his  own  hand? 
Next,  His  providence  sufficiently  declares  His  omniscience ;  if  He  manages,  rules, 
and  governs  all  things,  yea  sin  itself,  it  clearly  foUows  that  He  has  full  cognisance 
of  those  things,  since  all  these  acts  presuppose  knowledge.  H.  The  excellency  of 
God's  knowledge  above  the  knowledge  either  of  men  or  angels.  1.  Concerning 
its  properties.  (1)  The  first  property  holding  forth  the  excellency  of  this  knowledge 
is  the  exceeding  evidence,  and  consequently  the  certainty  of  it ;  for  though  a  thing 
may  be  certain,  and  yet  not  evident,  yet  whatsover  is  evident,  that  also  is  certain. 
Evidence  brings  a  property  eminent  from  the  essence  and  being  of  knowledge ;  it 
follows  that  that  which  includes  the  nature  of  knowledge  in  an  infinite  manner, 
must  be  also  attended  by  a  most  infinitely  clear  evidence.  He  that  causes  that 
innate  evidence  in  every  object,  by  which  it  moves  and  strikes  the  faculty,  shall  not 
He  see  ?  He  that  gives  hght  to  the  eye,  by  which  that  evidence  is  discerned,  shall 
not  He  discern  ?  (2)  Another  property  of  this  knowledge,  showing  the  excellence 
of  it,  is  this,  that  it  is  a  knowledge  independent  upon  the  existence  of  the  object  or 
thing  known.  God  beholds  all  things  in  Himself  ;  and  that  both  eminently,  as  He 
sees  His  own  perfection,  which  eminently  includes  all  the  perfection  that  is  scattered 
among  the  creatures,  as  the  hght  of  aU  the  stars  is  contained  eminently  in  the  sun ; 
and  He  beholds  them  also  formally,  distinctly,  and  according  to  the  model  of  their 
own  proper  beings,  without  looking  upon  the  existence  of  the  things  themselves,  and 
that  two  ways — (a)  By  reflecting  upon  His  power,  and  what  He  can  do.  He  has  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  all  possibilities,  and  of  things  that  may  be  produced.  (6)  By 
reflecting  upon  His  power  and  His  wiU,  He  knows  whatsoever  shaU  be  actually  pro- 
duced, 2.  The  excellency  of  God's  knowledge  appears  in  respect  of  His  objects ; 
which  are  aU  things  knowable.  But  they  may  be  reduced  to  three  things  especially, 
which  God  alone  perfectly  knows,  and  are  not  to  be  known  by  men  or  angels.  (1) 
The  nature  of  God  Himself.  Nothing  but  an  infinite  knowledge  can  comprehend 
an  infinite  being.  (2)  The  second  sort  of  things  only  known  to  God  are  things 
future.  (3)  The  thoughts  of  men :  it  belongs  to  the  sovereignty  of  God's  omniscience 
alone  to  judge  and  know  these  (Psa.  cxxxix.  2).  IH.  I  proceed  to  make  some 
APPLICATION  ;  and  to  see  what  uses  may  be  deduced  from  the  consideration  of  God's 
omniscience :  it  may  serve  as  an  argument  to  press  several  duties  upon  us.  1.  It 
must  be  a  strong  motive  to  bring  us  to  a  free  confession  of  all  our  sins  to  God.  We 
can  commit  and  tell  our  secrets  to  a  friend  that  does  not  know  them ;  how  much 
more  should  we  do  it  to  Him  that  knows  them  already.  2.  The  consideration  of 
God's  omniscience  may  enforce  us  to  an  humble  submission  to  all  God's  commanda 
and  directions,  and  that  both  in  respect  of  behef  and  of  practice.  3.  And  lastly, 
since  it  is  an  express  command  of  our  Saviomr  Himself,  that  we  should  "  be  perfect, 
as  our  heavenly  Father  is  perfect " ;  why  should  we  not,  according  to  our  weak 
model,  endeavour  to  copy  out  this  Divine  perfection  upon  our  soul,  as  well  as  any  of 
the  rest  ?  And  why,  as  well  as  we  are  commanded  to  be  Uke  Him  in  His  goodness, 
bounty,  and  mercy,  we  should  not  endeavour  to  resemble  Him  in  knowledge,  wisdom, 
and  understanding,  according  to  our  weak  capacity  ?  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Hearts 
of  sinners  known  to  God  : — Sinners  know  something  about  their  own  hearts,  other- 
wise they  would  never  feel  self  condemned  ;  but  they  do  not  know  so  much  about 
them  as  they  might  know  ;  for  they  endeavour  to  misinform,  or  silence  conscience, 
which  would,  if  properly  consulted  and  allowed  to  speak,  condemn  them  for  every 
evil  imagination  of  their  hearts.  No  sinners,  however,  whether  moral  or  immoral, 
whether  secure  or  awakened,  know  so  much  about  their  own  hearts  as  God  does, 
who  is  greater  than  their  hearts,  and  knows  all  things.  For — 1.  God  has  a  more 
extensive  view  of  the  exercises  of  their  hearts  than  they  ever  have.  "  The  Lord 
searcheth  aU  hearts,  and  understandeth  all  imaginations  of  the  thoughts."  He 
knows  all  that  passes  in  their  hearts  and  drops  from  their  Ups  every  moment,  and 
remembers  all.  This  is  what  all  sinners  are  extremely  prone  to  forget,  for  which 
Gk)d  justly  blames  them.  Though  they  cannot  remember  all  their  sins,  yet  they 
ought  to  remember  that  God  remembers  them  aU.  2.  God  sees  all  the  moral 
exercises  of  their  hearts  at  one  intuitive  and  comprehensive  view ;  which  is  a  far 
more  perfect  knowledge  of  them  than  they  ever  have.  3.  God  knows  the  moral 
quahty  of  all  the  exercises  which  compose  the  hearts  of  sinners,  as  well  as  their 
connection  with  each  other,  and  with  the  external  actions  which  flow  from  them. 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

4.  God  knows  how  vile  and  guilty  sinners  are,  for  all  the  evil  exercises  of  their 
hearts  which  they  inwardly  cherish,  and  outwardly  express.  He  views  the  least  sin 
as  unspeakably  more  vile  and  guilty  than  sinners  do  the  greatest.  5.  God  knows 
all  the  evils  which  the  corrupt  hearts  of  sinners  would  prompt  them  to  do,  if  He  did 
not  continually  restrain  them.  He  views  their  hearts,  therefore,  as  infinitely  more 
sinful  than  they  view  them.  6.  God  knows  the  extreme  obstinacy  of  their  hearts, 
which  they  are  unwilling  to  know,  and  of  which  they  are  generally  very  ignorant. 
God  knows  how  often  and  how  much  they  have  refused  to  obey  His  commands,  His 
gracious  invitations,  and  His  awful  threatenings.  God  knows  how  often  and  how 
much  they  have  resisted  the  strivings  of  His  Spirit.  Improvement.  1.  In  the  view 
of  this  subject  we  may  see  why  sinners  generally  live  so  little  concerned  about  their 
guilty  and  dangerous  state  by  nature.  They  either  bribe  conscience  by  their  good 
deeds,  or  sear  it  by  their  bad  ones  ;  and  in  either  case,  they  flatter  themselves  that 
their  hearts  are  pretty  good,  if  not  so  good  as  they  ought  to  be.  But  if  they  only 
saw  their  hearts  as  God  sees  them,  they  would  be  instantly  alarmed,  and  all  their 
peace  and  flattering  hopes  would  forsake  them.  2.  This  subject  shows  us  why 
awakened  sinners  are  often  in  so  much  anxiety  and  distress  about  the  salvation  of 
their  souls.  It  is  because  they  begin  to  see  their  hearts  in  the  same  light  in  which 
God  sees  them.  3.  This  subject  shows  why  sinners  are  so  ready  to  believe  that  God 
will  not  make  them,  nor  any  others  of  mankind,  for  ever  miserable.  They  think 
that  no  sinners  deserve  eternal  punishment.  The  reason  is  that  they  have  never 
Been  their  own  hearts  as  God  has  seen  them.  4.  It  appears  from  what  has  been 
said,  that  it  is  of  great  importance  to  preach  the  doctrine  of  total  depravity  plainly 
and  fully.  5.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said,  that  no  sinners  have  a  right  to 
think  they  are  Christians.  They  all  have  the  witness  within  themselves  that  they  are 
graceless.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Conscience  and  God  as  judges  : — I.  Thoughts  which 
our  NATUEAL  MINDS  TAKE  FROM  IT.  1.  We  know,  in  the  sense  of  being  impressed 
with,  but  a  few  of  our  own  sins — only  such  as  are  somewhat  aside  from  our  ordinary 
habit,  or  diverse  from  our  current  taste.  But  God,  the  impartial  and  omniscient, 
sees  them  all  numerically ;  every  grain  in  the  growing  heap.  2.  We  see  at  best  but 
detached  portions  of  our  lives ;  we  easily  forget  the  past ;  hence,  our  moral  equani- 
mity differs  from  day  to  day.  But  God  sees  us  altogether  in  our  general  character, 
the  drift  and  meaning  of  our  lives.  3.  We  do  not  know  the  sin  that  lies  within  our 
own  purposes.  No  wicked  man  lives  out  the  full  of  the  wickedness  that  is  in  him ; 
he  is  hedged  in  by  a  thousand  fears.  But  God  looks  on  the  heart.  4.  We  see  our 
Bin  in  the  narrow  scope  of  its  immediate  effect.  God  sees  it  in  all  the  hideousness 
of  sin's  general  work  in  the  world,  the  diseases,  poverty,  crime,  death,  which  deeds 
of  the  same  kind  as  those  that  to  us  seem  venial  have  accomplished.  5.  We  know 
almost  nothing  of  the  meaning  of  sin  as  seen  in  its  consequences  within  the  soul : 
blinding  spiritual  sight ;  corroding  the  finer  sensibilities ;  paralysing  the  will : 
engendering  eternal  impotency  and  misery.  God  knows  all  this.  6.  We  have  no 
high  standard  of  judging  our  sins ;  conscience  is  generally  depraved  to  near  the 
level  of  the  sinful  habit.  God  sees  our  sin  in  contact  with  His  infinite  purity,  our 
Bins  in  the  light  of  His  countenance.  7.  God  sees  all  sin  in  the  light  of  His  purpose 
one  day  to  rid  the  universe  of  it ;  the  refiner  sits  at  the  fire,  and  our  sin  is  there 
awaiting  the  process.  II.  Thoughts  which  Bible  faith  puts  into  the  text  for  our 
consolation.  1.  It  is  especially  said  to  be  for  our  assurance.  2.  God  knows  what 
He,  the  Judge,  is — "  God  is  love."  3.  God  knows  the  meaning  of  His  own  infinite 
fatherhood.  4.  God  knows  what  He  has  already  done  for  us.  We  do  not  begin  to 
realise  the  meaning  of  the  gift  of  the  only  begotten  Son.  5.  God  knows  what  He 
has  already  done  with  our  sins — blotted  them  out.  6.  God  knows  what  the  Holy 
Spirit's  mission  to  a  sinful  soul  is ;  we  but  dimly  conceive  it,  as  the  sanctifying 
process  is  manifest  to  our  experience.  7.  God  knows  how  the  light  of  heaven  will 
put  away  all  darkness  from  the  soul  that  He  has  permitted  to  enter  there,  and  looks 
upon  us  as  candidates  for  that  perfection  which  He  has  decreed  and  prepared  for 
ns.  {J.  M.  Ludlow.)  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condenm  ub  not,  then  have  we  con- 
fldence  toward  God. — A  good  life  the  siu-est  title  to  a  good  conscience : — I.  This 
KATDRE  OF  A  SURE  OR  CLEAR  CONSCIENCE  ought  to  bc  first  Stated  Icst  wc  should  mis- 
take shadow  for  substance,  presumption  and  vain  confidence  for  truth  and  sober- 
i  Bess.  The  apostle  points  out  the  general  nature  of  a  good  conscience  by  this  mark, 
that  our  hearts  condemn  us  not,  and  that  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth  ;  know 
it  by  some  certain  rule,  namely,  that  we  keep  God's  commandments.  And  if  our 
conduct  be  found,  upon  a  just  examination,  to  square  with  that  rule,  then  our  con- 
scienoes  are  clear,  and  we  may  look  up  with  a  becoming  confidence  to  God.    This 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  277 

is  a  matter  of  great  weight,  and  yet  there  is  nowhere  more  room  for  seK-flattery  and 
self-deceit.  A  man  will  often  call  it  acting  according  to  his  conscience,  when  he 
acts  according  to  his  present  persuasion,  without  ever  examining  how  he  came  by 
that  persuasion  ;  whether  through  wrong  education,  custom,  or  example  ;  or  whether 
from  some  secret  lust,  pride,  or  prejudice,  rather  than  from  the  rule  of  God's  written 
Word,  or  from  a  principle  of  right  reason.  This  cannot  be  justly  called  keeping  a 
good  conscience  :  for  we  ought  not  to  take  up  false  persuasions  at  all  adventures, 
and  then  to  make  those  persuasions  our  rule  of  life,  instead  of  that  rule  which  God 
hath  given  us  to  walk  by.  It  is  deceiving  ourselves  to  imagine  that  we  have  a  good 
conscience  when  we  have  used  no  reasonable  care  in  examining  whether  it  be  a  right 
conscience  or  not.  There  is  another  common  method  of  self-deceit,  when  a  person 
who  well  enough  understands  the  rule  he  is  to  go  by,  yet  forgets  to  apply  it  to  his 
own  particular  case,  and  so  speaks  peace  to  himself  all  the  while  that  he  trans- 
gresses it.  No  doubt  but  a  considerate  man  may  know  when  he  behaves  as  he 
ought  to  do,  and  may  reap  the  comfort  of  it.  And  though  we  are  none  of  us  with- 
out sin  yet  a  good  life  is  easily  distinguished  from  the  life  of  the  ungodly,  and  a 
state  of  grace  from  a  state  of  sin.  And  so  there  is  room  enough  left  for  the  joy  of  a 
good  conscience,  where  men  live  as  becometh  the  gospel  of  Chi-ist,  perfecting  holi- 
ness, to  such  a  degree  as  man  can  be  perfect,  in  the  fear  of  God.  11.  I  now  proceed 
to  discourse  of  the  comforts  of  it.  If  our  hearts  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we 
confidence  towards  God  ;  and  whatsoever  we  ask  we  receive  of  Him.  What  greater 
comfort  can  there  be  than  conscious  virtue  drawing  after  it  the  favour  of  God  in 
whom  all  happiness  centres,  and  upon  whom  all  things  entirely  depend  ?  If  God 
be  with  us  who  can  be  against  us  ?  What  friends  can  we  want,  while  in  Him  we 
have  all  that  are  truly  valuable  ?  Or  what  blessings  can  we  desire,  but  what 
He  is  both  willing  and  able  to  shower  down  upon  us,  only  leaving  it  to  Him 
to  judge  what  is  safest  and  most  convenient  for  us?  There  is  no  pleasure  in 
life  comparable  to  that  which  arises  in  a  good  man's  breast  from  the  sense 
of  his  keeping  up  a  friendly  intercourse  with  God.  (D.  Waterland,  D.D.) 
An  account  of  the  nature  and  measures  of  conscience  : — As  nothing  can  be  of 
more  moment,  so  few  things,  doubtless,  are  of  more  difficulty,  than  for  men  to  be 
rationally  satisfied  about  the  estate  of  their  souls,  with  reference  to  God  and  the 
great  concerns  of  eternity.  First  of  all  then :  he  who  would  pass  such  a  judgment  upon 
his  condition  as  shall  be  ratified  in  heaven,  will  find  himself  wofully  deceived,  if 
he  judges  of  his  spiritual  estate  by  any  of  these  measures.  1.  The  general  esteem 
of  the  world  concerning  him.  He  who  owes  his  piety  to  fame  and  hearsay,  and 
the  evidences  of  his  salvation  to  popular  voice  and  opinion,  builds  his  house  not 
only  upon  the  sand,  but,  which  is  worse,  upon  the  wind  ;  and  writes  the  deeds,  by 
which  he  holds  his  estate,  upon  the  face  of  a  river.  The  favourable  opinion  and 
good  word  of  men,  to  some  persons  especially,  comes  oftentimes  at  a  very  easy 
rate;  and  by  a  few  demure  looks.  2.  The  judgment  of  any  casuist  or  learned 
divine,  concerning  the  estate  of  a  man's  soul,  is  not  sufiicient  to  give  him  confidence 
towards  God.  And  the  reason  is  because  no  learning  whatsoever  can  give  a  man 
the  knowledge  of  another's  heart.  3.  The  absolution  pronounced  by  a  priest  is 
not  a  certain,  infallible  ground,  to  give  the  person  so  absolved  confidence  towards 
God,  because  if  absolution,  as  such,  could  of  itself  secure  a  man,  as  to  the  estate 
of  his  soul,  then  it  would  follow  that  every  person  so  absolved  should,  by  virtue 
thereof,  be  ipso  facto  put  into  such  a  condition  of  safety ;  which  is  not  imaginable. 
In  a  word,  if  a  man  be  penitent,  his  repentance  stamps  his  absolution  effectual.  If 
not,  let  the  priest  repeat  the  same  absolution  to  him  ten  thousand  times ;  yet  for 
all  his  being  absolved  in  this  world,  God  will  condemn  him  in  the  other.  4.  No 
advantages  from  external  church  membership,  or  profession  of  the  true  religion, 
can  of  themselves  give  a  man  confidence  towards  God :  and  yet  perhaps  there  is 
hardly  any  one  thing  in  the  world  which  men,  in  all  ages,  have  generally  more 
cheated  themselves  with.  Thus  I  have  shown  four  several  uncertain  rules,  which 
men  are  prone  to  judge  of  their  spiritual  estate  by.  But  now  have  we  any  more 
certain  to  substitute  and  recommend  in  the  room  of  them?  Why,  yes;  if  we 
believe  the  apostle,  a  man's  own  heart  or  conscience  is  that  which,  above  all  other 
things,  is  able  to  give  him  "  confidence  towards  God."  And  the  reason  is,  because 
the  heart  knows  that  by  itself,  which  nothing  in  the  world  besides  can  give  it  any 
knowledge  of  ;  and  without  the  knowledge  of  which  it  can  have  no  foundation  to 
build  any  true  confidence  upon.  1.  How  the  heart  or  conscience  ought  to  be  in- 
formed,   IN   ORDER   to   its    FOUNDING    IN   US   A   RATIONAL   CONFIDENCE    TOWARDS    GOD. 

It  is  not  necessary  for  a  man  to  be  assured  of  the  Tightness  of  his  conscience,  by 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  m. 

such  an  infallible  certainty  of  persuasion,  as  amounts  to  the  clearness  of  a 
demonstration  ;  but  it  is  sufficient  if  he  knows  it  upon  grounds  of  such  a  convinc- 
ing probability,  as  shall  exclude  all  rational  grounds  of  doubting  of  it.  There  is  an 
innate  light  in  every  man,  discovering  to  him  the  first  lines  of  duty  in  the  common 
notions  of  good  and  evil ;  which  by  cultivation  may  be  advanced  to  higher  dis- 
coveries. He  therefore  who  exerts  all  the  faculties  of  his  soul,  and  plies  all  means 
and  opportunities  in  the  search  of  truth,  which  God  has  vouchsafed  him,  may  rest 
upon  the  judgment  of  his  conscience  so  informed,  as  a  warrantable  guide  of  those 
actions  which  he  must  account  to  God  for.     II.  How,  and  by  what  means,  we  mat 

GBT  OUR  HEART  OR  CONSCIENCE  THUS  INFORMED,  AND  AFTERWARDS  PRESERVE  AND 

KEEP  IT  SO.  1.  Let  a  man  carefully  attend  to  the  voice  of  his  reason,  and  all  the 
dictates  of  natural  morality ;  so  by  no  means  to  do  anything  contrary  to  them. 
For  though  reason  is  not  to  be  relied  upon,  as  a  guide  universally  sufficient  to 
direct  us  what  to  do ;  yet  it  is  generally  to  be  relied  upon  and  obeyed,  where  it 
tells  us  what  we  are  not  to  do.  No  man  ever  yet  offended  his  own  conscience,  but 
first  or  last  it  was  revenged  upon  him  for  it.  So  that  it  will  concern  a  man  to 
treat  this  great  principle  awfully  and  warily,  by  still  observing  what  it  commands, 
but  especially  what  it  forbids :  and  if  he  would  have  it  always  a  faithful  and  sincere 
monitor  to  him,  let  him  be  sure  never  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  it ;  for  not  to  hear  it  is 
the  way  to  silence  it.  Let  him  strictly  observe  the  first  stirrings  and  intimations, 
the  first  hints  and  whispers  of  good  and  evil  that  pass  in  his  heart ;  and  this  will 
keep  conscience  so  quick  and  vigilant,  and  ready  to  give  a  man  true  alarms  upon 
the  least  approach  of  his  spiritual  enemy,  that  he  shall  be  hardly  capable  of  a  great 
surprise.  2.  Let  a  man  be  very  tender,  and  regardful  of  every  pious  motion  and 
suggestion  made  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  his  heart.  3.  Because  the  light  of  natural 
conscience  is  in  many  things  defective  and  dim,  and  the  internal  voice  of  God's 
Spirit  not  always  distinguishable,  above  all,  let  a  man  attend  to  the  mind  of  God 
uttered  in  His  revealed  Word.  We  shall  find  it  a  rule,  both  to  instruct  us  what  to 
do,  and  to  assure  us  in  what  we  have  done.  For  though  natural  conscience  ought 
to  be  listened  to,  yet  it  is  revelation  alone  that  is  to  be  relied  upon :  as  we  may 
observe  in  the  works  of  art,  a  judicious  artist  will  indeed  use  his  eye,  but  he  will 
trust  only  to  his  rule.  There  is  not  any  one  action  whatsoever  which  a  man  ought 
to  do  or  to  forbear,  but  the  Scripture  will  give  him  a  clear  precept  or  prohibition  for 
it.  4.  The  fourth  and  last  way  that  I  shaU  mention  for  the  getting  of  the  con- 
science rightly  informed,  and  afterwards  keeping  it  so,  is  frequently  and  impartially 
to  account  with  it.  It  is  with  a  man  and  his  conscience  as  with  one  man  and 
another,  amongst  whom  we  used  to  say  that  "  even  reckoning  makes  lasting 
friends,"  and  the  way  to  make  reckonings  even,  I  am  sure,  is  to  make  them  often. 
I  shall  close  with  this  twofold  caution.  (1)  Let  no  man  think  that  every  doubting 
or  misgiving  about  the  safety  of  his  spiritual  estate  overthrows  the  confidence 
hitherto  spoken  of.  The  sincerity  of  our  faith  or  confidence  will  not  secure  us 
against  all  vicissitudes  of  wavering  or  distrust;  indeed,  no  more  than  a  strong 
athletic  constitution  of  body  will  secure  a  man  always  against  heats,  and  colds,  and 
such  like  indispositions.  (2)  Let  no  man  from  what  has  been  said  reckon  a  bare 
silence  of  conscience,  in  not  accusing  or  disturbing  him,  a  sufiicient  argument 
for  confidence  towards  God.  For  such  a  silence  is  so  far  from  being  always  so, 
that  it  is  usually  worse  than  the  fiercest  and  loudest  accusations ;  since  it  may,  and 
for  the  most  part  does,  proceed  from  a  kind  of  numbness  or  stupidity  of  conscience ; 
and  an  absolute  dominion  obtained  by  sin  over  the  soul ;  so  that  it  shall  not  so  much 
as  dare  to  complain  or  make  a  stir.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  A  further  account  of  the 
nature  and  measure   of  conscience : — I.  Whence  it  is  that  the  testimony  of  con- 

BCXENCE,    THUS    INFORMED,    COMES   TO     BE    80    AUTHENTIC,    AND     80   MUCH   TO   BE    RELIED 

UPON.  1.  The  high  office  which  it  holds  immediately  from  God  Himself,  in  the  soul 
of  man.  It  commands  and  dictates  everything  in  God's  name ;  and  stamps  every 
word  with  an  almighty  authority.  So  that  it  is,  as  it  were,  a  kind  of  copy  or  trans- 
cript of  the  Divine  sentence,  and  an  interpreter  of  the  sense  of  heaven.  Nay,  and 
this  vicegerent  of  God  has  one  prerogative  above  all  God's  other  earthly  vicegerents; 
to  wit,  that  it  can  never  be  deposed.  For  a  king  never  condemns  any  whom  his 
judges  have  absolved,  nor  absolves  whom  his  judges  have  condemned,  whatsoever 
the  people  and  republicans  may.  2.  Proceed  we  now  to  the  second  ground,  from 
which  conscience  derives  the  credit  of  its  testimony  in  judging  of  our  spiritual 
estate ;  and  that  consists  in  those  properties  and  qualities  which  so  peculiarly  fit  it 
for  the  discharge  of  its  foreraentioned  office,  in  all  things  relating  to  the  soul.  (1) 
The  extraordinary  quickness  and  sagacity  of  its  sight  in  spying  out  everything 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  JOHN.  279 

■which  any  way  concern  the  estate  of  the  soul.  As  the  voice  of  it  was  as  loud  as 
thunder  ;  so  the  sight  of  it  is  as  piercing  and  quick  as  lightning.  (2)  The  tender- 
ness of  its  sense.  For  as  by  the  quickness  of  its  sight,  it  directs  us  what  to  do  or 
not  to  do  ;  so  by  this  tenderness  of  its  sense  it  excuses  or  accuses  us,  as  we  have 
done  or  not  done  according  to  those  directions.  And  it  is  altogether  as  nice,  delicate 
and  tender  in  feeling,  as  it  can  be  perspicacious  and  quick  in  seeing.  (3)  Its  great 
and  rigorous  impartiality.  For  as  its  wonderful  apprehensiveness  made  that  it 
could  not  easily  be  deceived,  so  this  makes  that  it  wiU  by  no  means  deceive.  A 
judge,  you  know,  may  be  skilful  in  understanding  a  cause,  and  yet  partial  in  giving 
sentence.  But  it  is  much  otherwise  with  conscience ;  no  artifice  can  induce  it  to 
accuse  the  innocent  or  to  absolve  the  guilty.  No,  we  may  as  well  bribe  the  light 
and  the  day  to  represent  white  things  black,  or  black  white.     11.  Some  paeticular 

CASES  OR  INSTANCES  IN  WHICH  THIS  CONFIDENCE  TOWARDS  GoD,  SUGGESTED  BY  A 
RIGHTLY   INFORMED    CONSCIENCE,    DOES   MOST   EMINENTLY   SHOW   AND   EXERT    ITSELF.       1. 

In  our  addresses  to  God  by  prayer.  When  a  man  shall  presume  to  come  and  place 
himself  in  the  presence  of  the  great  Searcher  of  hearts,  and  to  ask  something  of 
Him,  whUe  his  conscience  is  all  the  while  smiting  him  on  the  face,  and  telling  him 
■what  a  rebel  and  traitor  he  is  to  the  majesty  which  he  supplicates ;  surely  such  a 
one  should  think  with  himself,  that  the  God  whom  he  prays  to  is  greater  than  his 
conscience,  and  pierces  into  all  the  filth  and  baseness  of  his  heart  with  a  much 
clearer  and  more  severe  inspection.  And  if  so,  will  he  not  likewise  resent  the  pro- 
vocation more  deeply,  and  revenge  it  upon  him  more  terribly,  if  repentance  does  not 
divert  the  blow?  But  on  the  other  side,  when  a  man's  breast  is  clear,  and  the  same 
heart  which  indites,  does  also  encourage  his  prayer,  when  his  innocence  pushes  on 
the  attempt  and  vouches  the  success  ;  such  a  one  goes  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace, 
and  his  boldness  is  not  greater  than  his  welcome.  God  recognises  the  voice  of  His 
own  Spirit  interceding  with  him ;  and  his  prayers  are  not  only  followed  but  even 
prevented  with  an  answer.  2.  A  second  instance  in  which  this  confidence  towards 
God  does  so  remarkably  show  itself  is  at  the  time  of  some  notable  trial  or  sharp 
affliction.  When  a  man's  friends  shall  desert  him  and  all  dependencies  fail  him, 
certainly  it  will  then  be  of  some  moment  to  have  a  friend  in  the  court  of  conscience, 
which  shall,  as  it  -were,  buoy  up  his  sinking  spirits  and  speak  greater  things  for  him 
than  all  these  together  can  declaim  against  him.  3.  At  the  time  of  death  :  which 
surely  gives  the  grand  opportunity  of  trying  both  the  strength  and  worth  of  every 
principle.  At  this  disconsolate  time,  when  the  busy  tempter  shall  be  more  than 
usually  apt  to  vex  and  trouble  him,  and  the  pains  of  a  dying  body  to  hinder  and 
discompose  him,  and  the  settlement  of  worldly  affairs  to  disturb  and  confound  him ; 
and  in  a  word  all  things  conspire  to  make  his  sick-bed  grievous  and  uneasy: 
nothing  can  then  stand  up  against  all  these  ruins  and  speak  Ufe  in  the  midst  of 
death,  but  a  clear  conscience.  And  the  testimony  of  that  shall  make  the  comforts 
of  heaven  descend  upon  his  weary  head,  like  a  refreshing  dew  or  shower  upon  a 
parched  ground.  It  shall  give  him  some  lively  earnests  and  secret  anticipations 
of  his  approaching  joy.  (Ibid.)  What  is  the  verdict? — I.  Carefully  observe 
THAT  THIS  TEXT  IS  SPOKEN  TO  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.  It  spcaks  to  thosc  who  are  Called 
"  beloved."  These  are  the  people  who  are  specially  loved  of  God  and  of  His  people. 
As  soon  as  we  become  children  we  are  freed  from  the  condemning  power  of  the  law ; 
we  are  not  under  the  principle  and  motive  of  the  law  of  works,  but  yet  we  are  not  with- 
out law  unto  Christ.  We  are  dealt  with  not  as  mere  subjects  are  ruled  by  a  king,  but 
as  children  are  governed  by  a  father.  Thus  they  walk  on  blindfold  to  the  brink  of  the 
precipice.  God  grant  the  bandage  may  be  taken  off  before  they  have  taken  the  final  and 
fatal  step.  1.  Genuine  Christians  very  much  frequent  this  court  of  conscience.  They 
long  to  have  their  condition  put  to  a  thorough  test,  lest  they  be  deceived.  Make 
Bttre  work  for  eternity.  Be  certain  by  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost  within  you, 
that  you  are  indeed  the  children  of  God.  The  spirit  of  the  true  man  answers  to 
this :  he  is  always  willing  to  set  in  order  the  court  of  conscience  and  make  solemn 
trial  of  his  heart  and  life.  2.  In  this  court  the  question  to  be  decided  is  a  very 
weighty  one.  Am  I  sincere  in  the  truth  ?  Is  my  religion  true,  and  am  I  true  in 
my  profession  of  it  ?  Does  love  rule  in  my  nature  ?  Do  I  believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ?  Do  I  also  keep  His  commandments  ?  Do  I  seek  to  be  holy  as  Jesus 
is  holy  ?  Or  am  I  living  in  known  sin,  and  tolerating  that  in  myself  which  does 
not  and  cannot  please  God?  3.  This  court  is  guided  by  a  mass  of  evidence. 
That  evidence  has  not  to  be  sought  for,  it  is  there  already.  Memory  rises  up  and 
says,  "I  remember  aU  thou  hast  done  since  thy  profession  of  conversion — thy 
shortcomings  and  breaches  of  covenant."    The  wUl  confesses  to  offences  which 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

never  ripened  into  acts  for  want  of  opportunity.  The  passions  own  to  outbreaks 
which  were  concealed  from  human  observation.  The  imagination  is  made  to  bear 
testimony,  and  what  a  sinful  power  that  imagination  is,  and  how  diflQcult  it  is  to 
govern  it :  its  tale  is  sad  to  hear.  Our  tempers  confess  to  evil  anger,  our  lusts  to 
evil  longings,  our  hearts  to  evil  covetousness,  pride,  and  rebellion.  Hopeful  witness 
there  is  also  of  sin  conquered,  habits  broken,  and  desires  repressed ;  all  this  is 
honestly  taken  in  evidence  and  duly  weighed.  4.  While  the  trial  is  going  on,  the 
deliberation  causes  great  suspense.  As  long  as  I  have  to  ask  my  heart,  "  Heart, 
dost  thou  condemn  me,  or  dost  thou  acquit  me  ?  "  I  stand  trembling.  You  may 
have  seen  a  picture  entitled,  "  Waiting  for  the  Verdict."  The  artist  has  put  into 
the  countenances  of  the  waiters  every  form  of  unrest,  for  the  suspense  is  terrible. 
Blessed  be  God,  we  are  not  called  upon  to  wait  long  for  the  verdict  of  conscience. 
We  ought  never  to  let  the  question  remain  in  suspense  at  all ;  we  should  settle  it, 
and  settle  it  in  the  light  of  God,  and  then  walk  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light. 
II.  The  acquittal  issued  from  this  court  :  "  If  our  heart  condemn  us  not."  1. 
Observe  that  a  man  may  get  an  acquittal  from  the  court  of  conscience ;  for  the 
question  laid  before  the  heart  can  be  settled.  It  can  be  ascertained  whether  I 
sincerely  believe  in  Jesus  Christ;  it  can  be  ascertained  whether  I  sincerely  love 
God  and  love  His  people ;  it  can  be  ascertained  whether  my  heart  is  obedient  to 
the  commands  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  These  questions,  however,  must  be 
debated  with  great  discernment.  Abundance,  aye,  superabundance,  of  temptation 
is  no  proof  against  the  sincerity  of  our  faith  in  our  God  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  may 
sometimes  happen  that  the  more  we  are  tempted  the  more  true  is  it  that  there  is 
something  in  us  to  tempt,  some  good  thing  which  Satan  seeks  to  destroy.  3.  Again, 
the  verdict  of  the  heart  must  be  given  with  discrimination,  or  otherwise  we  may 
judge  according  to  outward  circumstances  and  so  judge  amiss.  The  fact  that  my 
child  is  little  and  feeble  is  no  proof  that  he  is  not  my  son.  The  boy  may  be  like 
his  father  and  yet  be  only  a  tiny  babe.  4.  And  the  verdict  has  to  be  given,  mark 
you,  upon  gospel  principles.  The  question  before  the  court  of  conscience  is  not. 
Have  I  perfectly  kept  the  law  ?  The  question  is,  Am  I  a  believer  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ?  Am  I  resting  in  him  for  salvation,  and  do  I  prove  the  truth  of  that 
faith  by  loving  God,  and  loving  the  brethren,  and  by  doing  those  things  which  are 
pleasing  to  God,  and  avoiding  those  things  which  are  displeasing  to  Him  ?  5. 
This  question  in  the  court  of  the  heart  must  never  be  settled  by  our  feelings. 
Sinners  can  rejoice  as  well  as  saints,  and  saints  can  mourn  as  well  as  sinners ;  the 
point  is  not  what  we  feel,  but  what  we  believe  and  do.  6.  The  question  of  our  state 
ought  to  be  settled  speedily.  We  know  "the  law's  delays,"  but  we  must  not  allow 
any  delay  in  this  court.  No,  we  must  press  for  summary  justice.  III.  The  con- 
sequence OF  THIS  ACQUITTAL.  Here  is  the  man  who  has  had  his  acquittal  in  the 
court  of  conscience.  Your  conscience  has  said,  "  He  is  a  sincere  man ;  he  is  a 
believing  man ;  he  is  quickened  with  the  life  of  God  ;  he  is  an  obedient  and  God- 
fearing man  " ;  and  now  you  have  confidence  toward  God ;  or  at  least  you  have  a 
right  to  such  confidence.  What  does  that  confidence  or  boldness  mean  ?  1.  There 
is  the  confidence  of  truthfulness.  When  you  kneel  down  to  pray  you  know  that  you 
are  praying,  and  not  mocking  God  ;  when  you  sing  you  are  making  melody  in  your 
heart ;  when  you  preach  you  are  preaching  that  which  your  soul  believes.  2.  The 
next  kind  of  confidence  towards  God  as  to  one's  acceptance  with  Him.  The  Word 
saith,  "He  that  believeth  on  Me  hath  everlasting  life."  Conscience  says,  "Yes, 
thou  hast  faith  "  ;  and  the  heart  concludes,  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemna- 
tion." When  you  know  this,  your  life  is  gilded  with  the  sunlight  of  the  coming 
glory,  and  your  heart  rejoiceth  exceedingly.  3.  This  produces,  and  perhaps  it  is 
that  which  the  apostle  most  intended,  a  boldness  of  converse.  The  man  who  knows 
that  he  is  truthful  and  that  God  has  accepted  him,  then  speaks  freely  with  God. 
4.  This  leads  to  great  confidence  in  prayer.  Look  at  the  context.  "  We  have  con- 
fidence toward  God.  And  whatsoever  we  ask  we  receive,"  &c.  If  you  want  power  in 
prayer  you  must  have  purity  in  life.  5.  Our  text  means  also  that  such  a  man  shall 
have  confidence  towards  God,  in  all  service  for  God.  Look  at  the  man  of  God  who 
has  confidence  towards  God  as  to  the  perils  encountered  in  faithfully  following  his 
Lord.  Take  Daniel,  for  instance.  His  confidence  toward  God  is  that  he  is  safe  in 
the  path  of  duty.  6.  Moreover,  we  have  this  confidence  towards  God  in  the  way 
of  service,  so  that  we  are  sure  of  receiving  all  necessary  help.  An  officer,  if  he  finds 
himself  in  straits,  impresses  anybody  that  passes  by,  saying,  "  In  the  King's  name, 
help  me."  Even  sO)  if  you  do  your  Lord's  bidding,  and  if  conscience  condemns  you 
not,  you  may  impress  into  the  service  of  the  great  King  every  angel  in  heaven,  and 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  281 

every  force  of  nature,  as  need  requires.  7.  It  means  rest,  perfect  rest.  Look  at 
your  Lord  when  the  tempest  was  on.  Loud  roaring,  the  billows  come  near  to  over- 
whelming the  ship  ;  but  He  is  asleep.  It  was  the  best  tlimg  to  do.  You  and  I  may  do 
the  same:  we  need  not  be  frightened  nor  worried  nor  troubled  ;  but  just  trust  in 
the  Lord  and  do  good,  so  shall  we  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  we  shall  be  fed. 
8.  This  confidence  often  mounts  up  into  joy  till  the  Christian  man  overflows  with 
delight  in  God  ;  he  cannot  contain  his  happiness.  Me  goes  to  his  toil  rejoicing  to 
serve  God  in  his  calling,  and  he  comes  home  at  night  to  repose  himself  in  the 
care  of  his  God  and  Father.  All  is  well  and  he  knows  it.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
An  approving   heart — confidence  in  prayer  : — I.  Show  that  if  our  heart  dobs 

NOT   CONDEMN   US,   WE   HAVE   AND   CANNOT   BUT   HAVE   CONFIDENCE    TOWARD    GoD    THAT 

~HB  ACCEPT  US.  If  our  heart  really  does  not  condemn  us,  it  is  because  we  are 
conscious  of  being  conformed  to  all  the  light  we  have,  and  of  doing  the  whole  will 
of  God  as  far  as  we  know  it.  While  in  this  state  it  is  impossible  that,  with  right 
views  of  God's  character,  we  should  conceive  of  Him  as  condemning  us.  He  is  a 
Father,  and  He  cannot  but  smile  on  His  obedient  and  trusting  children.  We  can- 
not conceive  of  Him  as  being  otherwise  than  pleased  ;  for,  if  He  were  displeased 
with  a  state  of  sincere  and  full  obedience.  He  would  act  contrary  to  His  own 
character  ;  He  would  cease  to  be  benevolent,  holy,  and  just.  Again,  let  it  be  noted 
that  in  this  state  with  an  approving  conscience,  we  should  have  no  self -righteous- 
ness. A  man  in  this  state  would  at  this  very  moment  ascribe  all  his  obedience  to 
the  grace  of  God.  The  apostle  Paul  when  in  this  state  of  conscious  uprightness 
most  heartily  ascribes  all  to  grace.  "  I  laboured,"  says  he,  "  more  abundantly 
than  they  all,  yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  that  is  in  me."  But  observe  that 
while  the  apostle  was  in  that  state,  it  was  impossible  that  he  should  conceive  of 
God  as  displeased  with  his  state.  Again,  when  a  man  prays  disinterestedly,  and 
with  a  heart  in  full  and  deep  sympathy  with  God ,  he  may  and  should  have  con- 
fidence that  God  hears  him.  Indeed  no  one,  having  right  views  of  God's  character, 
can  come  to  Him  in  prayer  in  a  disinterested  state  of  mind,  and  feel  otherwise  than 
that  God  accepts  such  a  state  of  mind.  Again,  when  we  are  conscious  of  sym- 
pathising with  God  Himself,  we  may  know  that  God  will  answer  our  prayers.  The 
soul,  being  in  sympathy  with  God,  feels  as  God  feels ;  so  that  for  God  to  deny  its 
prayers  is  to  deny  His  own  feelings,  and  refuse  to  do  the  very  thing  He  Himself 
desires.  Since  God  cannot  do  this.  He  cannot  fail  of  hearing  the  prayer  that  is  in 
sympathy  with  His  own  heart.  In  the  state  we  are  now  considering  the  Christian 
is  conscious  of  praying  in  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  must  know  that  his  prayer  is 
accepted  before  God.  I  say  he  is  conscious  of  this  fact.  And  this  deep  praying 
of  the  heart  goes  on  while  the  Christian  is  still  pursuing  the  common  vocations  of 
life.  The  team  he  is  driving  or  the  book  he  professes  to  study  is  by  no  means  so 
vividly  a  matter  of  conscious  recognition  to  him  as  is  his  communion  of  soul  with 
his  God.  In  this  state  the  soul  is  fully  conscious  of  being  perfectly  submissive  to 
God.  "  Not  my  will,  0  Lord,  but  Thine  be  done."  Hence  he  knows  that  God  will 
grant  the  blessing  he  asks.     II.  We  are  next  to  consider  this  position,  namely, 

THAT  IF  OUR  HEART  DOES  NOT  CONDEMN  US,  WE  MAT  HAVE  CONFIDENCE  THAT  WE 

SHALL  RECEIVE  THE  THINGS  WE  ASK.  1.  This  must  be  SO,  bccause  it  is  His  Spirit 
working  in  us  that  excites  these  prayers.  2.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  all  real 
prayer  seems  to  be  summed  up  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  especially  in  those  two 
most  comprehensive  petitions  :  "  Thy  kingdom  come ;  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as 
it  is  in  heaven."  Now  let  it  be  observed  that  God  desires  this  result  infinitely  more 
than  we  do.  3.  Yet  let  it  be  noted  here  that  God  may  not  answer  every  prayer 
according  to  its  letter  ;  but  He  surely  will  according  to  its  spirit.     III.  Why  will 

God    CERTAINLY   ANSWER   SUCH   A   PRAYER,    AND    HOW   CAN    WE    KNOW    THAT    He    WILL? 

1.  The  text  affirms  that  "  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him,  because  we  keep 
His  commandments  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight."  The 
fundamental  reason  always  of  God's  bestowing  blessings  is  His  goodness — His  love. 
All  good  flows  down  from  the  great  fountain  of  infinite  goodness.  Our  obedience  is 
only  the  condition  of  God's  bestowing  it — never  the  fundamental  reason  or  ground 
of  its  bestowment.  Obedience  takes  away  the  obstacle  ;  then  the  mighty  gushings 
of  Divine  love  break  forth.  Obedience  removes  the  obstacles ;  never  merits  or 
draws  down  the  blessing.  2.  If  God  were  to  give  blessings  upon  any  other  con- 
dition, it  would  deceive  multitudes,  either  respecting  ourselves  or  Himself.  If  He 
were  to  answer  our  prayers,  we  being  in  a  wrong  state  of  mind,  it  would  deceive 
others  very  probably  ;  for  if  they  did  not  know  us  well,  they  would  presume  that 
we  were  in  a  right  state,  and  might  be  led  to  consider  those  things  in  us  right 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

which  are  in  fact  wrong.  Or,  if  they  knew  that  we  were  wrong,  and  yet  knew  that 
God  answered  our  prayers,  what  must  they  think  of  God  ?  They  could  not  avoid 
the  conclusion  that  He  patronises  wrong-doing.  3.  God  is  well  pleased  when  we 
remove  the  obstacles  out  of  the  way  of  His  benevolence,  He  is  infinitely  good, 
and  Uves  to  do  good.  Now,  if  it  is  His  delight  and  His  life  to  do  good,  how  greatly 
must  He  rejoice  when  we  remove  all  obstacles  out  of  the  way !  Suppose  the 
bottom  of  the  vast  Pacific  should  heave  and  pour  its  ocean  tides  over  all  the  con- 
tinents of  the  earth.  This  might  illustrate  the  vast  overflowings  of  the  love  of 
God ;  how  grace  and  love  are  mounting  up  far  and  infinitely  above  all  the  moun- 
tains of  your  sins.  How  it  would  force  its  way  and  pour  out  its  gushing  floods 
wherever  the  least  channel  might  be  opened  !  And  you  would  not  need  to  fear  that 
your  little  wants  would  drain  it  dry !  Remarks  :  1.  Many  persons,  being  told  that 
God  answers  prayer  for  Christ's  sake,  overlook  the  condition  of  obedience.  They 
have  so  loose  an  idea  of  prayer,  and  of  our  relations  to  God  in  it,  and  of  His 
relations  to  us  and  to  His  moral  government,  that  they  think  they  may  be  dis- 
obedient and  yet  prevail  through  Christ.  How  Uttle  do  they  understand  the  whole 
subject  1  "  He  that  turneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer 
shall  be  an  abomination."  "  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord."  "  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  When 
men  come  before  God  with  their  idols  set  up  in  their  hearts,  and  the  stumbling- 
block  of  their  iniquity  before  their  face,  the  Lord  says,  "  Should  I  be  inquired  of  at 
all  by  them  (Ezek.  xiv.  3-5)  ?  "  2.  Persons  never  need  hesitate,  because  of  their 
past  sins,  to  approach  God  with  the  fullest  confidence.  3.  Many  continue  the 
forms  of  prayer  when  they  are  living  in  sin,  and  do  not  try  to  reform,  and  even 
have  no  sincere  desire  to  reform.  All  such  persons  should  know  that  they 
grievously  provoke  the  Lord  to  answer  their  prayers  with  fearful  judgments.  4.  It 
is  only  those  that  live  and  walk  with  God  whose  prayers  are  of  any  avail  to  them- 
selves, to  the  Church,  or  to  the  world.  5.  Sinner,  if  you  will  come  back  to  the 
Lord,  you  may  not  only  prevail  for  yourself,  but  for  your  associates  and  friends. 
Christian  hearer,  is  it  not  a  dreadful  thing  for  you  to  be  in  a  state  in  which  you 
cannot  prevail  with  God  ?  Let  us  look  around  ;  how  is  it  with  you  ?  Can  you 
prevail  with  God?  (C.  G.  Finney.)  Self-acquittal,  and  the  confidence  it  pro- 
duces:— I.  Self-acquittal.  "If  our  heart  condemn  us  not."  The  case  supposed 
is  what  may  be  supposed  of  any  Christian,  which  is — 1.  That  his  heart  does 
not  condemn  him  on  the  ground  of  allowing  and  cherishing  sin.  2.  A  Christian's 
heart  does  not  condemn  him  on  the  ground  of  total  insensibility  to  spiritual 
things.  3.  Acquit  you  of  a  self-righteous  spirit.  Is  it  a  sin,  then,  to  be  self- 
righteous  ?  Undoubtedly.  Must  it  not  be  sinful  to  justify  ourselves  in  the 
face  of  a  righteous  law  which  condemns  us  at  every  point  ?  4.  The  destitution 
of  Christian  graces  is  another  point  on  which  the  judgment  of  a  Christian  will 
acquit  him.  5.  Insincerity  is  also  one  of  those  things  of  which  our  hearts  should 
be  prepared  to  acquit  us.  II.  The  confidence  which  kesults  from  this  self- 
acquittal.  1.  We  have  a  persuasion  of  our  being  justified  before  God  because  the 
terms  of  our  justification  have  been  complied  with.  2.  We  are  conscious  of 
possessing  what  God  approves.  "  We  assure  our  hearts  before  Him,"  because  "  we 
love  indeed  and  in  truth."  3.  A  persuasion  of  acceptableness  in  devotion  is 
another  part  of  his  confidence  toward  God.  4.  An  expectation  of  gracious  superinten- 
dence forms  also  a  part  of  this  confidence.  5.  Aii  assurance  of  preparation  for 
judgment  and  eternity  crowns  the  confidence  of  those  whose  hearts  condemn  them 
not.     (Essex  Remembrancer.) 

Vers.  22-24.  And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him,  because  we  keep  Hia 
commandments. — The  conditions  of  power  in  prayer : — I.  The  essentials  of  poweb 
IN  pkayek.  We  must  make  a  few  distinctions  at  the  outset.  I  take  it  there  is  a 
great  difference  between  the  prayer  of  a  soul  that  is  seeking  mercy  and  the  prayer 
of  a  man  who  is  saved.  I  would  say  to  every  person  present,  whatever  his  character, 
if  you  sincerely  seek  mercy  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ  you  shall  have  it.  Quali- 
fications for  the  sinner's  first  prayer  I  know  of  none  except  sincerity ;  but  we  must 
speak  in  a  different  way  to  those  of  you  who  are  saved.  You  have  now  become  the 
people  of  God,  and  while  you  shall  be  heard  just  as  the  sinner  would  be  heard,  and 
shall  daily  find  the  needful  grace  which  every  seeker  receives  in  answer  to  prayer, 
yet  you  are  under  a  special  discipline  peculiar  to  the  regenerated  family.  There  is 
something  for  a  believer  to  enjoy  over  and  above  bare  salvation  ;  there  are  mercies, 
and  blessings,  and  comforts,  which  render  his  present  life  useful,  happy,  and 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  283 

honourable,  and  these  he  shall  not  have  irrespective  of  character.  To  give  a 
common  illustration :  If  a  hungry  person  were  at  your  door,  and  asked  for  bread, 
you  would  give  it  him,  whatever  might  be  his  character ;  you  will  also  give  your 
child  food,  whatever  may  be  his  behaviour  ;  you  will  never  proceed  in  any  course  of 
discipline  against  him,  so  as  to  deny  him  his  needful  food,  or  a  garment  to  shield 
him  from  the  cold  ;  but  there  are  many  other  things  which  your  child  may  desire, 
which  you  will  give  him  if  he  be  obedient,  but  which  you  will  not  give  if  he  be 
rebellious  to  you.  I  take  it  that  this  illustrates  how  far  the  paternal  government  of 
God  will  push  this  matter,  and  where  it  will  not  go.  Understand  also,  that  the  text 
refers  not  so  much  to  God's  hearing  a  prayer  of  His  servants  now  and  then,  for  that 
He  wiU  do,  even  when  His  servants  are  out  of  course  with  Him  ;  but  the  power  in 
prayer  here  intended  is  continuous  and  absolute  power  with  God  ;  so  that,  to  quote 
the  words  of  the  text,  "  whatsoever  we  ask  of  Him  we  receive."  For  this  prayer 
there  are  certain  pre-requisites.  1.  The  first  is  chUd -like  obedience :  "Whatsoever 
we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him,  because  we  keep  His  commandments."  2.  Next  to  this 
is  another  essential  to  victorious  prayer,  viz.,  child -like  reverence.  We  receive  what 
we  ask,  "  because  we  keep  His  commandments,  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing 
in  His  sight."  Suppose  any  of  us  should  be  self-willed,  and  say,  "  I  shall  not  do 
what  pleases  God,  I  shall  do  what  pleases  myself."  Then  observe  what  would  be 
the  nature  of  our  prayers  ?  Our  prayers  might  then  be  summed  up  in  the  request, 
"  Let  me  have  my  own  way."  And  can  we  expect  God  to  consent  to  that  ?  3.  In 
the  third  place,  the  text  suggests  the  necessity  of  child-like  trust :  "  And  this  is  His 
commandment,  that  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ." 
Let  us  come  back  to  our  family  similitudes  again.  Suppose  a  child  in  the  house 
does  not  believe  his  father's  word ;  suppose,  indeed,  that  he  teUs  his  brothers  and 
sisters  that  his  faith  in  his  father  is  very  weak.  He  mentions  that  wretched  fact, 
but  is  not  at  aU  shocked  that  he  should  say  such  a  thing,  but  he  rather  feels  that  he 
ought  to  be  pitied,  as  if  it  were  an  infirmity  which  he  could  not  avoid.  I  think  a 
father  so  basely  distrusted  would  not  be  in  a  very  great  hurry  to  grant  such  a  son's 
requests  ;  indeed,  it  is  very  probable  that  the  petitions  of  the  mistrustful  son  would 
be  such  as  could  not  be  complied  with,  even  if  his  father  were  willing  to  do  so,  since 
they  would  amount  to  a  gratification  of  his  own  unbelief  and  a  dishonour  to  his 
parent.  Expect  not,  therefore,  to  be  heard  when  your  prayer  is  suggested  by  an 
imbelieving  heart:  "  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord;  trust  also  in  Him,  and  He 
shall  bring  it  to  pass."  4.  The  next  essential  to  continued  success  in  prayer  is 
chUd-like  love :  "  That  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  and 
love  one  another  as  He  gave  us  commandment."  We  should  abound  in  love  to  God, 
love  to  Christ,  love  to  the  Church,  love  to  sinners,  and  love  to  men  everywhere. 
You  must  get  rid  of  selfishness  before  God  can  trust  you  with  the  keys  of  heaven  ; 
but  when  self  is  dead,  then  He  wiU  enable  you  to  unlock  His  treasuries,  and,  as  a 
prince,  shall  you  have  power  with  God  and  prevail.  5.  Next  to  this,  we  must  have 
chUd-like  ways  as  well.  "  He  that  keepeth  His  commandments,  dwelleth  in  Him, 
and  He  in  him."  It  is  one  of  a  child's  ways  to  love  its  home.  Suppose  one  of  you 
had  a  boy,  who  said,  "  Father,  I  do  not  like  my  home,  I  do  not  care  for  you  ;  and  I 
will  not  endure  the  restraints  of  family  rule ;  I  am  going  to  live  with  strangers.  But 
mark,  father,  I  shall  come  to  you  every  week,  and  I  shall  require  many  things  of 
you ;  and  I  shall  expect  that  you  will  give  me  whatever  I  ask  from  you." 
Why,  if  you  are  at  all  fit  to  be  at  the  head  of  the  house,  you  will  say,  "  My  son,  how 
can  you  speak  to  me  in  such  a  maimer  ?  If  you  are  so  self-willed  as  to  leave  my 
house,  can  you  expect  that  I  will  do  your  bidding  ?  If  you  utterly  disregard  me, 
can  you  expect  me  to  support  you  in  your  cruel  unkindness  and  wicked  insubordina- 
tion. No,  my  son  ;  if  you  wiU  not  remain  with  me  and  own  me  as  a  father,  I  can- 
not promise  you  anything."  And  so  it  is  with  God.  6.  One  thing  more :  it  appears 
from  the  text  that  we  must  have  a  child-like  spirit,  for  "  hereby  we  know  that  He 
abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath  given  us."  What  is  this  but  the  Spirit 
of  adoption— the  Spkit  which  rules  in  all  the  children  of  God  ?  The  Holy  Spirit  if 
He  rules  in  us,  wiH  subordinate  our  nature  to  His  own  sway,  and  then  the  prayers 
which  spring  out  of  our  renewed  hearts  will  be  in  keeping  with  the  wUl  of  God,  and 
Buch  prayers  wiU  naturally  be  heard.  H.  The  prevalence  of  these  essential 
THINGS.  If  they  be  in  us  and  abound,  our  prayers  cannot  be  barren  or  unprofitable. 
1.  First,  if  we  have  faith  in  God,  there  is  no  question  about  God's  hearing  our 
prayer.  If  we  can  plead  in  faith  the  name  and  blood  of  Jesus,  we  must  obtain 
answers  of  peace.  But  a  thousand  cavils  are  suggested.  Suppose  these  prayers 
concern  tiie  laws  of  nature,  then  the  scientific  men  are  against  us.    What  of  that  ? 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

The  Lord  has  ways  of  answering  our  prayers  irrespective  of  the  working  of  miracles 
or  suspending  laws.  Perhaps  there  are  other  forces  and  laws  which  He  has 
arranged  to  bring  into  action  just  at  times  when  prayer  also  acts,  laws  just  as  fixed 
and  forces  just  as  natural  as  those  which  our  learned  theorisers  have  been  able  to 
discover.  The  wisest  men  know  not  all  the  laws  which  govern  the  universe,  nay, 
nor  a  tithe  of  them.  If  there  be  but  faith  in  God,  God  must  either  cease  to  be,  or 
cease  to  be  true,  or  else  He  must  hear  prayer.  The  verse  before  the  text  says,  "  If 
our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence  toward  God  ;  and  whatsoever  we 
ask,  we  receive  of  Him."  He  who  has  a  clear  conscience  comes  to  God  with  con- 
fidence, and  that  confidence  of  faith  ensures  to  him  the  answer  of  his  prayer.  2.  But 
next,  love  must  succeed  too,  since  we  have  already  seen  that  the  man  who  loves  in 
the  Christian  sense  is  in  accord  with  God.  God  always  hears  the  prayers  of  a 
loving  man,  because  those  prayers  are  the  shadows  of  His  own  decrees.  3.  Again, 
the  man  of  obedience  is  the  man  whom  God  will  hear,  because  his  obedient  heart 
leads  him  to  pray  humbly  and  with  submission,  for  he  feels  it  to  be  his  highest 
desire  that  the  Lord's  will  should  be  done.  4.  Again,  the  man  who  lives  in  fellow- 
ship with  God  will  assuredly  speed  in  prayer,  because  if  he  dwells  in  God  and  God 
dwells  in  hun,  he  will  desire  what  God  desires.  5.  And  here,  again  let  us  say,  our 
text  speaks  of  the  Christian  man  as  being  filled  with  God's  Spirit ;  "  We  know  that 
He  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath  given  us."  Who  knows  the  mind  of 
a  man  but  the  spirit  of  a  man  ?  So,  who  knows  the  things  of  God  but  the  Spirit  of 
God  ?  And  if  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  us,  then  He  tells  us  what  God's  mind  is ; 
He  makes  intercession  in  the  saints  according  to  the  will  of  God.  Practical 
improvement :  1.  The  first  is,  we  want  to  pray  for  a  great  blessing  as  a  church. 
Very  well.  Have  we  the  essentials  for  success  ?  Are  we  believing  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ  ?  Are  we  full  of  love  to  God  and  one  another  ?  2.  Next,  are  we  doing 
that  which  is  pleasing  in  God's  sight  ?  3.  The  next  question  is,  do  we  dwell  in  God? 
4.  Lastly,  does  the  Spirit  of  God  actuate  us,  or  is  it  another  spirit  ?  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Righteousness  essential  to  our  pleasing  God  and  to  His  hearing  us  : — I.  "  We  keep 
His  commandments,  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight."  So 
John  writes  ;  and  so  also  Jesus  speaks  (John  viii.  29).  The  language  is  the  very 
same ;  the  sense  and  spirit  in  which  it  is  used  must  be  the  very  same  also.  Jesus 
uttered  the  words  for  our  sakes ;  and  as  expressing  a  human  feeling  which  we  may 
understand,  and  with  which  He  would  have  us  to  sympathise.  That  human  feeling 
in  the  bosom  of  Jesus  must  have  been  very  simple  and  intensely  filial ;  realising 
intensely  His  filial  relation  to  the  Father  and  His  filial  oneness  with  the  Father. 
There  is,  if  I  may  venture  so  to  speak,  a  child-like  simplicity,  a  sort  of  artless 
straightforwardness,  in  His  saying  so  confidingly,  so  lovingly,  so  naturally,  "I  do 
always  those  things  that  please  Him."  He  has  the  Cross  in  view.  Men,  displeased 
with  Him,  are  to  "  lift  Him  up,"  and  leave  Him  to  die  in  His  agony  alone.  Not  so 
the  Father.  He  leaves  me  not  alone;  He  is  with  me;  "for  I  do  always  those 
things  that  please  Him."  Somewhat  similar  are  the  circumstances  in  which  John 
would  have  us  to  say ;  "  we  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight."  Oh ! 
to  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children !  First,  to  be  made  willing  as  little 
children,  that  all  this  misunderstanding  should  be  ended,  and  this  breach  thoroughly 
healed  at  once,  and  once  for  all,  as  the  Father  would  have  it  to  be,  in  the  Son. 
And  then,  as  little  children,  to  know  something  of  a  little  child's  touching  and 
artless  simplicity,  as  we  look  with  loving  eye  into  the  loving  eye  of  the  Father,  and 
lovingly  lisp  out  the  touching  words:  "  We  keep  His  commandments  and  do  those 
things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight."  II.  "  And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of 
Him."  In  this  saying  also  we  have  the  countenance  of  Jesus  (John  xi.  41,  42). 
"  Thou  hearest  me  always  1  "  It  is  a  blessed  assurance.  And  the  blessedness  of  it 
really  lies,  not  so  much  in  the  good  he  gets  from  the  Father's  hearing  him,  as  in  the 
Father's  hearing  him  itself ;  not  so  much  in  what  he  receives,  as  in  his  receiving  it 
from  the  Father.  For  this  is  the  charm,  the  joy,  the  consolation,  of  that  access  to 
the  Father  and  that  influence  with  the  Father  which  you  now  have  in  common  with 
the  Son.  It  is  not  that  you  may  enrich  and  gratify  yourselves  with  what  you  win 
by  asking  from  Him.  But  it  is  literally  that  whatever  you  ask  you  receive  of  Him, 
as  His  gift ;  the  proof  that  He  is  ever  with  you  and  heareth  you  always.  Ah  1  how 
then  shall  I  ask  anything  at  all?  If  such  is  my  position,  in  and  with  Christ,  how 
shall  I  have  the  heart  or  the  hardihood  to  ask  anything  at  all  of  the  Father,  except 
only  that  He  may  deal  with  me  according  to  His  good  pleasure?  If  I  am  really  on 
such  a  footing  with  the  Father  that  "  He  heareth  me  always,"  and  "  whatsoever  I 
ask  I  receive  of  Him  " ;  if  I  have  such  influence  with  Him ;  if,  as  His  dear  child, 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN,  285 

pleasing  Him,  and  doing  what  pleases  Him,  I  can  so  prevail  with  Him  that  He  can 
refuse  me  nothing ;  what  can  I  say  ?  What  can  I  do  ?  I  can  but  cast  myself  into 
His  arms  and  cry.  Thou  knowest  better  than  I,  oh  my  Father !  Father,  Thy  will  be 
done.  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.I).)  Answers  to  'prayer : — We  must  make  a  wide 
distinction  between  a  cause  and  a  condition.  The  cause  of  anything  is  the  actual 
reason  why  it  is — the  source  from  which  it  flows.  The  condition  is  something 
which  comes  in  afterwards — super-added — to  limit  and  to  guide  the  actings  of  the 
first  cause.  Just,  for  example,  as  the  rain  is  not  caused  by  the  particular  state  of 
the  atmosphere,  but  it  depends  upon  it ;  and  there  must  be  a  certain  rarity  in  the 
air,  without  which  the  rain  would  not  fall.  This  is  its  condition.  In  like  manner, 
"  keeping  the  commandments  "  is  not  the  cause  of  our  prayers  being  answered,  but 
it  is  the  condition.  Your  prayers  will  not  be  answered  unless  you  "  keep  the 
commandments."  If  we  ask,  "what  is  the  reason  why  any  prayer  prevails  with 
God?  "  the  explanation  lies  very  deep.  You  will  find  it  among  the  grandnesses  of 
the  Holy  Trinity.  It  is  because  God  is  a  Father,  and  therefore  of  Himself  loves  to 
listen  to  His  children's  petitions,  and  to  give  them  everything  they  ask.  It  is 
because  every  believer  praying,  prays  in  Christ^he  presents  Christ — he  is  in  Christ. 
Hence  the  almost  omnipotence  of  prayer.  It  is  because  whatever  true  prayer  goes 
up  to  the  throne  of  God,  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  who  prays  it.  Thus  the  whole  Trinity 
meets  to  make  the  prayer  of  the  weakest  Christian,  and  this  is  the  cause  why  prayer 
gets  answered.  Who  has  not  asked  of  God  a  great  many  things  ?  Who  does  not 
believe  that  many,  at  least,  of  the  things  which  he  asks  are  the  legitimate,  nay,  the 
covenanted  subjects  of  prayer?  Who  has  not  the  evidence  of  his  own  heart  that 
for  many  of  these  things,  at  all  events,  he  has  prayed,  and  is  praying  very  earnestly. 
And  yet,  who  has  not  to  feel  "  My  prayers  are  not  answered ;  I  do  not  obtain  what 
I  ask  "  ?  And  who  has  not  wondered  why  it  is  thus  with  his  prayers  ?  Now  what 
is  the  reason  ?  Certainly  the  cause  cannot  be  in  God ;  it  must  be  in  you.  But 
where  in  you  ?  I  answer  deliberately — in  your  life,  in  your  heart.  In  some  way 
or  other,  you  are  not  "  keeping  "  some  "  commandment,"  you  are  not  "  doing  those 
things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight."  Let  us  now  pause  upon  the  thought  that 
the  life  rules  the  prayer — that  according  as  you  are  holy,  so  will  you  receive  answers 
to  your  prayers — that  the  condition  of  prayer  is  obedience,  and  without  obedience 
prayer  loses  its  prerogative.  If  a  man  is  leading  a  religious  life — not  grieving  his 
conscience — a  man  of  pure  thoughts  and  holy  pleasures — that  man  grows  into  such 
a  state  of  mind  that  he  will  only  wish  such  things  as  God  has  promised  to  give  him, 
he  win  not  desire  many  temporal  things  ;  but  his  tastes  will  be  spiritual,  therefore 
his  prayers  are  always  keeping  within  the  bounds  of  the  promises.  He  will  not  ask 
nor  long  for  anything  which  is  not  after  the  will  of  God  to  give.  The  Spirit  which 
is  in  him  will  take  care  of  that  for  him.  1.  And  here  is  the  first  grand  secret  of 
the  success  of  a  good  man's  prayer,  which  arises  out  of  a  conformity  of  his  mind  to 
the  mind  of  God,  and  that  conformity  of  his  mind  to  the  mind  of  God  arises  out  of 
his  daily  habits  of  life.  2.  Secondly,  blessings  may  be  ready  to  come  down,  and 
they  may  pour,  but  unless  your  heart  be  in  a  right  state  to  receive  them,  they  will 
pour  in  vain.  The  heart  is  hard,  and  they  cannot  come  in ;  or  it  is  so  crowded 
that  there  is  no  room ;  or  it  is  so  weak  that  there  is  no  holding.  Now  any  state  of 
wilful  sin  puts  the  heart  in  that  state.  Hence,  prayer  cannot  be  answered — for 
even  should  the  answer  come,  it  will  not  find  entrance.  3.  Thirdly,  remember  this  ; 
that  when  God  says  that  a  man  must  "  keep  His  commandments  "  if  he  will  have 
his  prayers  answered,  part  of  the  commandments  is  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
therefore  the  passage  runs  thus  in  very  emphatic  order  —  "Whatsoever  we  ask, 
we  receive  of  Him,  because  we  keep  His  commandments,  and  do  those  things  that 
are  pleasing  in  His  sight.  And  this  is  His  commandment.  That  we  should  believe 
on  the  name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  4.  And  then  fourthly,  it  is  quite  evident 
that  what  God  gives  to  those  who  are  leading  a  godly  and  devoted  life.  He  gives  to 
the  promotion  of  His  own  glory  ;  because,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  they  will  use 
the  gift  for  the  extension  of  His  kingdom,  and  this  gives  a  plain  reason  why  their 
prayer  should  be  granted.  For  shall  God  give  to  a  man  whose  life  has  two  faces — 
one  face  in  practice,  and  another  face  in  prayer  ?  Shall  He  give  to  a  sheer  hypo- 
crite ?  5.  And  once  more,  why  should  not  our  heavenly  Father  do  what  all  fathers 
do,  love  to  give  His  good  things  to  the  child  who  tries  to  please  Him  most,  and  who 
delights  in  His  society  ?  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  And  this  is  His  commandment. 
That  we  shoxild  believe  on  the  name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  love  one  another. 
— On  the  importance  of  faith  in  Christ  and  love  to  Christians  : — I.  The  gospel, 

WHESBT£B  II  COMES,  BEQUIBES  A  FIRM  IBUSX  IN  THE   MERITS  AND   OBACE  OF  THE   LoBD 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iu. 

Jesus  Christ.  1.  It  is  necessary  to  obtain  pardon  of  sin.  2.  It  is  necessary  to 
produce  purity  of  heart.  3.  It  is  necessary  to  promote  vital  union  with  God,  the 
fountain  of  life  and  felicity.  II.  The  gospel  requires  brotherly  love,  as  a 
PRIMARY  AND  MOST  IMPORTANT  DUTY.  1.  Let  US  Consider  the  nature  and  extent  of 
that  brotherly  love  which  the  gospel  inculcates  and  demands.  It  is  esteem,  com- 
placence, compassion,  benevolence.  (1)  Love  is  evinced  by  sincerely  sympathising 
with  our  Christian  brethren  in  their  sufferings.  (2)  Love  is  evinced  by  cheerfully 
communicating  of  our  substance  to  relieve  the  wants  of  our  Christian  brethren. 
2.  The  grounds  and  obligations  of  brotherly  love.  (1)  Faith  in  Christ,  and  love  to 
Christians  are  represented  as  closely  and  inseparably  connected.  (2)  There  is  an 
express  and  very  particular  command  of  Christ,  enjoining  brotherly  love  upon  His 
followers.  (3)  The  basis  of  our  obligation  is  the  cause  of  God.  There  are  two  cases  to 
which  this  subject  may  be  appUed.  1.  Let  it  serve  as  a  test  or  touchstone  of  our  personal 
piety.  2.  Let  this  subject  rouse  us  to  more  seriousness,  activity,  and  zeal.  (Essex 
Remembrancer.)  The  warrant  of  faith  : — The  true  believer  has  learned  to  look  away 
from  the  killing  ordinances  of  the  old  law.  He  turns  with  loathing  from  all  trust  in  his 
own  obedience  and  lays  hold  with  joy  upon  the  hope  set  before  him  in  the  one  com- 
mandment contained  in  my  text.  I.  The  matter  of  believing,  or  what  is  it  that  a 
man  is  to  believe  in  order  to  eternal  life  ?  That  faith  which  saves  the  soul  is  believing 
on  a  person,  depending  upon  Jesus  for  eternal  life.  We  must  believe  Him  to  be 
God's  Son — so  the  text  puts  it — "  His  Son."  We  must  grasp  with  strong  confidence 
the  great  fact  that  He  is  God  :  for  nothing  short  of  a  Divine  Saviour  can  ever 
deliver  us  from  the  infinite  wrath  of  God.  Furthermore,  we  must  accept  this  Son 
of  God  as  "  Jesus,"  the  Saviour.  We  must  believe  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,  became  man  out  of  infinite  love  to  man,  that  He  might  save  His  people  from 
their  sins.  We  must  look  upon  Jesus  as  "  Christ,"  the  anointed  of  the  Father, 
sent  into  this  world  on  salvation's  errand,  not  that  sinners  might  save  themselves, 
but  that  He,  being  mighty  to  save,  might  bring  many  sons  unto  glory.  Moreover, 
we  should  rejoice  that  as  Jesus  Christ,  by  His  dying,  put  away  for  ever  the  sin  of 
His  people,  so  by  His  living  He  gave  unto  those  who  trust  in  Him  a  perfect 
righteousness,  in  which,  despite  their  own  sins,  they  are  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 
We  are  also  taught  that  if  we  heartily  trust  our  soul  with  Christ,  our  sins,  through 
His  blood,  are  forgiven,  and  His  righteousness  is  imputed  to  us.  The  mere 
knowledge  of  these  facts  will  not,  however,  save  us,  unless  we  really  trust  our  souls 
in  the  Redeemer's  hands.  H.  The  warrant  of  believing.  This  is  the  command- 
ment, that  ye  "  believe  on  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  1.  First,  negatively.  (1)  That 
any  other  way  of  preaching  the  gospel-warrant  is  absurd.  Are  we  to  go  running  up 
and  down  the  world  proclaiming  life  to  the  hving,  casting  bread  to  those  who  are 
fed  already,  and  holding  up  Christ  on  the  pole  of  the  gospel  to  those  who  are  already 
healed  ?  (2)  To  tell  the  sinner  that  he  is  to  believe  on  Christ  because  of  some 
warrant  in  himself,  is  legal.  If  I  lean  on  Christ  because  I  feel  this  and  that,  then 
I  am  leaning  on  my  feelings  and  not  on  Christ  alone,  and  this  is  legal  indeed. 
(3)  Again,  any  other  way  of  preaching  than  that  of  bidding  the  sinner  believe 
because  God  commands  him  to  beUeve,  is  a  boasting  way  of  faith.  When  we  tell  a 
sinner  that  filthy  as  he  is,  without  any  preparation  or  qualification,  he  is  to  take 
Jesus  Christ  to  be  his  all  in  all,  finding  in  Him  all  that  he  can  ever  need,  we  leave 
no  room  for  self-glorification,  all  must  be  of  grace.  Law  and  boasting  are  twin 
brothers,  but  free  grace  and  gratitude  always  go  together.  (4)  Any  other  warrant 
for  believing  on  Jesus  than  that  which  is  presented  in  the  gospel  is  changeable. 
Since  everything  within  changes  more  frequently  than  ever  does  an  EngUsh  sky,  if 
my  warrant  to  believe  in  Christ  be  based  within,  it  must  change- every  hour; 
consequently  I  am  lost  and  saved  alternately.  Can  these  things  be  so  ?  (5)  Again, 
any  other  warrant  is  utterly  incomprehensible.  Multitudes  preach  an  impossible 
salvation.  Personally,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  been  told  from  the  pulpit  to 
believe  in  Jesus  as  a  sinner.  I  heard  much  of  feelings  which  I  thought  I  could 
never  get,  and  frames  after  which  I  longed  ;  but  I  found  no  peace  until  a  true,  free 
grace  message  came  to  me,  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the 
earth."  (6)  Yet  again,  I  believe  that  the  preaching  of  alarms  of  conscience  and 
repentance  as  qualifications  for  Christ  is  unacceptable  to  the  awakened  sinner.  Oh, 
I  am  ashamed  of  myself  when  I  think  of  the  way  in  which  I  have  sometimes  talked 
to  awakened  sinners.  I  am  persuaded  that  the  only  true  remedy  for  a  broken  heart 
is  Jesus  Christ's  most  precious  blood.  (7)  Any  other  warrant  for  the  sinner's  faith 
than  the  gospel  itself,  is  false  and  dangerous.  It  is  as  false  as  God  is  true,  that 
anything  in  a  sinner  can  be  his  warrant  for  believing  in  Jesus.     There  cannot  be  a 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  287 

true  and  real  hatred  of  sin  where  there  is  not  faith  in  Jesus.  All  the  sinner  knows 
and  feels  before  faith  is  only  an  addition  to  his  other  sins,  and  how  can  sin  which 
deserves  wrath  be  a  warrant  for  an  act  which  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  How 
dangerous  is  the  sentiment  I  am  opposing.  Take  care  of  resting  in  your  own 
experience.  All  that  is  of  nature's  spinning  must  be  unravelled,  and  everything 
that  getteth  into  Christ's  place,  however  dear  to  thee,  and  however  precious  in  itself, 
must  be  broken  in  pieces.  Sinners,  Jesus  wants  nothing  of  you,  nothing  whatsoever, 
nothing  done,  nothing  felt ;  He  gives  both  work  and  feeling.  Eagged,  penniless, 
just  as  ye  are,  lost,  forsaken,  desolate,  with  no  good  feelings  and  no  good  hopes, 
still  Jesus  comes  to  you,  and  in  these  words  of  pity  He  addresses  you,  "  Him  that 
Cometh  to  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  2.  But  now,  positively,  and  as  the 
negative  part  has  been  positive  enough,  we  will  be  brief  here.  "  This  is  the 
commandment."  Do  you  want  any  warrant  for  doing  a  thing  better  than  God's 
command  to  do  it  ?  The  command  to  believe  in  Christ  must  be  the  sinner's  warrant, 
if  you  consider  the  nature  of  our  commission.  How  runs  it  ?  "  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  eveiy  creature."  It  ought  to  run,  according  to 
the  other  plan,  "  preach  the  gospel  to  every  regenerate  person,  to  every  convinced 
sinner,  to  every  sensible  soul."  But  it  is  not  so  ;  it  is  to  "  every  creature."  Then 
how  is  it  put  ? — "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baj)tised  shall  be  saved  ;  he  that  believeth 
not  shall  be  damned."  Where  is  there  a  word  about  the  pre-requisites  for  beUeving. 
(1)  I  shall  only  add,  that  the  blessings  which  flow  from  preaching  Christ  to  sinners 
as  sinners,  are  of  such  a  character  as  prove  it  to  be  right.  Do  you  not  see  that  this 
levels  us  all  ?  We  have  the  same  wan-ant  for  believing,  and  no  one  can  exalt 
himself  above  his  fellow.  (2)  Then  how  it  inspires  men  with  hope  and  confidence  ; 
it  forbids  despair.  No  man  can  despair  if  this  be  true  ;  or  if  he  do,  it  is  a  wicked, 
unreasonable  despair,  because  if  he  has  been  never  so  bad,  yet  God  commands  him 
to  believe.  (3)  Again,  how  it  makes  a  man  live  close  to  Christ !  If  i  am  to  come 
to  Christ  as  a  sinner  every  day,  and  I  must  do  so,  for  the  Word  saith,  "  As  ye  have 
received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  Him"  ;  if  every  day  I  am  to  come  to 
Christ  as  a  sinner,  why  then,  how  paltry  all  my  doings  look  !  what  utter  contempt 
it  cast  upon  all  my  fine  virtues,  my  preachings,  my  prayings,  and  all  that  comes  of 
my  flesh !  and  though  it  leads  me  to  seek  after  purity  and  holiness,  yet  it  teaches 
me  to  live  on  Christ  and  not  on  them,  and  so  it  keeps  me  at  the  fountain  head. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  one  commandment : — Every  thoughtful  reader  of  the 
Word  of  God  must  have  been  struck  with  the  very  great  importance  that  the  sacred 
writers  attach  to  names.  In  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Sacred  Volume  we  read  of 
God  giving  their  names  to  the  works  of  His  hands :  "  God  called  the  hght  Day, 
and  the  darkness  He  called  Night."  The  very  first  thing  that  Adam,  the  first 
man,  does,  is  by  God's  direction  to  give  names  to  all  God's  creatures.  Then,  when 
God  entered  into  covenant  with  Abram,  He  changed  his  name  from  Abram  to 
Abraham.  When  God  wrestled  with  Jacob,  He  changed  his  name  from  Jacob  to 
Israel.  '  But  we  must  pass  on  to  the  New  Testament.  It  also  begins  with  God  giving 
a  name.  On  its  very  title-page  we  have  God  sending  an  angel  to  give  a  name  to 
One  not  yet  born — that  Second  Adam — that  Beginning  of  the  New  Creation  of  God, 
whom  He  sent  into  the  world.  In  the  very  first  chapter  of  the  New  Testament  we  have 
two  names  assigned  to  the  Saviour.  First,  the  angels  say,  "  Thou  shalt  call  His 
name  Jesus,  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."  Then  the  name  of 
*'  Emmanuel,"  given  to  Him  in  the  spirit  by  Isaiah,  the  prophet,  is  also  claimed  as 
His  by  the  Evangelist.  These  two  names,  given  to  the  Second  Adam  in  the  first 
chapter  of  the  book  of  the  New  Covenant,  answer  to  the  two  names  by  which  God 
made  Himself  kno\vn  to  the  children  of  Israel.  Emmanuel  signifies  what  the 
Saviour  is  in  Himself — God  with  us ;  God  in  our  nature.  Jesus  rather  signifies 
what  He  is  to  His  people — their  "  Saviour  from  sin."  It  means  literally,  "  The 
Lord  is  salvation,"  or  "  The  Lord  our  salvation."  I.  What  is  meant  by  believing  in 
THE  NAME  OF  Jesus  Cheist  ?  It  must  mean  more  than  believing  that  some  years  ago  a 
person  came  into  this  world  who  had  such  a  name  given  to  him.  It  is  believing  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  to  us  what  His  name  means.  Now  let  us  take  the  best  known  name  of 
our  Saviour — "Jesus  Christ,  His  only  Son  our  Lord."  We  know  Him  as  the  only  Son 
of  God — as  Jesus — as  Christ.  Take  the  first  of  these — the  Son  of  God.  See  how 
our  Lord  insists  upon  our  believing  in  this,  as  His  name,  in  His  discourse  with 
Nicodemus  (John  iii.  18).  Now  a  man  who  believes  this  respecting  the  Person  who 
was  then  speaking  to  Nicodemus,  and  who  was  afterwards  crucified  and  raised 
again,  believes  in  the  greatest  possible  instance  of  God's  love.  It  is  quite  clear,  also, 
that  any  interpretation  which  attaches  to  the  term  "  Son  of  God  "  a  lower  meaning 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.    ,i. 

than  that  of  "  only-begotten  Son,"  really  destroys  all  the  testimony  which  such  a 
text  as  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son  "  bears  to  the 
exceeding  love  of  God.  Now  let  us  proceed  to  the  human  name  by  which  we  know 
the  Son  of  God — Jesus  Christ.  The  name  "  Jesus  "  signifies  "  the  Lord  our  salvation." 
He  has  saved  us  from  the  guilt  of  sin  by  His  sacrifice  on  the  Cross.  Again,  Ho 
saves  us  from  the  power  of  sin  by  His  indwelling  Spirit  making  us  partakers  of  His 
nature,  so  that  His  risen  life  is  in  us  our  spiritual  life.  And  so  with  that  title  of 
Messiah,  or  Christ,  or  Anointed  One,  to  which  is  joined  His  name  of  Jesus.  It  is 
impUed  in  the  very  fact  of  His  being  called  Christ  that  He  has  been  anointed  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  be  the  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  of  His  people.  Believing  in  the 
name  of  God's  Son,  Jesus,  then,  is  believing  that  God's  Son  is  that  very  Lord,  our 
Saviour,  which  His  name  implies.  This  is  God's  commandment.  No,  no ;  it  is 
only  part  of  God's  commandment :  for  the  one  commandment  of  God,  which  God 
inspired  the  beloved  disciple  to  give  to  His  people,  is  made  up  of  two  things.  "  This 
is  His  commandment,  that  we  believe  on  the  name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and 
love  one  another,  as  He" — i.e.  as  Christ  Himself — "gave  us  commandment." 
Any  one  who  knows  anything  of  the  history  of  the  Church,  or  about  religious  society, 
knows  well  that  a  man  may  have,  or  at  least  may  express,  not  only  belief  in  the 
name,  but  the  sincerest  trust  in  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  and  yet  be  bitter  to 
those  who  differ  from  him,  uncharitable  to  those  who  oppose  him,  and  churlish  to 
those  who  are  at  all  in  his  way.  St.  Paul  writes  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  to  men 
who  realised  the  gospel  far  better  than  any  Christians  now  do ;  and  instead  of 
"  leaving  the  gospel  to  itself,"  and  simply  insisting  on  believing  in  Christ  crucified, 
the  apostle  actually  bids  those  who  are  supposed  to  believe  the  gospel  not  to  lie,  nor 
to  steal,  nor  to  use  bad  language,  nor  to  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  to  walk  in  love, 
and  put  away  all  bitterness,  wrath,  anger,  clamour,  and  evil-speaking.  Similarly 
with  St.  Peter.  If  there  is  any  place  in  which  he  declares  the  precious  truths  of 
the  gospel  in  terms  fuU  of  consolation  and  good  hope,  it  is  in  the  first  chapter  of 
his  Epistle ;  but,  so  far  from  thinking  that  all  this  would  do  its  own  work,  he  tells 
them  at  the  beginning  of  the  very  next  chapter  to  lay  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile, 
and  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all  evil-speakings.  But  what  is  "  loving  one 
another"?  Why,  according  to  St.  Paul,  the  apostle  of  justification,  it  is  keeping 
the  last  six  commandments  (Rom.  xiii.  8).  And  in  the  next  chapter  he  reckons 
working  ill  to  our  neighbour's  soul,  as  well  as  to  his  body,  as  a  breach  of  love.  But 
what,  according  to  St.  John,  is  "  loving  one  another  "  ?  This  is  His  commandment, 
that  ye  believe  in  all  the  power  and  grace  that  is  contained  in  the  name  of  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ,  and  seek  out,  visit,  relieve,  and  comfort  your  sick  and  needy  fellow- 
Christians.  This  is  His  commandment,  that  ye  believe  in  the  name  of  the  only- 
begotten  Son  of  God,  and  be  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another,  in  honour  preferring 
one  another.  This  is  His  commandment,  that  ye  believe  in  the  name  of  Him  who 
saves  His  people  from  their  sins,  and  put  away  from  you  all  bitterness,  and  wrath, 
and  anger,  and  clamour,  and  evil-speaking,  and  all  malice.  This  is  His  command- 
ment, that  ye  believe  in  the  name  of  Him  who  was  anointed  by  God  to  be  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour,  and  covet  earnestly  that  best  gift  of  a  charity  that  suffereth  long,  is 
kind,  &c.  (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  Faith  a  work  : — I.  The  word  "  believe,"  which 
enters  this  Epistle  for  the  first  time  at  this  point,  is  one  of  the  royal  words  of  the 
New  Testament.  It  contains  three  ideas.  1.  First  there  is  knowledge.  That 
which  you  believe  must  first  announce  itself  as  a  fact  to  your  intellect.  It  must 
enter  the  crystal  chamber  of  consciousness.  2.  Then  follows  assent.  That  is  the 
answer  of  your  mind  to  the  claims  made  upon  it  by  the  fact.  3.  Then  comes  the 
last  and  most  important  of  all,  viz.,  trust.  You  say  to  yourself,  "  This  is  truth — 
this  will  bear,"  and  you  put  your  whole  weight  upon  it.  II.  But  what  is  to  be  donb 
WITH  IT  ?  To  what  shall  a  man  attach  himself  by  means  of  this  threefold  cord  ? 
The  object  around  which  we  are  bid  throw  our  faith  is  no  series  of  propositions — 
not  any  Church — not  even  the  Bible  as  a  whole,  but  the  full  name  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  full  title  of  Christ,  as  given  here,  gathers  up  into  itself  every  ray  of  spiritual 
truth  diffused  through  the  whole  Bible.  "His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  Say  that 
seriously,  simply,  honestly,  without  qualification  or  reserve,  and  you  have  repeated 
the  fuU  Christian  creed.  That  name  is  the  gospel.  III.  This  is  God's  command- 
ment. Note  that  well.  Faith  is  set  before  us  as  a  duty,  as  a  work.  Now,  if  God 
commands  us  to  believe,  then  surely  belief  is  something  that  is  possible  to  us  all. 
We  cannot  imagine  God  commanding  the  impossible.  Then,  too,  unbelief  is  a  sin.  It 
is  positive  disobedience.  And  further,  St.  John  says  that  belief  in  Christ  is  not  simply 
a  commandment,  but  that  it  is  the  commandment.    Faith  working  by  love  is  the 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  JOHN.  289 

spiritual  unity  of  all  commandments,  and  unbelief  is  therefore  the  root  of  all  sins. 
IV.  Now,  HOW  FAR  HAVE  WE  THE  POWER  TO  BELIEVE  IN  Christ  ?  To  what  extent  is 
faith  subject  to  our  will?  It  is  worth  while  finding  this  out,  for  the  measure  of  our 
power  to  believe  will  be  the  measure  of  our  sin  and  of  our  punishment  if  we 
disbelieve.  1.  If  we  look  into  the  Bible  we  shaU  find  two  sets  of  texts.  One  set 
ascribes  the  whole  work  of  redemption  to  God — faith,  repentance,  love,  holiness,  are 
all  declared  to  be  gifts  of  God.  Another  whole  class  of  texts  describes  repentance, 
faith,  purification,  and  love  as  acts  which  each  man  ought  to,  and  therefore  can 
perform  himself.  2.  Again,  in  the  teaching  of  the  Church  we  have  two  opposite 
camps  of  opinion  on  this  matter.  Augustine  held  very  strong  views  on  this  point. 
He  taught  that  when  Adam  fell  he  lost  his  freedom  of  will ;  the  will  sank  into  a 
state  of  infirmity,  in  which  it  had  no  power  of  choice  at  aU  between  good  and  evil — 
only  the  power  of  always  choosing  the  wrong ;  and  through  his  sin  aU  his  successors 
feU  into  the  same  state  of  bondage.  In  fact,  as  one  said,  he  taught  that  in  the  fall 
of  man  one  whole  piece  of  human  nature  had  fallen  out !  But  out  of  this  mass  of 
mutilated  humanity  God  has  elected  a  number  to  be  saved.  These  must  be  saved. 
God's  grace  overpowers  them,  and  they  are  saved  by  a  fiat  of  the  Almighty  Will. 
As  to  the  others,  they  must  be  lost — they  are  reprobate.  Pelagius  held  very  strong 
views  on  the  subject  of  our  text.  "  AU  men,"  he  said,  "  are  as  free  to  choose  as 
Adam  was.  The  will  is  not  impaired,  and  can  of  itself,  at  any  moment,  free  itself 
from  sin."  Man  stands  at  the  parting  of  the  ways,  and  he  has  full  power  to  choose 
either.  Man — man's  own  power,  is  the  note  that  is  heard  sounding  aU  through  his 
teaching.  Grace  scarcely  appears  at  aU.  Thus,  while  the  one  almost  did  away 
with  the  free  will  of  man,  the  other  almost  did  away  with  the  grace  of  God.  And 
these  two  men  divided  the  Christian  world  into  opposing  factions.  The  majority 
followed  Augustine,  though  many  too  followed  Pelagius.  And  so  from  age  to  age 
the  pendulum  of  opinion  swung  from  extreme  to  extreme.  3.  Neither  of  these 
views  is  right.  The  first  libels  both  God  and  man.  It  represents  God  as  partial 
and  arbitrary.  It  reduces  man  to  a  poor  puppet  of  destiny.  It  robs  religion  of 
morality  and  deprives  heaven  of  holiness.  It  takes  away  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  lifts 
the  blame  of  hell  from  the  souls  of  men  and  lays  it  at  the  feet  of  God.  Equally 
distant  from  the  New  Testament  truth  is  the  other  view.  It  renders  the  best  half 
of  Scripture  meaningless,  and  the  whole  mediatorial  work  of  Christ  needless.  It 
peoples  the  earth  with  an  imaginary  race  of  moral  giants,  each  of  whom  is  sufficient 
in  himself,  and  fills  heaven  with  a  multitude  of  self-saved  souls.  4.  But  while  the 
many  thus  swung  from  one  extreme  to  another,  there  have  always  been  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  a  party  of  common-sense  men,  able,  hke  Melancthon,  to  combine 
the  two  sets  of  texts,  and  to  see  that  they  are  not  contradictions — only  the  two  opposite 
poles  of  one  great  truth.  Salvation,  they  teach,  is  a  work  of  God's  grace,  in  which 
each  man  is  required  and  enabled  to  take  an  active  part.  Mankind  is  a  fallen  race, 
but  not  an  abandoned  race.  Man  carmot  save  himself,  yet  God's  preparing  grace 
has  kept  alive  in  each  man  enough  of  moral  life  to  respond  to  the  offer  of  Christ, 
a  something  living  in  each  man  to  which  the  Christ  can  make  His  appeal.  So  men 
are  utterly  unable  to  save  themselves.  But  they  are  not  literaUy  Lfeless  like  a 
stone  or  stick.  Faith  is  pre-eminently  a  matter  of  wiU.  The  text  does  not  say, 
"  Believe  this  doctrine  or  that,"  but "  Trust  yourselves  in  Christ's  hands — trust  Christ 
as  your  Saviour."     (J.  M.  Gibbon.) 

Yer.  24.  And  he  that  keepeth  His  commandments  dwelleth  in  Him,  and  He  in 
him.  And  hereby  we  know  that  He  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath 
given  UB. — Our  abiding  in  God  by  obedience : — 1.  In  the  keeping  of  God's  com- 
mandments there  is  this  great  reward,  that  he  that  doeth  so  "  dwelleth  in  God,  and 
God  in  him."  If  this  mutual  indwelling  is  not  to  be  mere  absorption,  which  some 
dreamers  in  John's  day  held  it  to  be ;  if  it  is  not  to  be  the  swallowing  up  of  our 
conscious  individual  personaUty  in  the  infinite  mind  or  intelligence  of  God ;  if  it  is 
to  conserve  the  distinct  relationship  of  God  to  man,  the  Creator  to  the  creature,  the 
Ruler  to  the  subject,  the  Father  to  the  child ;  it  must  be  reaUsed  and  must  develop 
itseK,  or  act  itself  out,  through  the  means  of  authority  or  law  on  the  one  side,  and 
obedience  or  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  on  the  other.  It  is,  in  fact,  the 
very  consummation  and  crown  of  man's  old,  original  relation  to  God — as  that 
relation  is  not  only  restored,  but  perfected  and  gloriously  fulfilled,  in  the  new 
economy  of  grace.  2.  The  manner  of  God's  abiding  in  us,  or  at  least  the  way  in 
which  we  may  know  that  He  abides  in  us,  is  specified: — "  Hereby  we  know  that  He 
abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath  given  us."     We  are  to  distinguish  here 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

between  our  dwelling  in  God  and  His  dwelling  in  us.  Our  dwelling  in  God  is  to  be 
known  by  our  "  keeping  His  commandments  "  ;  God's  dwelling  in  us,  by  "  the  Spirit 
which  He  giveth  us."  And  yet,  the  two  means  of  knowledge  are  not  far  apart. 
They  are  not  only  strictly  consistent  with  one  another ;  they  really  come  together  in 
one  point.  For  the  Spirit  is  here  said  to  be  given  to  us — not  in  order  to  our  knowing 
that  God  abideth  in  us,  in  the  sense  of  His  opening  our  spiritual  eye  and  quickening 
our  spiritual  apprehension — but  rather  as  the  medium  of  our  knowing  it,  the 
evidence  or  proof  by  which  we  know  it.  And  how  are  we  to  recognise  the  Spirit  as 
given  to  us  ?  How  otherwise  than  by  recognising  the  fruit  of  the  gift?  The  Spirit 
given  to  us  is,  as  to  His  movement  or  operation,  unseen  and  unfelt.  But  the  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  is  palpable  and  patent.  "  It  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentle- 
ness, goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance."  For  "  against  such  there  is  no  law  " 
(Gal.  V.  22,  23).  3.  From  aU  this  it  follows  that  the  counsel  or  warning,  "BeUeve 
not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God  "  (chap.  iv.  1),  is  as  needful 
for  us  as  it  was  for  those  to  whom  John  wrote.  We  may  think  that  it  is  the  Spirit 
of  God  whom  we  are  receiving  into  our  hearts  and  cherishing  there,  when  it  may 
really  be  another  spirit  altogether — one  of  the  many  spirits  inspiring  the  "  many  false 
prophets  that  are  gone  out  into  the  world."  Therefore  we  must  "try  the  spirits." 
(R.  S.  Camdlish,  D.D.)  Of  the  manner  and  importance  of  the  Spirit^ sindivelling  : — 
I.  What  the  giving  of  the  Spirit  imports  akd  signifies.  Tha  Spirit  of  God  is  said 
to  come  upon  men  in  a  transient  way,  for  their  present  assistance  in  some  particular 
service,  though  in  themselves  they  be  unsanctified  persons.  Thus  the  Spirit  of  God 
came  upon  Balaam  (Numb.  xxiv.  2),  enabling  him  to  prophesy  of  things  to  come. 
But  whatever  gifts  He  gives  to  others.  He  is  said  to  be  given,  to  dwell,  and  to  abide 
only  in  believers  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).  An  expression  denoting  both  His  special  propriety 
in  them,  and  gracious  familiarity  with  them.  There  is  a  great  diflference  betwixt 
the  assisting  and  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit;  the  one  is  transient,  the  other 
permanent.     H.  How  this  giving  of  the  Spirit  evidently  proves  and  strongly 

CONCLUDES  that  SOUL's  INTEREST   IN  ChRIST   UNTO  WHOM  He  IS  GIVEN.       1.    The  Spirit 

of  God  in  beUevers  is  the  very  bond  by  which  they  are  united  unto  Christ.  If,  there- 
fore, we  find  in  ourselves  the  bond  of  union,  we  may  warrantably  conclude  that  we 
have  union  with  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  Scripture  everywhere  makes  this  giving,  or 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  the  great  mark  and  trial  of  our  interest  in  Christ ;  con- 
cluding from  the  presence  of  it  in  us,  positively,  as  in  the  text ;  and  from  the 
absence  of  it,  negatively,  as  in  Eom.  viii.  3.  That  which  is  a  certain  mark  of  our 
freedom  from  the  covenant  of  works,  and  our  title  to  the  privileges  of  the  covenant 
or  grace,  must  needs  also  infer  our  union  with  Christ  and  special  interest  in  Him ; 
but  the  giving  or  indwelling  of  the  sanctifying  Spirit  in  us  is  a  certain  mark  of  our 
freedom  from  the  first  covenant,  under  which  all  Christless  persons  stiU  stand,  and 
our  title  to  the  special  privileges  of  the  second  covenant,  in  which  none  but  the 
members  are  interested ;  and,  consequently,  it  fully  proves  our  union  with  the  Lord 
Jesus.  4.  If  the  eternal  decree  of  God's  electing  love  be  executed,  and  the  virtues 
and  benefits  of  the  death  of  Christ  applied  by  the  Spirit  unto  every  soul  in  whom 
He  dwelleth,  as  a  spirit  of  santification,  then  such  a  giving  of  the  Spirit  unto  us 
must  needs  be  a  certain  mark  and  proof  of  our  special  interest  in  Chiist ;  but  the 
decree  of  God's  electing  love  is  executed,  and  the  benefits  of  the  blood  of  Christ 
are  applied  to  every  soul  in  whom  He  dwelleth,  as  a  spirit  sanctification.  This  is 
plain  from  1  Pet.  i.  2.  5.  The  giving  of  the  Spirit  to  us,  or  His  residing  in  us,  as  a 
Banctifying  Spirit,  is  everywhere  in  Scripture  made  the  pledge  and  earnest  of  eternal 
ealvation,  and  consequently  must  abundantly  confirm  and  prove  the  soul's  interest 
in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  13,  14).  Uses  :  I  shall  lay  down  some  general  rules  for  the  due 
information  of  our  minds  in  this  point,  upon  which  so  much  depends.  (1)  Though 
the  Spirit  of  God  be  given  to  us,  and  worketh  in  us,  yet  He  worketh  not  as  a  natural 
and  necessary,  but  as  a  free  and  arbitrary  agent :  He  neither  assists  nor  sanctifies, 
as  the  fire  burneth,  as  much  as  He  can  assist  and  sanctify,  but  as  much  as  He 
pleaseth ;  "  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  He  will"  (1  Cor.  xii.  11).  (2)  There 
is  a  great  difference  in  the  manner  of  the  Spirit's  working  before  and  after  the  work 
of  regeneration.  Whilst  we  are  unregenerate  He  works  upon  us  as  upon  dead 
creatures  that  work  not  at  all  with  Him  ;  and  what  motion  there  is  in  our  souls  is 
a  counter  motion  to  the  Spirit ;  but  after  regeneration  it  is  not  so.  He  then  works 
upon  a  complying  and  willing  mind ;  we  work,  and  He  assists  (Eom.  viii.  26). 
(3)  Though  the  Spirit  of  God  be  given  to  believers,  and  worketh  in  them  yet 
believers  themselves  may  do  or  omit  such  things  as  may  obstruct  the  working  and 
obscure  the  very  being  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  them.      (4)  Those  things  which  difl- 


CHAP,  ni.]  I.  JOHN.  291 

cover  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  in  believers  are  not  so  much  the  matter  of  their 
duties,  or  substance  of  their  actions,  as  the  more  secret  springs,  holy  aims,  and 
spiritual  maimer  of  their  doing  or  performing  of  them.  (5)  All  the  motions  and 
operations  of  the  spirit  are  always  harmonious,  and  suitable  to  the  written  Word. 
(Isa.  viii.  20).  (6)  Although  the  works  of  the  Spirit,  in  all  sanctified  persons,  do 
substantially  agree,  both  with  the  written  Word  and  with  one  another,  yet  as  to 
the  manner  of  infusion  and  operation  there  are  found  many  circmnstantial 
differences.  (7)  There  is  a  great  difference  found  betwixt  the  sanctifying  and  the 
comforting  influences  of  the  Spirit  upon  beUevers,  in  respect  of  constancy  and 
permanency.  Evidence  1.  In  whomsoever  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  a  Spirit  of  sanctifi- 
cation,  to  that  man  or  women  He  hath  been,  more  or  less,  a  Spirit  of  conviction 
and  humUiation.  Evidence  2.  As  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  been  a  convincing,  so  He 
is  a  quickening  Spirit,  to  all  those  to  whom  He  is  given  (Eom.  viii.  2).  Evidence  3. 
Those  to  whom  God  giveth  His  Spirit  have  a  tender  syrnpathy  with  all  the  interests 
and  concernments  of  Christ.  Evidence  4.  Wherever  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth, 
He  doth  in  some  degree  mortify  and  subdue  the  evUs  and  corruptions  of  the  soul 
in  which  He  resides.  Evidence  5.  Wherever  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  the  way 
of  sanctification,  in  all  such  He  is  the  Spirit  of  prayer  and  supplication  (Eom. 
viii.  26).  Evidence  6.  Wherever  the  Spirit  of  grace  iniiabits,  there  is  an  heavenly, 
spiritual  frame  of  mind  accompanying  and  evidencing  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit 
(Eom.  viii.  5,  6).  Evidence  7.  Those  to  whom  the  Spirit  of  grace  is  given  are  led 
by  the  Spirit.  Sanctified  souls  give  themselves  up  to  the  government  and  conduct 
of  the  Spirit ;  they  obey  His  voice,  beg  His  direction,  follow  His  motions,  deny  the 
soUcitations  of  the  flesh  and  blood,  in  obedience  to  Him  (Gal.  i.  16).  And  they 
that  do  so,  they  are  the  sons  of  God.  {John  Flavel.)  The  ind%velling  of  God : — 
I.  The  pkivilege.  It  is  the  indwelling  of  God  in  the  soul — His  "  abiding  in  us." 
The  sentiment  is  not  pecuhar  to  John,  but  the  frequency  of  it  is.  Let  us  look  at 
this  "  abiding."  There  was  a  time  when  the  persons  here  referred  to  were  without 
God  in  the  world ;  when  another  being  had  possession  of  them — "  the  prince  of  the 
power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience."  But 
God  hath  deUvered  them  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and  translated  them  into  the 
kingdom  of  His  dear  Son.  God  has  entered,  and  taken  possession  of  the  heart. 
Perhaps,  too,  after  the  parent  had  pleaded  to  no  purpose ;  perhaps  after  the 
minister  had  long  laboured  for  nought ;  perhaps  after  he  had  been  wooed  and  awed, 
blest  and  chastised,  in  vain.  Then,  God  says,  "  I  will  work,  and  who  shaU  let  it?  " 
His  abiding  in  us  supposes  not  only  entrance,  but  continuance.  But  how  does  He 
abide  in  them  ?  If  I  should  answer  this  question  negatively,  I  should  say,  not 
personally,  as  it  was  in  the  Eedeemer  Himself.  "  In  Him,"  says  the  apostle, 
"  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me,"  said 
He,  "  hath  seen  the  Father."  Nor  does  He  abide  in  them  essentially.  Thus  indeed 
He  is  in  them,  as  to  the  perfection  of  His  nature,  as  to  His  Omnipresence,  as  to  the 
presence  by  which  He  fiUs  heaven  and  earth ;  but  when  His  presence  is  spoken  of 
by  the  way  of  providence  or  privilege,  it  intends  some  peculiar  regard.  "  The  Lord 
is  nigh  unto  all  those  who  are  of  a  broken  heart ;  and  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  contrite 
spirit."  But  if  I  am  required  to  answer  this  question  positively,  I  should  say,  first, 
objectively.  He  dwells  in  His  people  by  a  real  union ;  a  gracious  union ;  by  a  spiritual 
operative  influence  in  all  the  powers  of  their  souls.  Thus  He  dwells  in  them  as 
water  in  a  well,  our  Saviour's  own  image.  "  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall 
be  in  him,  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  He  dwells  in  them  as 
the  sap  in  the  tree,  sustaining  its  life  and  producing  fertility.  He  dwells  in  them  aa 
the  soul  dwells  in  the  body,  enhvening  every  limb  and  pervading  every  part.  Can 
you  explain  this  ?  Why  the  doctrine  of  union  is  one  of  the  hardest  chapters  in  all 
natural  philosophy  ?  First,  explain  to  me  how  the  soul  is  in  the  body ;  the  spirit, 
without  parts,  combining  with  matter  and  coalescing  with  substance ;  explain  first, 
how  God  is  in  the  highest  heavens,  and  is  also  about  our  path,  and  about  our  bed, 
and  spying  out  all  our  ways,  words,  and  thoughts.  U.  How  it  is  to  be  ascertained. 
The  apostle  says,  "We  know  that  He  abideth  in  us  by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath 
given  us."  Now,  what  was  the  Spirit  God  had  given  to  them?  Not  the  Spirit  of 
miraculous  agency.  No,  but  the  Spirit  which  we  call  the  common  influences  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  We  call  it  "  common,"  not  because  all  men  have  it,  but  because  all 
Christians  have  it ;  and  all  Chi-istians  will  experience  it  to  the  very  end  of  time. 
But  as  the  thing  exemplified  should  always  be  plainer  than  the  thing  proved,  let  us 
inquire  what  manner  of  spirit  that  is  which  evinces  the  privilege  of  union  with  God? 
•'  We  know  that  He  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath  given  us."     I  am 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

aware  the  Spirit  is  said  to  anoint  us ;  He  is  said  to  seal  us  to  the  day  of  redemption ; 
and  to  bear  witness  with  our  spirits,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  But  this  is 
not  done  by  the  sounds  in  the  air,  and  by  sudden  impulses  in  the  mind,  but  by  His 
residing  in  us.  Our  having  this  Spirit  is  the  anointing ;  our  having  this  Spirit  is 
the  sealing;  and  our  having  it  is  the  witness.  This  Spirit  is  known  by  five  attributes. 
1.  It  is  the  Spirit  of  conviction;  and  the  process  is  generally  this: — He  first  con- 
vinces of  the  guilt  of  sin  ;  then  of  its  pollution  ;  and  then  awakens  in  us  a  sense  of 
its  abhorrence  ;  causing  us  to  repent  before  God  as  in  dust  and  ashes.  2.  It  is  the 
Spirit  of  faith.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  puts  the  man  into  the  position  of  looking  to 
Christ,  and  of  coming  to  Christ,  and  of  dealing  with  Christ,  concerning  all  the 
affairs  of  the  soul  and  eternity.  "  When  He  is  come,"  says  the  Saviour,  "  He  shall 
glorify  me."  3.  It  is  the  Spirit  of  grace.  It  is  expressly  called  the  Spirit  of  grace 
and  of  supplication,  which  was  to  be  poured  upon  the  house  of  David  and  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  4.  It  is  a  Spirit  of  sanctification.  Hence,  He  is  so 
often  called  "  the  Holy  Spirit,"  and  in  one  place,  "the  Spirit  of  holiness."  5.  It  is 
the  Spirit  of  affection.  We  read  therefore  of  "the  Spirit  of  love."  "  He  that  loveth 
Him  that  begat,"  says  John,  "  loveth  Him  also  that  is  begotten  of  Him."  And,  says  the 
Saviour,  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one 
to  another."  III.  The  usefulness  of  this  subject.  1.  The  subject  is  useful  to 
induce  us  to  adore  the  condescension  of  God.  David  was  struck  with  this  ;  he  was 
astonished  that  God  should  "  try  "  man  and  "  visit  "  him.  Solomon  was  still  more 
struck  with  His  dwelling  with  man,  "  Will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  man  upon 
earth  ?  "  But  John  goes  further  than  this,  and  speaks  of  God  as  not  only  visiting 
man,  as  not  only  dwelling  with  man,  but  of  His  abiding  in  him !  "  Who  is  a  God 
like  unto  Thee?"  2.  This  subject  is  useful,  also,  as  it  reproves  those  who  think 
there  is  nothing  in  religion  connected  with  certainty.  There  are  marks  enough,  if 
you  are  in  the  way  everlasting,  to  show  that  you  are  not  in  a  mistaken  direction, 
but  in  a  right  road.  3.  This  subject  is  useful  also,  as  it  censures  those  who  seek  to 
determine  their  religious  state  by  any  other  standard  than  that  which  is  Divine. 
"  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  4.  Then  this 
subject  is  useful  to  comfort  those  who  are  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They 
should  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always.  5.  Lastly,  let  us  turn  the  medal,  and  then  we 
shall  see  the  subject  is  useful  to  alarm  those  who,  as  the  apostle  terms  it,  are 
sensual,  not  having  the  Spirit  of  God  in  you.  Have  you  the  Spirit  ? — the  spirit  of 
prayer,  and  the  spirit  of  love,  and  the  spirit  of  meekness  ?  Bather,  have  you  not  & 
proud  spirit?  an  ungrateful  spirit?  a  careless  spirit?  a  revengeful  spirit?  or  a 
covetous  spirit?  "  This  spirit  cometh  not  from  Him  that  calleth  you."  And  if  you 
have  nothhig  better  to  actuate  you  than  this,  you  are  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and 
in  the  bond  of  iniquity.  {W.  Jay.)  The  abiding  witness  : — Some  persons  crave  for 
Christian  assurance  under  a  mistaken  apprehension  of  its  nature.  They  seem  to 
regard  it  as  something  over  and  above  the  ordinary  processes  of  grace.  The  assurance 
of  faith  is  simply  an  exalted  and  confirmed  faith,  and  rests  therefore  on  the  promises 
which  are  the  common  foundation  of  all  faith.  There  are  persons,  on  the  other 
hand,  who  shrink  from  the  name  of  assurance,  and  repudiate  the  thing  as  if  it  were 
arrogant  and  presumptuous.  If  our  salvation  were  our  own  work,  or  if  it  were  half 
our  own  work  and  half  God's  work  ;  if  our  own  wisdom,  strength,  or  righteousness 
had  anything  whatever  to  do  with  the  meritorious  grounds  of  our  acceptance,  the 
scruple  would  be  a  just  one.  But  the  work  is  altogether  God's  work.  Hence  to 
doubt  the  f  uU  completion  of  the  work  is  to  doubt  God,  not  ourselves.    I.  The  dignity, 

NOT    ONLY   OF   THE    STATE    OF  THE    SAINT,  BUT   ALSO    OF    THE    EVIDENCE    BY  WHICH    HE   IS 

ASSURED  OF  IT.  This  statc  consists  in  the  abiding  presence  of  God ;  and  this  not 
only  above  us  and  around  us,  but  in  us.  He  who  is  Omnipotent,  Omniscient, 
Omnipresent — the  Creator  who  called  this  world  into  being — the  Preserver,  who 
maintains  it  in  being — the  King  who  rules  and  governs  us — the  Judge  before  whose 
tremendous  throne  we  shall  hereafter  stand  to  give  an  account  of  the  things  we  have 
done  in  the  body — that  God  who  is  Indivisible,  but  is  everywhere  at  once,  the  whole 
Deity  with  power  and  wisdom,  majesty  and  truth,  with  every  attribute  and  glory 
complete — He,  He  Himself,  dwells  within  the  saints.  He  dwells — not  flashing  a  ray 
of  His  glory  now  and  then,  breaking  the  natural  darkness  of  the  soul  for  a  moment, 
and  then  leaving  it  again  darker  than  before,  but  abiding  there,  dwelling — like  the 
Bun  in  the  heavens,  with  His  beams  hidden,  it  may  be,  sometimes  with  earthly 
clouds  and  mists,  but  like  the  sun  behind  the  clouds  filling  the  soul,  as  in  ancient 
times  He  filled  the  material  temple,  with  the  glory  of  His  presence.  Yet  let  us  take 
care    not  to  mistake    this    matter.      The    cleansing    blood  of  Christ  must   be 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  293 

sprinkled  upon  us,  and  in  that  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  must  we 
be  washed  from  the  guilt  of  sin  ;  the  quickening  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  must  have 
descended  upon  us,  dispelled  the  darkness,  broken  down  the  strength  and  taken 
away  the  love  of  sin,  before  this  state  can  be  ours.  But  even  when  this  is  done,  the 
motions  of  sin  still  remain.  Sanctification  is  so  imperfect  here  below,  our  strongest 
faith  so  feeble,  our  brightest  hope  so  dim,  our  most  fervent  love  so  cold  and  selfish, 
our  waywardnesses  and  inconsistencies  so  many,  that  it  is  wonderful  that  God  should 
dwell  within  such  hearts.     Yet,  child  of  God,  it  is  the  sober,  literal  fact.     II.  With 

THIS  DIGNITY  WE  MUST  COMBINE  THE  DEFINITE  CLEARNESS  OF  THE  TEST,  WHICH 
PROVES   OUR    POSSESSION    OF     IT,    FOR    WE    MIGHT     OTHERWISE    FIND    GREAT   DIFFICULTT. 

"  Hereby  we  know  " — by  what  ?  The  word  "  hereby  "  is  not  to  be  thrown  forward 
as  a  mere  synonym  for  the  words  "  by  the  Spirit  whom  He  hath  given  us  "  ;  but  it 
is  to  be  thrown  back  to  the  words,  "  He  that  keepeth  His  commandments."  Hereby — 
namely,  by  keeping  His  commandments — we  know.  We  have  great  cause  to  bless 
God  for  thus  resting  our  hopes  on  our  obedience,  which  every  honest  mind  can  see 
and  recognise.  The  lesson  draws  close  and  indissoluble  the  connection  between 
faith  and  holiness,  the  heart  and  the  life,  the  religion  and  the  character  and 
conduct.  It  makes  Christianity  to  be  a  real  practical  working  power.  Step  by  step, 
link  by  link,  assurance  of  faith  and  hope  is  inseparably  united  to  practical  holiness 
of  life.  Yet  there  are  one  or  two  cautions  to  be  borne  in  mind.  The  obedience 
which  is  the  proof  of  the  Spirit's  presence  is  not  a  holiness  finished  or  perfect;  other- 
wise it  would  belong  to  none  of  us  on  this  side  heaven  ;  it  would  be  a  hope  of  the 
future,  not  a  blessing  of  the  present.  It  is  not  a  finished  hohness,  but  only  a 
holiness  begun.  The  will  is  like  a  river  which  here  and  there  beneath  an  over- 
hanging bank  may  seem  to  stand  still,  and  here  and  there  in  some  narrow  bay  may 
seem  to  retrograde,  but  which  in  its  main  current  still  sets  slowly,  but  surely,  towards 
the  ocean.  It  is,  further,  a  holiness  not  complete,  but  progressive.  Every  day 
brings  its  struggle,  but  brings  likewise  its  victory.  Further  yet,  this  Christian 
obedience  is  not  partial.     Christian  obedience  accepts  and  follows  the  whole  law. 

III.     The      INFINITE      BLESSEDNESS      BOTH      OF      THE      STATE     AND      OF      THE     EVIDENCE. 

If  Christian  obedience  were  an  outward  and  compulsory  thing,  bringing  by  mere  force 
the  unwilling  heart  into  subjection  to  the  letter  of  a  law,  it  would  be  painful.  But 
it  is  not  this.  It  is  a  willing,  loving,  generous  thing.  It  is  a  law  working  from 
within  the  soul  itself,  not  a  compulsion  from  the  outside.  It  is  not  like  a  stream  of 
water  thrown  from  without  upon  us,  but  like  a  living  fountain  springing  up  within 
us — "  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  And  why  is  it  this,  but 
because  it  is  the  Spirit's  work,  and  because  God  abideth  in  us  ?  Is  there  not  always 
joy  in  life  ?  Is  there  not  joy  in  nature's  life,  as,  bursting  the  chains  of  death-Uke 
winter,  happy  creation  breaks  into  beauty,  and  flowers  and  fruits  and  trees  and 
birds  sing  together  ?  Is  there  not  joy  in  human  life  when,  fresh  and  sweet  as  a 
spring  flower,  the  buoyant  child  laughs,  and  sings,  and  plays  ?  Is  there  not  joy  in 
the  sense  of  life,  and  only  so  far  pain  in  it  as  the  mortality  of  a  fallen  nature 
interrupts  it  with  the  seeds  of  decay,  and  clouds  it  with  the  shadows  of  death  ?  And 
is  there  not  joy  in  the  life  of  the  soul,  §ince  it  is  the  very  life  of  God  fresh  from  the 
indweUing  Deity,  as  if  He  became  a  part  of  ourselves  and  filled  us  with  His  glory  ? 
(Canon  Garbett.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vers.  1-3.  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they 
are  of  God. — The  test  of  truth — confessing  Christ : — In  the  Word  of  God  we  are 
warned  against  sitting  in  judgment  on  others.  Especially  are  we  enjoined  not  to 
cultivate  a  censorious  and  uncharitable  spirit.  But  in  the  text  Christians  seem 
to  be  enjoined  to  exercise  their  powers  of  judgment  and  discrimination  in  another 
way.  They  are  called  upon  to  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God.  To  try  a 
spirit  is  not  to  try  an  individual ;  it  is  not  to  try  even  a  community  of  men ;  rather 
is  it  to  put  to  the  test  of  enlightened  reason  some  principle  they  follow  as  true, 
some  institution  they  uphold  as  right.  I.  The  scientific  false  prophet  ;  or  anti- 
Christ  in  the  schools,  especially  in  connection  with  the  study  and  interpretation  of 
nature.     There  are  three  points  in  the  scientific  world  that  appear  to  be  prominent. 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I7. 

These  points  are — first,  that  our  highest  business  here  is  to  study  nature — that 
nature  at  least  in  relation  to  this  present  life  is  supreme ;  second,  that  natural  or 
physical  law  is  absolutely  uniform  or  unbending,  and  has  been  so  since  the  creation 
of  the  universe ;  third,  that  the  human  race  is  to  be  elevated,  regenerated,  or  truly 
developed  from  the  basis  of  nature,  and  in  accordance  merely  with  natural  laws. 
Now,  if  it  really  were  so,  we  can  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  position  and 
claims  of  the  Christian  religion  are  quite  incompatible  with  it.  If  the  dream  of 
Buch  thinkers  were  destined  to  be  realised,  Christianity  must  slowly  fade  from  the 
earth,  with  other  superstitions.  It  is  only  too  evident  what  the  spirit  and  hope  of 
such  systems  is.  Take  the  first  position — that  nature  or  the  visible  material  scene 
around  us  is  the  supreme  influence  and  power  in  relation  to  our  life  upon  the  earth. 
That  involves  the  denial  of  a  Divine  revelation.  Take  the  second  position — that  for 
incalculable  ages  Nature  has  been  undeviating  in  her  course.  That  law  maintains 
its  slow,  grand  march  through  millions  of  years,  without  deviation,  acceleration,  or 
interruption.  That  may  be  thought  a  grand  idea  ;  but  as  it  is  advanced  in  certain 
systems,  it  is  not  a  true  one ;  for  it  is  a  shutting  out  of  the  miraculous  altogether. 
Take  the  third  position — that  man  is  saved  by  obedience  to  natural  law,  and  that  the 
human  race  will  be  elevated  and  ennobled  only  as  men  study  the  laws  of  nature, 
and  conform  themselves  to  them.  That  is  a  doctrine  put  forth  by  some.  It  looks 
■with  a  sinister  and  disparaging  eye  on  Christianity  and  the  Church.  It  does  not 
hesitate  sometimes  to  say  that  all  religions  have  been  a  misfortune  to  the  world. 
When  the  plague  comes  this  spu-it  declares  that  prayer  is  useless,  and  that  the  only 
thing  that  can  save  us  is  to  perfect  our  sanitary  arrangements.  This  is  a  spirit  of 
antichrist,  for  it  is  the  denial  of  a  moral  government  in  the  Scriptural  sense  of  the 
word.  II.  The  secular  false  pkophet  ;  or  antichrist  in  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world.  In  as  far  as  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  necessary  to  maintain  order,  to 
suppress  violence,  and  repel  invasion,  they  are  the  ordinance  of  God,  but  in  so  far 
as  they  perpetuate  injustice  and  wrong,  of  course  they  cannot  be  of  God ;  they  are 
babels  and  antichrists,  standing  in  the  way  of  His  kingdom  who  has  the  absolute 
right  to  rule.  Now  it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  to  whom  the  light  of  the  gospel 
comes  to  become  a  subject  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  That  light  will  show  him  what 
is  wrong  in  existing  systems.  It  will  show  him  that  some  of  them  are  fundamentally 
wrong,  but  it  wiU  not  teach  him  to  remedy  that  wrong  by  violence  and  revolution. 
The  eternal  moral  principle  that  truth  and  justice  cannot  be  permanently  advanced 
by  mere  physical  force,  enters  into  the  foundation  of  Christ's  kingdom.  And  if  any 
one  asks.  How  then  are  we  to  hold  our  own  in  the  world  ?  the  only  answer  that  can 
be  given  is,  that  it  is  our  duty  to  do  as  Christ  did.  Because  God  lives  all  those  who 
have  faith  in  Him  will  Uve  also.  HI.  The  litebabt  false  prophet  ;  or  anti- 
Christ  in  the  world  of  letters.  This  is  a  time  of  great  thinkers,  great  writers, 
great  book-makers.  We  do  not  speak  of  individuals.  We  have  no  right  to  judge 
them ;  but  their  works  we  may  judge,  and  the  spirit  of  their  works  we  may  try 
•whether  it  is  of  God  or  no.  Now  we  know  that  some  of  the  greatest  works  in  the 
world  are  books  written  in  defence  of  Christianity ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  some 
writers  of  considerable  power  have  taken  up  positive  ground  against  Christianity 
and  have  sufficiently  shown  that  they  do  not  beUeve  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in 
the  flesh.  They  do  not  believe  in  Him  as  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  and  the  only 
Saviour  of  men.  Some  of  them  have  written  books  expressly  to  deny  this.  But 
this  is  not  so  much  what  the  text  suggests.  There  are  other  writers  of  great 
power  and  influence  in  both  hemispheres  of  the  world  who  occupy  rather  a 
negative  and  undefined  position  in  relation  to  Christ  and  Christianity.  They  have 
written  upon  almost  every  subject  of  human  thought — upon  government  and  the 
Church,  upon  history  and  biography,  upon  morals  and  destiny.  They  have  gone 
round  the  world  to  fiiid  heroes  and  representative  men,  and  have  said  many  true 
and  striking  things  about  them ;  but,  strange  to  say,  they  have  never  clearly 
informed  the  world  as  to  what  they  think  of  Christ.  They  are  unaccountably 
reticent  upon  a  subject  that  is  the  most  important  of  all.  IV.  The  religious 
TALSE  prophet;  or  antichrist  in  the  ecclesiastical  world.  The  antichrist  of  an 
atheistical,  political  system ;  of  a  poor,  blind,  hero-worship — the  worship  of  mere 
intellectual  ability  and  unfathomable  cunning;  and  the  antichrist  of  a  barren 
Protestantism  which  has  a  name  to  live  while  it  is  dead — such  forms  as  these 
are  little  better  than  the  Papacy.  V.  The  social  false  prophet;  or  antichrist 
in  the  work  of  everyday  life.  That  is  the  most  deadly  form  of  antichrist 
which  professes  great  respect  for  Christianity,  but  lives  in  continual  opposition 
to  its  principles ;  and  we  cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  a  great  amount 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  295 

of  the  Christian  profession  of  this  country  seems  little  more  than  a  mere  pro- 
fession. This  is  called  a  Christian  country,  but  look  at  the  woes  that  are 
festering  in  the  midst  of  us ;  think  of  the  rank  worldliness  and  heartlessness  that  is 
baptized  into  the  name  of  Christ.  Is  this  not  the  reason  why  prayer  seems 
unanswered,  and  troubles  are  thickening  upon  the  land?  {F.  Ferguson,  D.D.) 
Our  righteousness  exercised  in  trying  the  spirits;  the  test,  confessing  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh : — I.  It  properly  belongs  to  the  Spirit  to  "  confess  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh."  He  had  much  to  do  with  the  flesh  in  which 
Jesus  Christ  came.  He  prepared  for  Him  a  body  in  the  Virgin's  womb,  so  as  to 
secure  that  He  came  into  the  world  pure  and  sinless.  And  all  throughout  His 
sojourn  on  earth  the  Spirit  ministered  to  Him  as  "Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh"; 
He  could  not  minister  to  Him  otherwise.  It  is  the  flesh,  or  humanity,  of  Jesus 
Christ  that  brings  Him  within  the  range  of  the  Spirit's  gracious  care.  It  was  His 
human  experience  that  the  Spirit  animated  and  sustained ;  and  it  is  with  His 
human  experience  also  that  the  Spirit  deals  when  He  "  takes  of  what  is  Christ's 
and  shows  it  unto  us."  His  object  is  to  make  us  one  with  "  Jesus  Christ  as  come 
in  the  flesh."  That  practically  is  His  confession  to  us  and  in  us.  Let  us  see  what 
it  impUes.  1.  He  identifies  us  with  Jesus  Christ  in  His  humOiation.  In  our 
Divine  regeneration  He  brings  us  to  be  subject  to  the  authority  and  command- 
ments of  God — willingly  subject — our  nature  being  renewed  into  the  likeness  of  His. 
2.  The  Spirit  identifies  us  with  Jesus  Christ,  not  only  in  His  humiliation,  but  in  its 
conditions  and  liabilities.  His  coming  in  the  flesh  is  His  consenting  to  be  crucifled 
for  us  ;  the  Spirit  in  us  confessing  Him  as  come  in  the  flesh  makes  us  willing  to  be 
crucified  with  Him.  "  In  my  flesh  I  shaU  see  God  "  was  the  hope  of  the  patriarch 
Job.  It  is  made  sure  by  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh,  and  by  the  Spirit  confess- 
ing in  us  that  He  is  come.  11.  This  accordingly  is  the  secret  of  our  present 
victory  over  anti-Christian  spirits  and  men  :  "  Ye  are  of  God,  httle  children,  and 
have  overcome  them  "  (ver.  4).  1.  The  victory  is  a  real  victory  got  over  the  false 
prophets  or  teachers,  who  are  not  of  God,  whom  the  spirit  of  antichrist  inspires. 
And  it  is  a  victory  over  them  personally ;  not  over  their  doctrines  and  principles 
merely,  but  over  themselves — "  ye  have  overcome  them."  It  is  the  actual  "  coming 
of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  flesh,"  and  His  actual  accomplishment,  in  the  flesh,  of  all  that 
in  the  flesh  He  came  for,  that  they  resent  and  resist.  It  is  that  which  Satan,  the 
original  spirit  of  antichrist,  would  fain  have  set  himself  to  hinder  ;  moving  Herod  to 
slay  Jesus  in  His  ehUdhood,  and  Judas  to  betray  Him  in  his  manhood ;  tempting 
Jesus  to  make  shipwreck  of  His  integrity.  And  it  is  your  actual  personal  participa- 
tion with  Him,  as  "  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh"  ;  your  being  really  one  with 
Him  in  that  wondrous  humihation,  in  its  spirit  and  its  fruit ;  that,  so  far  as  you  are 
concerned,  they  seek  to  frustrate.  In  realising  that,  you  get  the  better  of  them ; 
confessing  thus  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh,  you  have  overcome  them.  2.  Your 
having  overcome  them  is  connected  with  your  "  being  of  God "  (ver.  4) ;  which 
again  is  intimately  connected  with  your  "  confessing  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in 
the  flesh  "  (ver.  2).  Your  being  of  God  is  the  intermediate  link  between  your 
confessing  thus  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  (ver.  2),  and  your  having  over- 
come them  who  reject  that  truth  (ver.  4).  The  essential  characteristic  of  the  spirit 
of  antichrist  is  that  it  is  "  not  of  God."  It  does  not  look  at  the  Saviour  and  the 
salvation  as  on  the  side  of  God ;  rather  it  takes  an  opposite  view,  and  subjects 
God  to  man.  It  subordinates  everything  to  human  interests  and  human  claims  ; 
looks  at  everything  from  a  human  and  mundane  point  of  view ;  measures  every- 
thing by  a  human  standard ;  submits  everything  to  human  opinion — in  a  word, 
conceives  and  judges  of  God  after  the  manner  of  man.  This,  indeed,  may  be  said 
to  be  the  distinctive  feature  of  all  false  religions,  as  well  as  of  all  corruptions  of  the 
true  religion.  They  exalt  man.  They  dislike  such  representations  as  bring  in  the 
element  of  God's  holy  name  and  righteous  authority,  and  lay  much  stress  upon 
that  element  as  one  of  primary  consideration  in  the  plan  of  saving  mercy.  Hence 
they  naturally  shrink  from  owning  explicitly  Jesus  Christ  as  come  in  the  flesh  to 
make  atonement  by  satisfying  Divine  justice.  But  "  ye  are  of  God,  little  children," 
in  this  matter ;  in  the  view  that  you  take,  and  the  conception  that  you  form  o£ 
Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh  ;  of  the  end  of  His  coming,  and  the  manner  in  which 
that  end  is  attained.  You  look  at  that  great  fact,  first  and  chiefly  in  its  relation 
to  God,  and  as  on  the  side  of  God.  It  is  from  God  and  for  God  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  come  in  the  flesh.  So  He  always  taught ;  and  so  you  firmly  believe.  You  sit 
at  the  feet  of  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh.  You  stand  beside  His  Cross.  You 
do  not  now  stumble  at  the  mystery  of  its  bloody  expiation ;  or  quarrel  with  the 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

great  propitiation-sacrifice  through  unbelief  of  its  necessity.  Nay,  being  "  of  God," 
on  His  side  and  in  His  interest  in  the  whole  of  this  great  transaction,  you  can 
meekly,  in  faith,  commit  to  Him  and  leave  in  His  hands  even  the  most  terrible  of 
those  ultimate  and  eternal  consequences,  involving  the  aggravated  guilt  and  final 
ruin  of  many,  that  you  cannot  but  see  to  be  inseparably  mixed  up  with  the  confession 
that  "  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh."  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Testing  false 
teachers  : — I.  The  general  counsel — "  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit,"  &c.  Those 
who  are  called  "  spirits"  in  the  first  part  of  it  are  denominated  "  prophets"  in  the 
last.  They  are  the  ministers  of  the  Word,  whether  they  write  or  preach  it.  They  are 
supposed  to  be  under  the  dominion  of  other  spirits.  These  may  be  good,  or  they 
may  be  evil.  Such  being  the  position  of  the  teachers  of  the  Church,  we  must  at  once 
perceive  the  propriety  of  the  counsel  which  is  given  respecting  them.  "  Believe 
not  every  spirit."  You  are  not  to  suppose  because  a  man  is  a  minister  he  must  be 
sound  in  his  views,  or  faithful  in  his  office,  or  exemplary  in  his  life.  All  profess- 
ing ministers  must  be  tested  by  members  of  the  Church.  Nor  let  us  fail  particu- 
larly to  notice  what  is  to  be  tried  in  the  matter  of  all  ministers  of  the  Word.  It  is 
"  whether  they  are  of  God."  How  solemn  the  duty !  Has  God  sent  them  ?  Do 
they  bear  their  credentials  from  Him  ?  Do  they  speak  His  truth  ?  Do  they  main- 
tain His  cause  ?  Do  they  promote  His  glory  ?  A  reason  is  assigned  for  this  duty, 
"  Because  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world."  It  was  so  even  in  the 
days  of  the  apostles.  All  their  influence,  and  zeal,  and  fidelity  could  not  prevent 
it.  The  opponents  of  the  truth  were  many — many  in  numbers,  many  in  their 
forms  of  error,  and  many  in  the  spirit  and  practices  of  enmity  which  they  dis- 
covered. It  is,  therefore,  no  strange  thing  that  happens  if  the  same  be  found  in 
all  subsequent  ages.  Nor  let  us  overlook  the  powerful  motive  by  which  the 
members  of  the  Church  are  urged  to  fidelity  in  the  duty  here  required  of  them. 
Compassion  for  false  teachers  should  operate  on  them.  Their  guilt  is  great  and 
we  should  earnestly  seek  to  deliver  them  from  it.  What  is  the  crime  of  the  man 
who  sets  up  a  false  light  on  the  dangerous  shore  ?  Such  is  that  of  the  false 
teacher.  But  it  is  not  he  only  that  is  concerned.  Our  Lord  has  said,  "  If  the  blind 
lead  the  blind  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch."  In  like  manner  they  who  mislead  the 
members  of  the  Church  draw  them  with  themselves  to  destruction.  Above  all,  if 
we  encourage  false  teachers  we  are  held  accountable  with  them  and  shall  be 
partakers  in  their  condemnation.  II.  Having  given  this  general  counsel  the 
apostle  proceeds  to  give  a  particular  illustration  of  both  the  error  that  might  be 
introduced  and  of  the  duty  of  opposing  it  in  the  subsequent  verses — "  hereby 
know  ye  the  spirit  of  God,"  &c.  There  are  signs  by  which  the  minister  who  is 
under  the  teaching  and  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  may  be  known.  What  are 
they?  They  are  both  positive  and  negative.  "Every  spirit  that  confesseth,"  &c. 
1.  To  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  to  own  the  Divinity  of  His 
mission.  2.  To  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  to  own  the 
Divinity  of  His  person.  3.  To  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  to 
own  the  grace  of  both  His  mission  and  His  person  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).  4.  Finally,  to 
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  has  come  in  the  flesh  is  to  own  Him  to  be  an  all-sufficient 
Saviour.  {J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  springs  and  motives  of  false  pretences  to  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  with  the  rules  and  marks  of  trying  and  detecting  them: — These  words 
very  plainly  pointed  at  the  false  pretenders  to  the  Spirit,  appearing  in  those  early 
days.  I.  From  what  springs  or  motives  the  false  pretences  to  the  spIrit  gene- 
rally PROCEED.  Vainglory,  or  a  thirst  after  fame,  is  often  the  most  prevailing 
motive.  But  to  go  a  little  deeper ;  self-love,  of  some  kind  or  other,  is  the  general 
root  of  all.  Who  does  not  wish  to  be  one  of  the  favourites  of  heaven,  and  to  be 
extraordinarily  illuminated,  or  conducted  by  God's  Holy  Spirit?  When  the  pleasing 
delusion  is  once  indulged  thus  far,  the  man  begins  presently  to  fancy  himself  a 
kind  of  saint  upon  earth,  or  perhaps  an  apostle.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  but 
that  persons  of  this  unhappy  complexion  must  have  some  appearances  whereby  to 
deceive  their   own  hearts.     II.  By  what  rules  or  marks  any  pretences  of  that 

KIND  may    be    tried,  AND    DETECTED   TO    BE    FALSE    AND    VAIN.       1.    Boastiug  and  OStCn- 

tation  are  a  flat  contradiction  to  the  very  supposal  of  the  ordinary  graces  boasted  of ; 
because  humility  and  modesty  are  the  very  chief  graces  upon  which  all  the  rest 
hang.  2.  Another  sure  mark  of  a  false  spirit  is  disobedience  to  rule  and  order, 
contempt  of  lawful  authority,  and  especially  any  intruding  into  what  does  not 
belong  to  them.  3.  Another  sure  mark  of  a  false  spirit  is  the  laying  down  deceitful 
rules  or  tokens  whereby  to  judge,  whether  or  when  a  man  has  the  spirit  of  God. 
There  have  been  many  who  have  laid  great  stress  upon  I  know  not  what  sensible 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  297 

emotions,  or  violent  impulses,  coming  upon  them  at  times.  III.  How  mtjch  it 
CONCERNS  us  TO  BE  UPON  OUR  GUARD  IN  SUCH  CASES.  Keligion,  like  all  other  weighty 
concernments,  is  best  carried  on  in  the  calm,  regular,  and  sedate  way  ;  and  there- 
fore great  care  should  be  taken  to  keep  up  the  old  and  well-tried  methods,  rather 
than  to  change  them  for  new  devices,  which  will  never  answer.  (D.  Waterland,  D.D.) 
Rules  for  trial  of  the  spirits  : — I.  What  rules  they  had  in  the  apostles'  dats  to 

TRY   THE    SPIRITS,    AND   TO    DISTINGUISH    THE    FALSE    PROPHETS    OR   TEACHERS    FROM   THE 

TRUE.  1.  The  miraculous  gifts  which  were  then  bestowed  upon  the  true  prophets  or 
teachers.  2.  Their  obedience  and  subjection  to  the  apostles  of  our  Blessed  Saviour, 
as  the  great  directors  of  their  ministry.  3.  The  agreement  of  their  doctrine  with 
the  doctrines  taught  by  Christ  and  His  apostles.  11.  What  rules  there  are  in 
OUR  days,  to  know  and  distinguish  them  so  as  that  the  honest  and  well-meaning 
Christians  may  not  be  imposed  upon  by  false  prophets  or  teachers.  1.  If  men  pretend 
to  come  to  us  with  an  extraordinary  message  from  God,  or  boast  of  an  extraordinary 
inspiration,  such  as  the  apostles  had,  we  may  justly  require  of  them  to  give  the 
same,  or  the  like  extraordinary  proof  of  it.  2.  If  they  pretend  to  no  more  than  a 
common  and  ordinary  assistance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  such  as  any  good  man  may 
lay  claim  to,  then  are  they  subject  to  Christ  and  His  apostles,  and  obey  those  orders 
and  injunctions  they  have  left  us  in  the  New  Testament.  3.  If  any  one,  though 
never  so  regularly  called  to  the  office  of  the  ministry,  should  preach  a  doctrine 
contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  such  a  teacher  is  not  to  be  heard — his  spirit , 
cannot  be  from  God.  Conclusion :  1.  From  what  has  been  said  we  may  learn  to 
make  a  true  judgment  of  those  who  take  upon  them  the  office  of  preachers.  2.  We 
should  take  care  that  the  wild  notions  and  practices  of  these  men  do  not  create  a 
prejudice  in  us,  and  possess  us  with  a  less  esteem  for  religion  in  general,  or  any 
particular  doctrines  of  Christianity ;  for  there  is  nothing  so  good  but  may  be  mis- 
taken or  abused,  and  an  ill  use  made  of  it.  3.  That  God  assists  good  men,  both  in 
the  knowledge  and  practice  of  their  duty,  by  the  secret  operation  of  His  Holy  Spirit, 
is  a  plain  and  certain  doctrine  of  Christianity ;  but  that  the  motions  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  are  to  be  distinguished  from  the  natural  workings  of  our  own  minds,  or  the 
suggestions  of  the  evil  spirit  by  anything  to  be  felt  in  these  motions  themselves,  does 
not  appear  from  Holy  Scripture.  The  only  way  we  have  to  distinguish  them  is 
to  bring  them  to  the  standard  of  truth,  and  those  rules  of  right  and  wrong,  of  good 
and  evil,  which  are  fixed  and  certain.  {Chas.  Peters,  M.A.)  The  duty  of  testing 
the  spirits : — I.  The  faith  of  the  Christian  rests  upon  inward  conviction,  not 
ON  outward  authority.  1.  Scripture  proof  of  this.  (1)  We  are  commanded  to 
test  the  doctrines  delivered  to  us.  (1  Thess.  v.  21 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10,  14,  15,  x.  15). 
(2)  The  foundation  of  our  faith  is  declared  to  be  such  (John  vi.  45,  xiv.  26,  xvi. 
13 ;  Eph.  ii.  18,  iv.  21 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  9  ;  Heb.  viii.  10,  11 ;  1  John  ii.  27 ;  also 
Kom.  xiv.  5 ;  Col.  ii.  2 ;  1  Thess.  i.  5).  2.  The  occasions  on  which  the  apostles 
spoke  with  authority  of  their  own  had  to  do  with  minor  matters.  The  gospel  they 
had  to  deliver  was  entrusted  to  them  from  above,  (1  Cor.  ix.  16;  Gal.  i.  8,  9). 
Over  that  they  had  no  power,  (Eph.  iii.  2,  3 ;  Col.  i.  25 ;  1  Tim.  i.  11).     II.  Yet 

OUTWARD   AUTHORITY   HAS   ITS    OWN    FUNCTION    IN    THE    ChURCH    OF    GoD.      It  deals,  HOt 

with  the  truths  of  Christianity  itself,  but  with  rules  and  ordinances,  which  touch, 
not  the  essence  of  the  Church's  life,  but  its  details.  III.  The  true  limits  of  out- 
ward AUTHORITY.  Evciy  socicty  must  have  its  rules.  Our  conscience  must  be 
satisfied  that  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  principle  in  these  rules.     IV.  By  what  test 

ABE    WE    to     try    THE     SPIRITS?        V.    ThERE    ARE     MANY    ERRORS   ABROAD.         St.    Johu 

warns  the  Christians  of  his  day  against  error.  The  warning  is  equally  necessary 
now.  It  needs  not  to  specify  instances.  They  fall  under  four  heads  :  (1)  traditional 
corruptions  of  the  faith,  whether  in  a  Roman  or  a  Protestant  direction ;  (2)  new 
revelations,  such  as  Swedenborgianism,  Irvingism,  or  Mormonism  ;  (3)  neglect  of 
portions  of  revealed  truth,  such  as  has  often  led  to  the  formation  of  sects  ;  and  (4) 
denial  of  all  revelation,  as  in  the  various  forms  of  infidelity.  (J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.) 
The  true  and  false  spirits  : — In  this  world  there  appears  to  be  no  truth  without  its 
counterfeit,  no  religion  without  hypocrites,  no  gold  without  tinsel,  nor  good  wheat  of 
God  unmixed  with  tares.  Christ  is  mimicked  by  Antichrist.  Indeed,  the  more 
active  is  religious  thought  and  life  in  any  period,  so  much  the  more  numerous  and 
plausible  are  likely  to  be  the  forms  of  religious  delusion  and  imposture.  St.  John 
has  set  forth  in  his  last  paragraph  (iii.  19-24)  the  grounds  of  a  Christian  man's 
assurance  ;  he  has  traced  it  to  its  spring  in  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  who  first  kindled 
the  life  of  God  within  ourselves.  But,  alas !  even  on  this  point  deception  is  possible, 
and  a  warning  is  necessary.     "Beloved,"  he  interjects,  "don't  be  believing  every 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  I7. 


spirit,  but  test  the  spirits,  to  see  whether  they  are  of  God."  It  is  a  common  but 
perilous  mistake  occurring  even  in  books  of  Christian  evidence,  to  treat  the  super- 
natural as  synonymous  with  the  Divine.  One  is  amazed  at  the  facility  with  which 
many  religious-minded  people  fall  into  the  meshes  of  spiritualism.  Let  them  be 
persuaded  that  they  are  witnessing  manifestations  from  another  world,  and  they  bow 
to  them  at  once  as  Divine  revelation,  without  considering  their  intrinsic  character, 
their  moral  worth,  their  agreement  with  Scripture  and  established  truth.  Let  it  be 
proved  to  me  that  certain  phenomena  are  "  spiritual,"  and  I  say,  "  Very  possibly  ; 
but  there  are  many  spirits  abroad  in  the  world — some  of  them  from  the  pit !  "  The 
Apostle  Paul  had  had  to  deal  with  a  similar  opposition  at  Corinth,  with  spiritual  and 
prophetical  manifestations  that  contravened  his  teaching.  And  he  speaks  in  1 
Corinthians  xii.  10  of  the  "  discerning  of  spirits,"  the  power  to  distinguish  genuine 
from  spurious  inspiration,  as  a  supernatural  grace  bestowed  upon  certain  members 
of  the  Church.  On  the  same  point  he  wrote  to  the  Thessalonians  earlier  (vers.  19, 
20).  Our  Lord  Himself  foretold  in  His  last  discourses  the  rise  of  "  false  Christsand 
false  prophets"  to  deceive  the  Church.  "The  false  prophet"  figures  side  by  side 
with  "  the  wild  beast "  in  his  visions  in  the  Apocalypse,  representing  a  corrupt  form 
of  religion  abetting  a  cruel  and  persecuting  worldly  power.  Elymas,  the  Jewish 
sorcerer  of  Paphos,  was  a  specimen  of  this  kind  of  trader  in  the  supernatural  (Acts 
xiii.  6).  Li  the  later  Old  Testament  times  such  upstarts  were  numerous,  men  who 
professed  to  speak  by  revelation  in  Jehovah's  name,  and  who  brought  a  more  popular 
message  than  the  true  prophets,  and  for  gain  flattered  the  rulers  and  the  multitude 
to  their  destruction.  This  last  feature  appears  in  St.  John's  false  prophets:  "  They 
are  of  the  world  " — animated  by  its  spirit  and  tastes ;  "  therefore  they  speak  of  the 
world  (they  utter  what  it  prompts ;  they  give  back  to  the  world  its  own  ideas,  and 
tickle  its  ear  with  its  vain  fancies),  and  the  world  heareth  them."  Along  with  their 
worldly  spirit,  it  is  false  doctrine  rather  than  miracles  or  lying  predictions  that 
supplies  the  chief  mark  of  the  class  of  men  denounced  by  our  apostle.  Accordingly, 
he  puts  them  through  a  theological  examination  :  he  uses  for  their  touchstone  the 
Licarnate  Deity  of  Jesus.  Li  this  way  the  apostle  comes  round  again  to  the  subject 
of  chap.  ii.  18-29,  and  the  great  conflict  there  announced  between  Christ  and 
Antichrist.  It  is  evident,  from  the  whole  Epistle,  that  the  burning  question  of 
controversy  just  then  was  the  nature  of  Jesus  Christ^the  reaUty  of  His  bodily  form, 
and  the  consistency  of  His  seeming  fleshly  hfe  with  His  higher  Divine  origin  and 
being.  1.  St.  John's  crucial  test  of  Christian  belief  lies,  then,  in  the  true  confession 
of  Christ  Himself.  "  In  this,"  says  the  apostle,  "you  may  know  the  Spirit  of  God." 
One  may  repeat  a  creed  ghbly  enough,  and  yet  be  very  far  from  "  confessing  Jesus 
Christ."  We  can  only  apprehend  Him,  and  lay  hold  of  the  person  of  Christ  with  a 
reaUsing  mental  grasp,  by  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  God  :  "  No  man  can  say  Jesus  is 
Lord,"  declared  the  other  theological  apostle,  "  except  in  the  Holy  Ghost"  (1  Cor. 
xii.  3 ;  Matt.  xvi.  17).  But  mark  the  precise  form  given  to  this  proof-question  by 
St.  John :  "  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  Jesus  Christ  come  in  flesh."  The  content 
of  this  confession  is  variously  construed  by  interpreters.  Some  read  it,  "  confesseth 
Jesus  Christ  as  come  in  flesh  " — that  is,  "  as  the  incarnate  Messiah."  I  do  not  think 
that  either  grammatical  usage  or  the  doctrinal  situation  points  to  this  construction. 
Others,  "confesseth  Jesus  Christ  to  be  come  in  flesh;"  but  this  makes  "  Jesus 
Christ "  the  specific  name  of  Godhead,  equivalent  by  itself  to  "  the  Son  of  God  " 
(else  it  is  no  antithesis  to  "  come  in  flesh  ") ;  and  this  is  not  at  all  obvious,  nor  John- 
like. We  must  read  the  expression  as  one  continuous  object :  "  Confesseth  Jesus 
Christ  come  in  flesh."  To  "  confess  Jesus  Christ  "  is  to  confess  the  human  Jesus, 
known  in  the  gospel  history,  as  the  declared  Messiah  of  God ;  and  to  confess  Him 
"  come,  in  flesh,"  is  to  confess  the  Godhead  in  the  humanity,  to  acknowledge  Him 
as  indubitable  man,  but  more  than  man — to  confess,  in  short,  "  the  Word  made 
flesh."  For,  of  course,  when  you  speak  of  one  as  "  come  (arrived)  in  flesh,"  it  ia 
assumed  that  he  has  issued  from  some  other,  spiritual  region,  and  that  his  flesh  is 
the  garb  of  a  higher  nature ;  otherwise  the  words  are  pointless  (John  xvi.  28).  St. 
Paul's  watchword  of  confession  in  1  Cor.  xii.  3,  belonged  to  the  stage  of  conflict  with 
original  Jewish  unbelief.  As  the  Messiahship  of  the  Nazarene  was  preached,  the 
spirit  of  evil  cried  out — and  Paul  had  frequently  been  thus  interrupted  in  the  Jewish 
synagogue — "  Jesus  is  anathema,  accursed  of  God  !  He  was  justly  crucified  ;  He 
is  the  abhorred,  and  not  the  elect  of  Israel  1 "  But  it  is  a  more  developed  and  subtle 
kind  of  error,  bred  within  the  Church,  that  is  here  unmasked.  "  Christ "  is  no 
longer,  in  St.  John's  Ephesian  circle,  the  disputed  title  of  the  crucified  Jesus  ;  it  is 
His  accepted  designation  ;  and  the  words  Jesus  Christ  have  coalesced  by  this  time 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  299 

into  the  familiar  name  of  the  Eedeemer.  The  rising  Gnosticism  of  John's  day 
separated  the  words  in  a  new  fashion,  by  metaphysical  analysis,  not  by  historical 
distinction.  The  new  prophets  recoUed  not  from  a  crucified  Messiah,  but  from  a 
humanised  God.  Now  St.  John's  formula  is  precisely  opposed  to  this  popular 
heresy  of  Asia  Minor,  which  tradition  imputes  to  Cerinthus,  the  apostle's  personal 
antagonist.  To  "  confess  Jesus  Christ  come  in  flesh"  is  to  declare  the  oneness  of 
His  Divine-human  person  as  an  abiding  certainty,  not  from  His  baptism,  but  from  His 
birth  and  onwards.  (Note  the  force  of  the  Greek  perfect  eleluthota,  "  arrived,  come  for 
good  and  all.")  The  bearing  of  the  expression  is  indicated  by  the  marginal  reading 
of  the  Eevised  Version  in  ver.  3,  which  is  probably  a  very  ancient  gloss  upon  the 
text :  "  Every  spirit  which  dissolveth  Jesus  is  not  of  God."  In  this  latter  negative 
clause  (ver.  3a)  it  is  to  be  observed  the  apostle  writes  "  Jesus  "  with  the  Greek 
definite  article,  as  much  as  to  say  "  this  Jesus  " — "the  Jesus  thus  defined — Jesus  as 
the  Church  knows  Him,  as  the  apostles  preached  Him."  He  it  is  whom  the  spu-it 
of  error  rejects,  and  whose  Person  it  would  dissolve  and  destroy.  2.  This  brings  us 
to  St.  John's  second  test  of  true  doctrine  in  the  Church,  the  general  consent  of 
Christian  believers.  The  teaching  he  denounced  was  repudiated  by  the  Church  ;  it 
found  accepta'nce  only  in  the  outside  world.  The  seductions  of  the  false  prophets 
are  "  overcome  "  by  John's  "  little  children,"  because  they  are  born  "  of  God  "  ;  there 
is  in  them  a  Spirit  "  greater  than  "  the  spirit  that  lives  "  in  the  world."  Plausible 
as  the  new  teaching  was,  and  powerful  through  its  accord  with  the  current  of  pre- 
vailing thought,  St.  John's  readers,  as  a  body,  had  rejected  it.  They  felt  it  could 
not  be  true.  They  had  struggled  with  the  network  of  error  flung  about  them,  and 
broken  through  the  snare.  They  had  received  an  "  anointing  (the  '  chrism  '  which 
makes  Christians)  from  the  Holy  One,"  in  virtue  of  which  they  "  know  the  truth," 
and  detect,  as  by  an  inner,  instinctive  sense,  the  "lie"  which  is  its  counterfeit 
(ii.  20).  Admittedly  this  test,  taken  by  itself,  is  not  easy  to  apply.  The  orthodoxy 
that  prevails  in  any  one  Church,  or  at  any  given  moment,  is  not  necessarily  the 
orthodoxy  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  You  must  take  a  sufficiently  large  area  to  get  the 
consensus  of  Christian  faith,  and  you  must  take  the  central  and  primary  truths,  not 
questions  such  as  those  of  "  the  three  orders  "  in  Church  government,  or  the  refine- 
ments of  the  Quinquarticular  controversy.  The  danger  lies  with  us,  not  in  the 
difficulty  that  attends  a  formal  adoption  of  this  confession  of  Christ,  but  in  the  ease 
with  which  men  accept  it  in  words  but  deny  it  in  heart  and  life.  3.  St.  John  in 
ver.  6  clinches  the  two  previous  tests  of  the  true  or  false  spirits  at  work  in  the 
Church  by  a  third— that  of  agreement  with  the  apostolic  testimony.  "  You  are  of 
God,"  he  declared  in  ver.  4 ;  but  now  adds,  speaking  for  himself  and  his  brother 
•witnesses  who  had  seen  and  handled  the  Word  made  flesh  (i.  1-3),  "  We  are  of  God : 
and  men  are  shown  to  be  of  God  or  not  of  God  by  the  sole  fact  of  their  hearing  or 
refusing  us."  This  was  an  enormous  assumption  to  make,  a  piece  of  boundless 
arrogance,  if  it  was  not  simple  truth.  But  the  claim  has  now  the  endorsement  of 
eighteen  centuries  behind  it.  "He  that  knows  God"  (ho  ginoskon,  ver.  5)  is, 
strictly,  "he  who  is  getting-to-know " — the  learner  of  God,  the  true  disciple,  the 
seeker  after  Divine  truth.  Is  it  not  to  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  that  such 
men,  all  the  world  over,  are  infallibly  drawn  when  it  comes  within  their  knowledge  ? 
They  follow  it,  they  listen  to  the  Gospel  and  the  Epistles,  as  the  eye  follows  the 
dawning  light  and  the  intent  ear  the  breaking  of  sweet  music  and  the  famished 
appetite  the  scent  of  wholesome  food.  The  soul  that  seeks  God,  from  whatever 
distance,  knows  when  it  hears  the  words  of  this  Book  that  its  quest  is  not  in 
vain;  it  is  getting  what  it  wants!  (G.  G.  Findlay,  B.A.)  A  caution  against 
fanaticism : — There  is  in  the  human  mind  a  strong  propensity :  to  beheve  in 
Bupematural  communications;  and  where  fancy  is  ardent,  and  the  power  of 
reflection  little  cultivated,  this  propensity  renders  men  either  so  credulous  as  to 
believe  in  the  arrogant  pretensions  of  others,  or  so  vain  as  to  set  up  their  own. 
Here  then  we  must  inquire  into  the  state  of  our  own  convictions.  Have  we  the 
least  reason  to  suppose  that  God  wiU  act  upon  our  minds  or  those  of  others  either 
in  revealing  new  truths,  or  in  explaining  old,  or  in  making  us  acquainted  with  future 
events,  by  any  influence  out  of  the  ordinary  course  of  His  providence  ?  We  know 
but  one  way  of  accrediting  a  messenger  from  God ;  and  that  is  by  the  power  of 
working  miracles.  But  amongst  the  pretenders  to  a  Divine  commission,  not  one  has 
been  found  since  the  first  age  of  Christianity  who  has  estabUshed  his  claim  upon 
this  ground.  "  It  is  finished."  AH  the  truths  are  promulgated  which  it  concerns 
us  to  know ;  and  aU  the  miracles  have  been  performed  which  were  necessary  to 
convince  us  that  they  are  truths  from  God.     To  look  after  this  for  new  revelations, 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i7 

new  prophets,  new  miracles,  is  to  despise  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  to  turn  His  grace 
into  wantonness.  But  though  we  ought  upon  this  ground  to  lend  a  deaf  ear  to  any 
one  who  in  these  times  assumes  a  preternatural  knowledge  of  the  designs  of  Gtod, 
this  of  itself  will  not  guard  us  against  the  indulgence  of  a  fanatical  spirit.  There  are 
many  who,  though  they  believe  in  the  sufficiency  of  Scripture,  and  in  consequence 
reject  such  claims  as  we  have  just  been  exposing,  yet  entertain  a  notion  not  much 
less  absurd,  that  the  true  sense  of  Scripture  is  revealed  to  them  by  the  Spirit  of  God ; 
whilst  all  those  who  do  not  admit  their  interpretation  are  actuated  by  the  spirit  of 
delusion.  This  is,  in  effect,  to  arrogate  the  gift  of  inspiration.  By  what  evidence 
then  is  this  claim  supported  ?  They  tell  you  that  they  possess  a  certain  conscious- 
ness of  being  born  again ;  of  having  been  guided  to  the  truth  by  the  immediate 
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  same  consciousness  has  been  alleged,  and  with 
the  same  reason,  for  the  most  absurd  and  the  most  dangerous  notions,  political  and 
reUgious,  that  ever  were  broached  by  the  wildest  or  the  weakest  heads.  But  is  not 
another  man's  consciousness  as  good  as  yours?  And  may  not  he  who  holds 
doctrines  directly  the  reverse  of  yours  persuade  himself  that  he  too  has  the 
guidance  of  a  Divine  spirit?  Who  then  is  to  judge  between  you  ?  It  should  never 
be  forgotten  on  this  subject  that  the  Almighty,  in  acting  upon  our  minds,  acts  by 
stated  laws  adapted  to  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  moral  agents.  He  submits 
the  revelation  of  His  will  to  the  test  of  our  inquiries,  and  in  all  essential  points  it 
is  so  plain,  that  he  who  runs  may  read.  The  natural  province  of  religious  feeling 
lies  not  in  points  of  faith,  but  in  the  exercises  of  devotion.  Here,  however,  we  must 
still  try  the  spirit  in  which  these  feelings  are  indulged.  For  here  too  there  is  ample 
scope  for  delusion.  We  would  not  encourage  the  cold  and  heartless  religion  which 
never  rises  with  delight  to  the  contemplation  and  worship  of  that  Being  who  has 
given  us  affections,  that  they  may  centre  in  Himself.  But  to  produce  this  salutary 
effect  our  piety  must  be  under  the  control  of  rational  and  sober  views ;  though 
animated,  not  extravagant ;  though  earnest,  not  familiar.  Above  all,  we  must  not 
confound  those  temporary  feelings,  which  are  the  offspring  of  accidental  circum- 
stances, with  that  devout  habit  of  the  mind  which,  though  less  ardent,  is  more  salutary 
because  it  acts  by  a  steady  and  permanent  influence.  As  to  what  regards  our  own 
practice,  let  us  be  equally  careful  to  avoid  loud  pretensions  on  the  one  hand,  and 
never  to  shrink  from  the  open  but  modest  avowal  of  what  we  deem  important 
truth  on  the  other.  Let  us  examine  our  opinions  by  the  standard  of  the  gospel,  and 
try  their  practical  efficacy  by  their  habitual  influence  upon  our  temper  and  conduct. 
Let  us  never  rest  in  emotions,  however  strong,  however  pious,  till  they  are  cherished 
into  good  habits.  But  let  us  also  beware,  lest  in  avoiding  the  extreme  of  fanaticism, 
we  run  into  that  of  apathy  and  indifference.  (J.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  Try  the 
spirits  : — So  St.  Paul  (1  Thess.  v.  21).  Cf.  among  the  distribution  of  gifts  of  the 
Spirit,  those  of  criticism  and  discernment  (1  Cor.  xii.  10).  The  spirit  of  St.  John  and 
St.  Paul,  however  deeply  reverential  and  childlike,  is  not  one  of  credulous 
fanaticism,  or  abject  unreasoning  submission  to  authority  (1  Cor.  xii.  10,  xiv.  29 ; 
1  Tim.  iv.  1).  It  must  have  been  a  crisis-time  in  the  spiritual  world  (Kev.  ix.  1-3). 
We  must  remember  that  at  Ephesus,  and  in  Asia  Minor  generally,  St.  John  found 
not  only  a  heresy  of  the  intellect  in  Cerinthus  and  the  Gnostics,  and  a  heresy  of  the 
senses  in  the  Nicolaitanes,  but  also  a  heresy  of  magic  and  mysticism.  The  streets 
of  Ephesus  were  full  of  theoleptics  and  convulsionaries ;  magical  practices  and 
invocations  were  pursued  by  the  educated  with  a  passionate  interest  to  which  modern 
spiritualism  presents  but  a  feeble  parallel.  St.  Paul  triumphed  for  a  season 
(Acts  xix.  17-20).  But  Persian  Magi,  with  their  enchantments  and  philtres, 
Egyptian  hierophants,  Chaldean  astrologers,  came  to  Ephesus  year  after  year. 
Cabalistic  letters,  called  Ephesian  letters,  were  in  reputation  for  their 
power  of  healing  or  divination.  Apollonius  of  Tyana  found  an  enthusiastic 
reception  in  Ephesus.  It  may  be  added  that  St.  John's  Epistles  contain  no 
point  of  the  apostles  exercising  gifts  of  healing.  {Abp.  Wm.  Alexander.) 
Hereby  know  ye  the  Spirit  of  God. — Characterigtic  nature  of  the  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  with  refereni^e  to  pergonal  religion : — I.  The  chabacteeistic  nature  op 
THE  INFLUENCES  OF  THE  HoLY  SpiKiT.  1.  Their  perfect  accordance  with  the  written 
Word.  2.  Self-abasement  uuder  a  sense  of  sin.  3.  A  faithful  reliance  on  the 
covenanted  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.  4.  A  spirit  of  prayer.  5.  It  uniformly  excites 
in  the  soul  a  principle  of  love.  6.  There  is  one  other  point  characteristic  of  the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spiritwithin  thesoul,  to  which  we  must  advert — the  influential 
principle  of  holiness.  II.  The  natuke  of  this  implanted  holiness.  It  is  no  abstract 
reverie  about  the  perfectibility  of  man's  nature — a  dream  originating  in  a  half- 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  301 

informed  imagination.  The  holiness  of  the  believer  has  a  definite  character,  and  a 
model  no  less  authoritative  than  it  is  luminously  distinct.  {E.  Young,  3I.A.)  Every 
spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God. — Christ 
made  a  phantom  : — Did  ever  human  folly  go  so  far  as  this,  asserting  the  unreaUty  of 
Christ's  bodily  presence,  and  making  Him  but  a  phantom  ?  Even  so  is  the  testimony 
of  history.  The  apostle  had  felt  the  heaving  of  that  breast,  the  beating  of  that  heart, 
and  he  arrayed  himself  firmly  and  intelligibly  against  the  philosophy  of  his  times, 
that  really,  in  effect,  made  Jesus  Christ  a  phantom — an  existence  without  bodily 
proportions  and  substantiality.  To  exalt  the  purity  of  Christ,  to  make  Him  the 
illustrious  soul  they  desired  to  recognise  Him,  they  were  forced  to  deny  the  reality 
of  His  bodily  presence,  and  maintain  that  it  was  but  show,  without  substance. 
That  He  actually  died  upon  the  Cross  they  could  not  allow,  and  some  argued  that 
when  the  Cross  was  taken  by  Simon  the  Cyrenean,  a  change  was  made,  and  the 
Cyrenean  was  actually  crucified,  while,  in  his  shape  and  appearance,  Jesus  passed 
away.  How  absurd  the  conclusions  to  which  theories  drive  men  !  Against  these 
ideas  the  apostle  protested.  He  that  professeth  not  that  Christ  was  really  a  man,  a 
proper  substantiality,  is  not  of  God — is  not  instructed  by  the  Divine  Spirit — hath  not 
the  truth.  There  are  many  who  do  not  weigh  well  this  matter.  They  deem  it  of 
little  consequence  whether  they  have  an  ideal  or  an  historical  personage  as  the 
embodiment  of  excellence.  They  say  the  idea  is  sufficient,  and  rest  satisfied  with 
that.  They  talk  of  Christianity  being  as  old  as  creation ;  that  it  is  but  the  growth  of 
the  idea  of  the  race ;  but  they  overlook  the  essential  difference  between  the  effect  of 
a  mere  idea  and  an  actual  person,  and  that  if  by  any  subtlety  of  metaphysics,  or  play  of 
poetic  fancy,  or  theological  vagary,  we  make  Jesus  not  to  have  laboured  and  suffered, 
died  and  rose,  as  the  Gospels  represent  Him,  the  real,  regenerating  power  of  His 
example  is  gone  ;  it  is  but  as  fine  poetry,  or  fine  music,  and  the  whole  of  Christ's 
resistance  of  evil  is  less  than  the  actor's  performance.  I  pity  those  who  thus 
dismiss  Christ  as  a  phantom  that  has  spoken.  Dream  or  reaUty,  fable  or  historical 
fact,  it  is  all  the  same  to  them.  Not  so  with  John's  estimate  of  what  man  would 
need.  He  that  confesseth  not  that  the  Christ  of  whom  my  Gospel  treats,  who  is 
there  portrayed  as  I  saw  Him ;  he  who  denies  that  that  excellence  came  in  the  flesh, 
is  not  of  God.  He  denies  God's  greatest  benefaction.  He  accepts  not  the  grandest 
thing  ever  done  for  humanity.  He  does  not  believe  that  the  highest  ideal  of 
character  has  been  realised.  What  we  want  is  such  a  sight  of  Jesus  as  will  exert  a 
transforming  power.  It  was  this  kind  of  seeing  Jesus  that  wrought  the  vast  change 
which  took  place  in  the  first  centuries  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  gave  new 
elements  to  thought.  It  made  life  more  to  be  desired.  It  poured  into  the  channel 
of  human  activity  new  forces  of  civilisation  and  progress,  and  every  department  of 
social  life  felt  the  power  of  the  grandest  of  all  Uves.  Phantom  though  He  may  be 
to  many,  Jesus  has  filled  the  world  with  His  presence.  It  cannot  be  denied.  It  is 
a  moral,  spiritual  power.  It  has  its  judgment-seat  in  our  midst,  and  men  of  the 
world,  of  the  bar  and  the  senate,  instead  of  attempting  to  set  aside  His  authority 
when  it  crosses  their  path,  try  their  power  to  bring  His  consecrated  name  to  the 
support  of  their  position.  Christ  is  no  phantom.  He  is  before  us  in  social  usages, 
laws,  institutions — in  the  best  blessings  of  our  homes,  the  best  aids  to  social  improve- 
ment, the  happiest  tendencies  of  the  wondrous  activities  of  the  world.  {Henry 
Bacon.)  The  object  of  faith : — Three  dangers,  arising  from  as  many  different 
quarters,  seem  at  this  moment  to  assail  the  faith  of  the  Church.  1.  The  first  of 
these  springs  from  the  aversion  which  is  very  widely  felt  towards  anything 
approaching  to  an  exact  and  definite  theological  system.  I  speak  of  that  large  mass 
of  half-educated  minds,  the  aggregate  or  average  of  whose  sentiments  forms  very 
largely  what  is  commonly  called  public  opinion ;  I  speak  of  those,  too,  who  aspire 
to  be  leaders  of  that  public  opinion.  Such  persons  profess  the  utmost  respect  for 
what  they  believe  to  be  Christianity,  but  repudiate  whatever  religion  comes  before 
them  in  a  definite  and  tangible  shape.  Now,  if  these  minor  sceptics  would  carry 
out  their  own  views  with  anything  like  consistency,  they  would  at  least  wrong 
nobody  but  themselves.  Content  with  denying  the  possibility  of  arriving  at  the 
truth,  they  would  leave  others  to  enjoy  undisturbed  their  real  or  fancied  possession 
of  it;  remembering  that  if  it  be  impossible  to  prove  that  any  religious  system  is 
true,  it  must  be  equally  impossible  to  prove  that  any  rehgious  system  is  false.  They 
would  think  it  enough  to  regard  creeds  and  orthodoxy  with  contemptuous  pity, 
without  expressing  opinions  on  a  subject  upon  which  they  are  proud  to  be  ignorant, 
or  raising  a  clamour  against  those  whose  adoption  of  a  fixed  standard  of  behef 
rebukes  their  own  indifference.    2.  The  next  peril  comes  from  men  of  a  totally 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

different  stamp,  a  nobler  sort  than  the  others,  persons  of  strong  religious  convictions, 
and  professing  a  rigid  orthodoxy  of  a  certain  kind.  They  accept  the  fundamental 
doctrines  of  Christianity,  and  other  doctrines  which,  whether  true  or  false,  are  not 
fundamental.  But  their  creed  is  out  of  all  keeping  and  perspective,  for  they  lay 
but  little  stress  upon  the  weightier  matters  of  revealed  religion ;  while  the  objects  of 
present  or  recent  controversy  assume  an  exaggerated  importance  in  their  eyes.  The 
end  of  it  is  that  they  become  Protestants,  or  Churchmen,  or  Arminians,  or 
Supralapsarians,  or  anything  rather  than  Christians.  And  if,  as  is  often  the 
case,  they  have  been  led  to  dwell  almost  exclusively  upon  what  may  be  called 
the  subjective  doctrines  of  the  gospel—  those  which  regard  the  work  of  redemption 
as  it  reveals  itself  in  the  inner  man — the  danger  comes  to  them  in  a  more  subtle 
shape.  For  the  internal  and  spiritual  character  of  those  doctrines  seduces  men 
readily  into  the  belief  that  the  profession  of  them  is  a  guarantee  for  spirituality. 
3.  The  third  proceeds  from  persons  who  profess  a  perfectly  correct  belief,  while 
they  are  not  at  all  spiritual,  nor  always  particularly  practical.  The  true  object  of 
the  confessii.a  is  not  so  properly  the  Incarnation,  as  the  Saviour  regarded  as 
Incarnate.  Yet  creeds  and  dogmas  have  their  proper  function,  so  far  forth  as 
they  give  our  faith  a  definite  object  to  fasten  on.  A  Christ  who  is  not  come  in 
the  flesh  would  be  no  Christ  at  all.     {W.  B.  Jones,  M.A.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Ye  are  of  God,  little  children,  and  have  overcome  them :  because 
greater  is  He  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world. — The  advantages  of 
truth,  in  opposition  to  error : — I.  Divine  truth  caeries  greater  evidence  along 
WITH  IT.  1.  The  doctrines  which  are  from  God  have  a  more  intrinsical  goodness 
in  them,  and  teach  such  things  as  are  most  worthy  of  God,  and  more  likely  to 
proceed  from  Him.  2.  The  external  confirmation  of  Divine  doctrines  is  greater 
and  carries  more  conviction  along  with  it.  By  external  confirmation  I  mean 
chiefly  that  of  miracles.  3.  Besides  the  goodness  of  the  doctrines  which  are  from 
God,  and  the  external  confirmation  of  them  by  miracles,  the  Spirit  of  God  doth 
likewise  illuminate  good  men,  and  those  who  are  desirous  to  know  the  truth,  and 
hath  promised  to  lead  them  into  it,  and  to  assist  them  in  discerning  between  truth 
and  falsehood  (John  vii.  17).     11.  The  motives  which  good  men  have  to  persuade 

THEM  to  adhere  TO  TRUTH  AND  HOLINESS  ARE  MORE  POWERFUL  THAN  THE  MOTIVES  TO 

THE  CONTRARY.  The  believing  that  "  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  "  infers  the  belief  of 
His  doctrine,  and  consequently  of  that  eminent  part  of  it,  the  eternal  recompense  of 
another  world,  which,  whosoever  firmly  believes,  wiU  be  able  to  resist  and  overcome 
all  the  temptations  of  this  world.  IH.  Those  who  sincerely  embrace  and  obey  the 
TRUTH  OF  God  have  a  greater  assistance  and  are  acted  by  a  more  powerful  spirit 
and  principle,  than  that  which  is  in  the  world.  1.  There  are  these  two  principles 
in  the  world,  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  devil,  very  active  and  powerful,  the  one  in 
good,  the  other  in  bad  men.  2.  The  Spirit  of  God  which  is  in  good  men  is  greater 
than  he  that  is  in  the  world :  He  is  more  able  and  ready  to  assist  men  to  good 
purposes  than  the  devil  is  to  tempt  and  help  forward  that  which  is  evil.  (1)  The 
Spirit  of  God  is  more  powerful  than  the  devU.  (2)  The  Spirit  of  God  is  as  willing 
to  assist  men  to  good  purposes  as  the  devil  is  to  the  contrary.  (3)  The  Spirit  of  God 
hath  a  more  free  and  immediate  access  to  the  minds  of  good  men,  and  a  more 
intimate  conjunction  with,  and  operation  upon  them,  than  the  devil.  3.  In  what 
ways  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  move  and  assist  good  men.  (1)  By  exercising  good 
motions  in  us,  and  enabling  us  to  bring  them  to  effect.  (2)  By  supporting  us  under 
persecution  for  religion.  (Abp.  Tillotson.)  The  Spirit  of  Christ  in  us  greater  than 
the  spirit  of  antichrist  in  the  world  : — 1.  "  He  that  is  in  the  world  is  great."  And 
his  greatness  lies  in  this,  that  he  operates  in  a  twofold  way.  He  forms  and  fashions 
the  world  spiritually  ;  and  he  finds  for  it,  or  makes  for  it,  appropriate  and  congenial  . 
spiritual  food.  The  world,  in  a  sense,  lives,  and  moves,  and  has  its  being,  in  him. 
He  is  in  it  as  the  spring  of  its  activities,  the  dictator  of  its  laws,  the  guider  of  its 
pursuits  and  pleasures  ;  in  a  word,  "  the  ruler  of  its  darkness."  The  darkness  of  its 
deep  alienation  from  God,  he  rules.  And  he  rules  it  very  specially  for  the  purpose 
of  getting  the  world  to  be  contented  with  an  image,  instead  of  the  reality,  of  godli- 
ness. He  takes  advantage  of  whatever  may  be  the  world's  mood  at  the  time,  as 
regards  God  and  His  worship,  throws  himself  into  it,  controlling  or  inflaming  it,  as 
he  may  see  cause,  so  as  to  turn  it  to  his  own  account.  And  then  he  contrives  to 
bring  under  his  sway  prophets  or  teachers,  not  always  consciously  false,  often 
meaning  to  be  true,  able  men,  holy  men,  men  of  God  and  of  prayer,  pre-eminently 
60  it  may  be.     And  bringing  into  contact  the  world  which  he  has  doctored  and  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  r.  JOHN.  303 

doctors  whom  he  has  tutored,  he  adjusts  them  skilfully  to  one  another.  He  causes 
his  teachers,  perhaps  insensibly,  to  draw  much  of  their  inspiration  from  the  particular 
world  which,  as  to  its  religious  bias,  he  has  influenced  with  an  eye  to  their  teaching. 
And  so  "they  are  of  the  world;  therefore  speak  they  of  the  world,  and  the  world 
heareth  them."  11.  But  "greater  is  He  that  is  in  you,  little  children,"  for  He  is  the 
Lord  God  Almighty.  He  is  strong;  and  He  "strengthens  you  with  might  by  His 
Spirit  in  the  inner  man ;  Christ  dwelleth  in  your  heart  by  faith ;  and  you  being 
rooted  and  grounded  in  love."  He  is  strong;  and  He  makes  you  strong  ;  strong  in 
holding  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  and  contending  earnestly  for  the  faith  once 
delivered  unto  the  saints  ;  strong  in  cleaving  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  strong  in 
your  real,  personal,  close,  and  loving  acquaintance  with  Him,  "  whom  to  know  is  life 
eternal."  He  who  is  in  you  is  God  ;  God  abiding  in  you  ;  giving  you  the  Spirit.  He  is 
in  you  ;  not  merely  on  your  side,  at  your  right  hand,  around  you ;  but  within  you.  He 
is  working  in  you ;  so  working  in  you  as  to  secure  your  safe  triumph,  in  this  great 
fight  of  truth  against  error,  over  the  world  and  him  who  is  in  it.  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D,D.) 
The  secret  of  overcoming  Satan  : — "  He  that  is  in  you,"  refers  to  God,  and  "  He  that 
is  in  the  world,"  refers  to  the  devil ;  and  the  first  thought  that  strikes  us  is  that 
there  is  no  attempt  in  the  Bible  to  deny  or  dispute  the  greatness  of  Satan.  I.  First, 
then,  let  us  consider  the  greatness  of  Satan  so  that  we  may  understand  the  cha- 
racter of  the  adversary  whom  we  have  to  contend  with.  The  Bible  represents 
Satan  as  the  head  of  a  great  army  of  foes.  If  you  examine  the  Epistles  to 
the  Ephesians  and  Colossians,  you  wiU  find  there  seem  to  be  seven  grades  of 
fallen  angels,  as  there  are  seven  grades  of  unfallen  angels.  We  read  of 
"  Principalities,"  "  Powers,"  "  Dominions,"  "  Authorities,"  "  Eulers,"  "  Thrones," 
"  Wicked  Spirits,"  &c.,  and  above  them  all,  as  I  beheve,  there  is  a  rank  of  arch- 
angels, or  chief  angels.  So  we  are  to  imagine  Satan  as  the  highest  over  all 
the  ranks  of  fallen  angels.  Suppose  that,  for  instance,  one  of  the  provinces  or 
colonies  of  Great  Britain  should  rebel  and  cut  loose  from  the  parent  government ;  it 
might  carry  into  its  rebellion  all  its  officers,  from  its  governor-general  down  to  the 
mayors  of  its  cities,  and  even  its  police  magistrates  ;  and  apparently  when  this  great 
rebellion  took  place  among  the  angels  of  God  they  carried  over  into  their  revolt  the 
ranks  they  had  before  rebeUion  came  among  them,  so  that  Satan  is  a  chief  demon, 
an  evil  spirit,  a  fallen  angel  of  tremendous  power.  Then,  again,  Satan  has 
marvellous  wisdom  and  knowledge.  He  knows  how  to  reach  the  human  soul ;  he 
knows  how  to  deceive  you  and  mislead  you.  When  the  Duke  of  Richmond  pre- 
sented his  report  about  "  fortifications,"  Sheridan  said,  "  I  compliment  the  noble 
president  on  his  talents  as  an  engineer,  which  were  strongly  evinced  in  planning 
and  constructing  that  paper.  .  .  .  He  has  made  it  a  contest  of  posts,  and  conducted 
his  reasoning  not  less  on  principles  of  trigonometry  than  of  logic.  There  are  certain 
assumptions  thrown  up  like  advanced  works  to  keep  the  enemy  at  a  distance  from 
the  principal  object  of  debate  ;  strong  provisos  protect  and  cover  the  flanks  of  his 
assertions,  and  his  very  queries  are  his  casemates."  And  Satan  is  a  civil  engineer. 
He  constructs  his  fortifications  to  make  the  evil  strong  and  repel  the  good.  And  so, 
as  he  is  a  demon  of  marvellous  power  and  wisdom,  is  he  also  formidable  in  his 
familiarity  with  evil,  and  it  is  this  that  constitutes  the  great  hold  of  Satan  over  the 
human  soul.  Eemember  that  he  has  in  himself  the  very  secrets  of  hell.  II.  Yet 
notwithstanding  this,  we  are  bidden  to  remember  that  "  He  that  is  in  you  is  greater 
than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  Conceding  the  greatness  of  Satan,  let  us  look  for  a 
moment  at  the  superior  greatness  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  first  place,  Jesus  Christ 
has  all  power.  Satan  has  great  power,  but  not  omnipotence.  Christ  is  not  only  a 
God  of  all  power,  but  He  is  a  God  of  all  wisdom.  Satan  is  very  wise,  but  he  is  not 
omniscient,  and  Christ  is.  Then  Jesus  Christ  is  everywhere  present.  He  is  in  your 
heart,  and  in  my  heart,  and  the  heart  of  every  disciple,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that 
of  a  true  child  of  God  we  may  still  say,  "  He  that  is  in  you  is  greater  than  he  that 
is  in  the  world,"  since  He  is  the  all-powerful,  the  all-wise,  and  the  all-present  God. 
And,  then,  remember  that  Jesus  Christ  represents  perfect  holiness,  and  holiness, 
like  the  light  of  the  sun,  positively  dispels  the  darkness,  that  is  to  say  infinite  holi- 
ness repels  evil  and  drives  evil  to  the  wall ;  and  in  the  great  ages  to  come,  when 
Christ  shall  be  crowned  as  King,  we  shall  find  darkness  absolutely  dispersed  and 
light  pervading  the  moral  universe.  II.  What  is  the  secret  of  our  possession 
AND  exercise  OF  THIS  OVERCOMING  poisTR  ?  We  are  told  in  this  epistle  that  there  are 
three  secrets  of  overcoming  power  (chap.  ii.  14 ;  iii.  8,  9,  24).  The  first  secret  is, 
the  Word  of  God  abides  in  you.  The  second  is  the  seed  of  God  abides  in  you  ;  and 
the  third  is  God  Himself  abides  in  you.    Now  look  successively  at  these  three 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

secrets.  The  "Word  of  God  is  represented  in  the  Scriptures  as  the  "  sword  of  the 
Spirit,"  "  a  two-edged  sword."  A  Damascus  scimitar  has  but  one  sharp  edge  and 
a  dull  back.  Hence  you  can  hew  with  a  scimitar,  but  you  cannot  thrust  with  it 
successfully.  But  when  you  have  two  edges  to  a  sword,  and  each  side  is  keen,  you 
can  cut  both  ways  with  such  a  blade ;  and  the  two  keen  edges  unite  in  one  burning 
point,  and  you  can  thrust  with  such  a  sword.  And  so  the  Word  of  God  is  repre- 
sented as  having  two  keen  edges  and.  one  burning  piercing  point.  Again,  it  is  repre- 
sented as  a  living  sword.  The  Word  of  God  is  quick,  i.e.,  aUve  and  powerful,  and 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword.  Knowing  the  Word,  and  having  it  in  your 
heart,  you  shall  find  that  Word  going  forth  like  a  two-edged  sword  out  of  your 
mouth,  a  Uving  sword,  and  a  powerful  sword,  that  hews  men  to  pieces  before  God, 
and  lays  bare  their  thoughts  and  intents.  Secondly,  the  seed  of  God  abides  in  the 
child  of  God.  The  seed  represents  the  living  principle.  I  suppose  you  are  all 
famihar  with  certain  great  facts  of  nature.  You  know  how,  for  instance,  in  the 
vegetable  world  the  seed  is  the  most  carefully  preserved  and  guarded  of  all  the  pro- 
ducts of  plant  life.  Here  is  a  little  plant  growing  up  and  putting  out  its  branches 
and  leaves,  and  by  and  by  its  flowers.  The  flowers  may  be  very  beautiful  and  very 
fragrant,  and  you  may  value  them  and  consider  them  the  finest  products  of  the 
plant,  but,  if  I  may  use  such  language,  the  plant  does  not  so  regard  them.  The 
thing  the  plant  cares  most  for  in  the  economy  of  nature  is  not  root  nor  stem,  is  not 
beauty  nor  blossom,  nor  even  fruit,  but  seed.  Now  the  seed  in  the  plant  and  the 
seed  in  the  animal  represents  not  only  the  highest  products  of  life,  but  the  means  of 
producing  ai>d  propagating  life,  and  therefore  the  seed  is  the  most  precious  thing  in 
nature.  And  how  significant  it  is  that  the  principle  of  life  in  God  which  represents 
the  highest  perfection  of  Deity  and  represents  the  means  by  which  God's  likeness  is 
reproduced  in  you  and  in  me  is  called  by  the  sacred  name  of  "  seed,"  and  we  are 
told  that  when  the  seed  of  God  remains  in  us  we  feel  that  we  cannot  sin.  We  have 
a  new  aflinity.  We  are  hke  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water  with  its  little 
spongelets  at  the  end  of  the  roots  drinking  up  the  blessed  water  of  life,  and  making 
sap  of  it.  That  is  what  John  means  when  he  says  the  seed  of  God  is  in  the  disciple, 
and  he  feels  that  he  cannot  sin  because  the  seed  of  God  leads  him  to  love  the  things 
of  God,  and  hate  the  things  of  the  evil  one.  But  we  are  told  once  more  that  God 
Himself  abides  in  us  (John  xiv.  23).  God  would  have  you  to  feel  this  great  fact, 
that  if  Jesus  Christ  dwells  in  you  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  makes  you  strong  to  over- 
come Satan,  as  He  Himself  was  strong  to  overcome  Satan  in  the  desert  and  in  the 
Garden  of  Gethsemane,  and  that  is  the  secret  of  your  triumph  over  evil.  We  are 
told  that  when  Hercules  was  a  little  baby  in  his  cradle,  there  were  some  serpents 
that  came  into  the  room  and  wound  their  way  into  the  cradle  and  tried  to  sting  him, 
and  folding  their  coils  round  him  to  choke  the  life  out  of  him.  But  we  are  told  in 
the  fable  that  with  his  little  hands  he  just  took  hold  of  the  necks  of  these  serpents 
and  strangled  them  to  death.  God  would  have  you  to  feel  that  a  Uttle  babe  in 
Christ  that  is  rocked  in  the  cradle  of  the  Church,  when  he  comes  into  contact  of  the 
the  great  serpent,  the  devil,  if  Jesus  is  in  him,  can  beat  back  the  serpent,  the  serpent 
cannot  strangle  him.  But  remember  this,  that  you  are  only  strong  when  you  are 
on  the  Lord's  ground,  not  on  the  devil's  ground.  Now  I  have  read  a  story  about  a 
swan  that  was  walking  on  the  shore  of  a  lake,  and  a  wolf  came  up  and  ran  after  the 
swan,  and  would  have  torn  him  to  pieces.  But  the  swan  said  to  himself,  "  I  am 
not  strong  on  the  land,  but  I  am  strong  on  the  water."  So  he  plunged  into  the 
water,  and  when  the  wolf  followed  him  into  the  water,  he  with  his  strong  bill  just 
gripped  the  wolf  by  the  ears,  and  pulled  his  head  down  under  the  water,  and 
drowned  him.  There  are  a  great  many  people  who  try  to  fight  the  devil  on  the 
devil's  ground,  and  they  always  get  defeated  ;  but  if  you  can  meet  the  devil  on  the 
Lord's  ground  you  will  defeat  him.  {A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  The  Christian's  con- 
quest over  sin : — Wherein  consists  the  superiority  of  the  power  of  good  over  the 
power  of  evil  in  us  ?  1.  The  power  of  God  is  much  nearer  to  us,  and,  by  its  relation 
to  our  true  nature,  so  much  more  capable  of  becoming  ours  than  the  power  of  evil 
or  the  devil.  We  are  the  children  of  God.  Can  the  renewed  child  of  God  say  that 
any  evil  power  lies  nearer  to  his  heart  and  more  appropriately  belongs  to  him,  than 
that  influence  of  a  Father's  love  which  he  acknowledges  to  be  the  holiest  and  most 
blessed  thing  in  the  universe  ?  2.  The  greater  power  of  good  over  us  may  be  seen 
by  comparing  those  parts  or  elements  of  our  nature  to  which  good  and  evil  influ- 
ences respectively  appeal.  On  the  one  hand,  we  have  the  appeal  of  God,  of  good, 
and  of  truth,  to  our  reason,  judgment,  and  conscience,  to  the  deepest  instincts  and 
most  fixed  principles  of  the  soul,  and  to  love,  in  itself  the  strongest  element  in  our 


CHAP.  TV."]  I.  JOHN.  305 

nature.  On  the  other  hand,  the  appeal  of  evil  is  only  to  prejudice,  fancy,  and 
appearance,  to  passion  and  to  selfishness.  3.  The  ohjects  through  which  good 
principle  influences  us  are  vastly  greater  than  those  with  which  evil  is  associated. 
Even  in  reference  to  the  present  visible  world,  we  may  see  this  contrast.  Evil, 
■which  is  necessarily  selfish,  limits  the  objects  of  our  thought  and  life  to  our  own 
mean,  narrow  selves.  It  knows  no  large  and  noble  objects  or  ends.  Good  embraces 
all  things,  aU  beings,  aU  great  and  lofty  ends.  Good  objects  and  aims  kindle  the 
heart  to  an  enthusiasm  before  which  difficulties  vanish  ;  evU  purposes  sink  the  heart 
into  meanness  and  weakness.  But  when  we  turn  to  the  invisible  and  eternal  world, 
how  much  more  striking  is  the  contrast.  God  Himself  is  the  centre  and  fountain 
of  aU  sublime  thoughts,  of  all  mighty  emotions,  and  of  all  boundless  hopes.  The 
summit  of  greatness  is  before  us  in  Christian  perfection.  All  this  greatness  we  as 
Christians  can  claim  as  our  possession  ;  and  can  all  this  dwell  in  and  fill  the  soul, 
and  yet  awaken  no  sense  of  greatness  and  power  ?  But  what  has  evil  to  compare 
with  this  ?  Where  are  its  sublime  heights,  grand  conceptions,  boundless  prospects  ? 
What  immortality  invests  it  with  unfading  splendour,  what  soUd  reason  guarantees 
its  infinity  of  bliss  ?  Can  we,  then,  say  that  the  ignoble  and  mean  has  the  same  power 
over  us  as  the  sublime  and  glorious  ?  {S.  Edger,BA.)  The  two  spirits  : — I.  There 
ABE  TWO  MiGHTT  spiEiTS  AT  WORK  AMONGST  MANKIND.  There  is  some  correspoiidence 
between  their  operation.  1.  Both  act  uncoercively.  There  is  no  invasion  of  the 
principles  of  responsibility  in  either  case.  2.  Both  act  universally.  The  one  is  the 
"  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  "  ;  the  other  is  in  aU  our  hearts.  3.  Both  act  per- 
severingly.  4.  Bojth  act  productively.  Both  "  produce  fruits  in  their  subjects  " 
(Gal.  V.  19-23).  5.  Both  act  resistibly.  "  Eesist  the  devU,  and  he  will  flee  from 
you."     "  Ye  do  always  resist  the  Spirit  of  God."    11.  That  whilst  these  spirits 

ARB  BOTH  UNIVERSAIi  IN    THEIR    INFLUENCE,  THE    SPECIAL    SPHERE   OP   THE    ONE    IS   THE 

"WORLD,"  AND  THE  OTHER,  THE  "  Church."  1.  The  Chuich  chcrishcs  the  Spirit, 
and  resists  the  devil.  2.  The  world  cherishes  the  devU,  and  resists  the  Spirit. 
in.  That  the  Spiret  whose  special  sphere  is  the  Church  is  infinitely  greater 
than  the  spirit  whose  special  sphere  is  the  world.  "  Greater  is  He  that  is  in 
you,"  Ac.  1.  The  one  that  is  in  the  Church  is  absolutely  independent ;  the  one 
that  works  in  the  world  is  not  so.  The  Holy  Spirit  can  do  whatsoever  He  please ; 
Satan  cannot  move  without  His  permission.  2.  The  one  that  is  in  the  Church 
sways  His  influence  by  absolute  right,  the  other  by  usurpation.  3.  The  one  that  is 
in  the  Church  works  to  save,  the  other  to  destroy.  4.  The  one  that  is  in  the  Church 
acts  through  truth,  the  other  through  error.  The  fijst  stone  of  Satan's  empire — 
the  foundation-stone — was  a  lie.  But  the  Spirit  works  by  truth — regenerates, 
sanctifies,  comforts,  by  truth.  Which  is  the  greater,  truth  or  error?  Truth  ia 
eternal,  error  is  not ;  truth  is  a  necessity,  error  is  a  contingency  ;  truth  is  mighty, 
error  is  weak.  A  lie  has  no  power,  only  as  it  wears  the  garb  of  truth.  Conclusion : 
1.  The  human  soul  is  an  object  of  stupendous  interest.  These  two  spirits  are  working 
for  it.  2.  The  philosophy  of  human  commotions  is  explained.  Two  opposite  spirits 
are  working  in  the  heart  of  the  world.  3.  The  ultimate  triumph  of  goodness  is 
certain.  "  Greater."  (Homilist.)  They  are  of  the  world :  therefore  speak  they 
of  the  world. — The  worldly  speak  of  the  world  : — The  water  riseth  not  (unless  forced) 
above  the  fountain.  Out  of  the  warehouse  the  shop  is  furnished.  {J  Trapp.) 
Speech  is  a  child  of  thought,  which  the  mind  always  travaUeth  and  teemeth  with, 
and  which  after  its  birth  is  wont  in  features  to  resemble  its  parent.     (J.  Barrow.) 

Ver.  6.  Hereby  know  we  the  spirit  of  truth,  and  the  spirit  of  error. — The  time 
spirit  and  the  Holy  Spirit : — I.  The  time  spirit.  What  the  Germans  call  the  Zeit- 
Geist ;  the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  What  is  that 
spirit  ?  It  is  the  world  about  us,  this  age  of  ours,  speaking  inarticulately  to  the 
soul  of  man.  The  world  lies  aU  around,  a  varied,  splendid  scene ;  vast,  rich,  fair, 
full  of  wealth  and  beauty.  Till  it  can  express  itself,  it  is  like  a  very  lovely  body 
without  a  soul.  But  it  makes  to  itself  a  voice  in  the  time  spirit,  and  so  talks  to 
our  hearts.  Its  mediums  are  manifold  and  diverse;  among  them  are  art  and 
literature ;  the  voices  vary  greatly,  according  to  race,  age,  and  clime.  This  is  an 
age  of  marvels.  Here  are  scholars  studying  and  speculating ;  inventors  planning 
and  contriving ;  politicians  doing  their  best  as  architects  of  their  own  fortunes. 
Here  be  poets,  and  painters,  mechanics  and  artig&ns  ;  here  are  grand  cities,  growing 
grander  year  after  year  ;  here  we  have  luxury,  comfort,  delights  of  aU  sorts,  music, 
world's  shows,  balls,  dances,  entertainments,  with  titles,  dress,  gala,  and  glory  to 
the  full.    What  is  aU  this?    A  mere  chaos  of  activities  tiU  the  Zeit-Geist  speaks. 

20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

To  this  it  gives,  what  is  needed,  expression  and  interpretation ;  as  the  musician 
would  say,  it  interprets  the  world's  psalm  of  the  world  life.  II.  Is  there  then  no 
OTHER  VOICE  ?  Sui'ely  something  is  lacking  here.  There  is  such  other  voice  :  the 
voice  of  another  spirit,  greater  than  the  time  spirit.  We  name  Him  in  the  Creed 
when  we  say,  "  and  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life."  Thig 
is  the  Spirit  which  speaks  against  the  spirit  of  the  age ;  which  strengthens,  purifies, 
and  elevates,  as  the  other  weakens,  corrupts,  and  depresses ;  whose  utterances  are 
wisdom  and  truth.  III.  Such  are  the  two  spirits,  which,  on  either  side,  perpetually 
address  the  soul  of  man.  How  shall  we  know  them  apart  ?  Or  rather  what  con- 
stitutes their  diiierence  ?  It  is  marked  and  strong.  The  time  spirit  preaches  boast- 
fully of  man,  of  the  world,  of  life ;  the  Holy  Spirit  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of 
judgment.  The  spirit  of  the  age  applauds  and  flatters  us ;  the  Holy  Spirit  rebukes, 
reproves,  convicts.  The  time  spirit  talks  to  us  of  the  glory  and  greatness  of  man, 
of  temporal  things  as  all-sufficient,  of  the  world  as  the  measure  of  our  destinies,  of  a 
free  and  reckless  life  without  responsibility,  faith,  or  fear.  The  Holy  Spirit  on  the 
contrary,  speaks  of  the  sin  of  man,  his  weakness  and  corruption ;  of  a  righteousness 
which  consists  in  faith,  obedience,  and  self-denial,  of  a  battle  against  the  world,  of 
a  coming  judgment  on  the  earth  and  its  guilty  tenants.  And  this  is  the  essential 
difference  between  the  voices ;  the  one  bids  to  indulgence,  the  other  to  discipline ; 
the  one  addresses  the  physical,  the  other  the  moral  nature ;  the  one  displays  the 
kingdoms  of  this  world  and  all  the  glory  of  them,  the  other  points  to  that  straight 
and  narrow  gate  through  which  we  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  There  are 
strange  fables  and  legends  of  the  old  time  and  of  the  new ;  stories  of  syrens,  who, 
singing  in  their  rock-bound  coasts,  drew  hapless  mariners  to  wreck  and  death 
before  their  cruel  eyes ;  stories  of  melodies  so  sweet  and  strange,  that  men,  if  once 
they  listened,  straightway  forgot  home,  and  kindred,  and  all  that  ever  they  knew, 
and  cared  for  nothing  but  to  listen  to  that  song  for  ever.  And  we  must  choose  what 
we  will  do ;  whether  we  will  hearken  to  the  syrens,  and  forget  thenceforth  all  that 
ever  we  were  taught  of  God  and  Christ,  of  sin  and  its  dire  penances  temporal  and 
eternal,  of  righteousness  and  its  crown.  Such  is  our  choice ;  and  it  presses  on  us 
for  a  decision,  since  the  time  is  short,  and  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away. 
{M.  Dix,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-10.  Beloved,  let  us  love  one  another. — A  triune  philosophy  : — I.  The 
PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  NEW  BIRTH.  "  Every  onc  that  loveth  is  born  of  God."  To 
begin  to  love  deeply,  truely,  purely — that  is  to  be  born  again,  for  he  that  loveth 
is  born  of  God.  II.  The  philosophy  of  the  true  knowledge  of  God.  "Every 
one  that  loveth,  knoweth  God."  Not  in  creeds  but  through  love  shall  come  true 
knowledge  of  God.  III.  The  philosophy  of  the  atonement.  "Herein  is  love," 
&c.  (B.  J.  Siiell,  31. A.)  Love  is  of  God — God  is  love  : — I.  "Love  is  of  God." 
This  does  not  mean  merely  that  love  comes  from  God,  and  has  its  source  in  God ; 
that  He  is  the  author  or  creator  of  it.  All  created  things  are  of  God,  for  by  Him 
all  things  were  made,  and  on  Him  they  all  depend.  But  love  is  not  a  created  thing. 
It  is  a  Divine  property,  a  Divine  affection.  Arid  it  is  of  its  essence  to  be  communi- 
cative and  begetting ;  to  communicate  itself,  and,  as  it  were,  beget  its  own  likeness. 
"  Love  is  of  God."  It  is  not  merely  of  God,  as  every  good  gift  is  of  God.  It  is  of 
God,  as  being  His  own  property,  His  own  affection.  His  own  love.  It  is,  wherever 
it  is  found,  the  very  love  wherewith  God  loveth.  If  it  is  found  in  me,  it  is  my  loving 
with  the  very  love  with  which  God  loves ;  it  is  my  loving  with  a  Divine  love,  a  love 
that  is  thus  emphatically  of  God.  "Every  one  that  loveth  is  bom  of  God,  and 
knoweth  God."  1.  None  but  one  born  of  God  can  thus  love  with  the  love  which, 
in  this  sense,  is  of  God  ;  therefore,  one  who  so  loves  must  needs  be  one  who  is  born 
of  God.  2.  Being  born  of  God  implies  knowing  God.  How  it  is  the  manner  of 
God  to  love ;  what  sort  of  love  His  is  ;  love  going  out  of  self ;  love  sacrificing  self ; 
love  imparting  and  communicating  self ;  love  unsought  and  unbought;  unconditional 
and  unreserved ;  what  kind  of  being,  in  respect  of  love,  God  is ;  you  who  are  born 
of  God  know,  even  as  the  only  begotten  Son  knows.  II.  The  opposite  statement 
follows  as  a  matter  of  course — "  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ;  for  God 
is  love."  To  love  with  the  love  which  is  of  God,  is  to  know  God ;  not  to  love 
thus,  is  not  to  know  God ;  for  God  is  love.  In  this  view,  the  proposition,  "  God 
is  love,"  really  applies  to  both  of  the  alternative  ways  of  putting  the  case ;  the 
positive  and  the  negative  alike.  It  assigns  the  reason  why  it  may  be  said  on 
the  one  hand,  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God  " ;  and 
why  it  may  also  be  said  on  the  other  hand, "  He  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God." 


CHAP.  IT.]  J.  JOHN.  307 

"  God  is  love."  It  is  a  necessity  of  His  nature,  it  is  His  very  nature  to  love.  He 
cannot  exist  without  loving.  "  God  is  love"  before  all  creation  ;  love  in  exercise; 
love  not  possible  merely  but  actual ;  love  forthgoing  and  communicative  of  itself  ; 
from  the  Father,  the  fountain  of  deity,  to  the  Son ;  from  the  Father  and  the  Son 
to  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  creation,  this  love  is  seen  forthgoing  and  communicative  in 
a  new  way  towards  new  objects.  Sin  enters,  and  death  by  sin  ;  all  sin,  and  all  are 
doomed.  Still  "  God  is  love " ;  the  same  love  as  ever.  And  "  in  this  now  is 
manifested  the  love  of  God  towards  us,  because  that  God  sent,"  &c.  This  is 
its  crowning  glory ;  the  saving  mission  from  God  of  His  only  begotten  Son. 
It  is  consummated  in  our  "  living  through  Him,"  through  His  "  being  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins."  For  now,  effectual  atonement  being  made  for  our 
guilt,  our  redemption  and  reconciliation  being  righteously  and,  therefore,  surely 
effected  by  His  being  the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;  we,  living  through  Him,  are  His 
brethren  indeed.  The  love  wherewith  God  loves  Him  dwells  in  us.  God  loves  us 
even  as  He  loves  Him.  And  so  at  last  the  love  which,  from  all  eternity,  it  is  of  the 
very  nature  of  God's  essential  being  to  feel  and  exercise,  finds  its  fuU  fruition  in 
the  "mighty  multitude  of  aU  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  nations,  and  tongues,  who 
stand  before  the  throne  and  give  glory  to  Him  who  sitteth  thereon,  and  to  the  Lamb 
for  ever  and  ever."  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  God's  existence  and  love  : — There 
must  of  necessity  be  in  some  quarters  to-day  a  denial  that  brotherly  love  rests  upon 
love  to  God,  because  there  is  not  a  little  denial  of  the  being  of  God  altogether.  It 
is  not  merely  the  proposition  "  God  is  love  "  which  is  contested,  but  the  previous  and 
simpler  proposition  "  God  is."  I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  that  this  is  quite  a  new 
thing ;  anyhow  it  is  as  old  as  the  fourteenth  Psalm  ;  but  certain  occurrences,  poUtical 
and  social,  and  the  attitude  assumed  by  some  of  our  scientific  men,  and  the  tone  of 
much  of  our  current  literature,  have  tended  to  give  a  prominence  and  practical 
importance  to  the  denial  that  "  God  is,"  which  it  had  not  half  a  century  ago. 
But  there  is  another  tendency  of  our  times  which  ought  to  be  noted,  and  it  is 
the  tendency  to  deny  that  "  God  is  love."  The  first  part  of  the  proposition, 
we  are  sometimes  told,  may  be  accepted  if  you  think  it  worth  asserting:  if  you 
like  to  explain  the  order  of  the  physical  universe  by  the  hypothesis  of  what  you  call 
God,  there  is  no  harm  in  it,  any  more  than  making  the  hypothesis  of  an  elastic 
medium  pervading  space,  or  of  an  electric  fluid,  or  anything  else  which  is 
hypothetical :  but  the  moment  you  attribute  purpose,  and  will,  and  love,  and 
the  exercise  of  moral  government  to  this  hypothetical  God,  then  you  are  told 
that  you  fly  in  the  face  of  modern  observation  and  discovery.  You  are  told, 
in  fact,  that  the  God  whom  science  has  revealed  is  an  unbending,  invariable, 
relentless,  pitiless  law,  as  different  from  love  as  the  strokes  of  a  steam-engine 
are  from  the  throbbings  of  a  mother's  heart.  Now  I  have  no  desire  to  under- 
rate or  misrepresent  scientific  discovery ;  I  do  not  deny,  moreover,  that  there  is 
much  that  happens  in  the  world  which  it  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  conception 
of  the  overruling  providence  of  a  loving  Father ;  any  one  who  chooses  to  hold  a 
brief  for  those  who  deny  that  "  God  is  love "  wiU  have  no  difficulty  in  finding 
arguments.  But  I  believe  the  truth  that  "  God  is  love  "  to  be  too  genuine  to  be 
overthrown  by  any  one  of  them :  I  believe  it  to  rest  upon  grounds  deeper,  more 
philosophical,  and  more  scientific,  than  any  of  the  denials  or  objections  which  can 
be  opposed  to  it.  I  believe  that  there  is  something  in  the  human  heart,  in  the 
universal  nature  of  man,  to  which  it  appeals  and  to  which  it  cannot  appeal  in  vain. 
In  the  New  Testament  the  proposition  "  God  is  love  "  is  not  an  abstract  theorem  to 
be  proved  by  the  help  of  axioms  and  postulates,  but  it  is  the  condensation  in  three 
words  of  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord.  When  I  see  that  weary,  wandering  Son 
of  man  "  going  about  doing  good,"  when  I  see  Him  feeding  the  hungry,  healing  the 
sick,  when  I  listen  to  Him  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  poor,  and  still  more  when  I 
see  Him  nailed  to  the  cross  of  shame,  then  I  bow  my  head  in  humble  adoration, 
and  I  say,  "  In  very  deed  and  truth,  God  is  love."  This  demonstration  of  the  love 
of  God  has  changed  the  face  of  the  world:  many  of  its  most  crying  evils  have 
ceased ;  a  bright  principle  of  light  and  love,  which  was  all  but  unknown  in  previous 
ages,  has  shined  upon  the  earth ;  men  have  gone  about  doing  good,  so  as  they  never 
did  before  :  hospitals  are  common  things :  we  have  seen  so  great  a  light  in  Jesus 
Christ  that  no  other  light  is  able  to  dazzle  us.  In  the  warmth  and  brightness  of 
this  Sun  of  our  souls,  we  know  and  are  persuaded  that  directly  or  indirectly  all  love 
comes  from  Him.  (Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  lessons  of  love : — If  I  mistake 
not,  our  first  instinct  is  to  suppose  that  to  know  God  must  be  some  result  of  hard 
thinking,  something  to  be  got  by  books,  or  something  which  is  granted  to  intellectual 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

power.     Whatever  truth  there  may  be  in  this,  there  is  no  allusion  to  it  all  through 
Scripture  which  does  not  lead  us  to  connect  the  thought  of  knowing  God  with  the 
study,  or  the  library,  or  the  laboratory.    It  carries  us  into  another  region  ;  it  speaks 
of  a  knowledge  which  is  open  to  the  poor,  the  uneducated,  the  young.     It  speaks  of 
a  state  of  mind  rather  than  of  a  degree  of  attainment ;  something  which  leads  you 
to   say  and  to  feel  as  you   see  it  in  others,  not  "how  wonderful!"   but  "how 
beautiful!" — not  "how  did  he  amass  all  those  stores  of  learning?"  but,  "how 
did  he  become  so  noble  and  so  like  Christ  ?  "    He  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God. 
Is  that  a  hard  saying  to  any  of  us  ?    What,  we  ask,  the  mightiest  intellect  of  modern 
times,  rich  with  the  spoils  of  time,  does  not  that  intellect  know  God  ?     No,  is  the 
Divine  answer,  not  if  the  man  be  selfish.     It  is  one  thing  to  know  about  God,  to 
know  what  has  been  said  of  Him  and  written  and  thought  of  Him,  and  what  science 
has  revealed  to  us  as  to  the  modes  of  the  operations  of  His  hands.     This  is  one 
thing ;  but  to  know  God  is  another.    To  know  God  in  any  true  sense  is  to  be  unsel- 
fish, to  be  loving,  to  have  towards  others  the  heart  of  a  brother.     He  who  gave  us 
the  intellect  wishes  us  to  use  the  intellect  according  to  our  age,  our  strength,  our 
opportunities.      Still  aU  this  knowledge  is  at  the  best  knowledge  about  God  not 
knowledge  of   God.      Let  us  dare  to  look  on  yet  further,  and  lift  the  wings  of 
the  soul.      Are  we  speaking  only  of  that  which  is,  or  of  that  also  which   shall 
be  hereafter?      Of  what  kind  do  you  suppose  will  be  that  higher  knowledge? 
Will  it  differ  in  kind  from  that  which  was  learned  often  so  painfully  on  earth  ? 
Will  there  be  one  measurement  for  the  "  pure  in  heart "  who  on  earth  have  "  seen 
God,"  and  another  for  those  who  wake  up  after  His  likeness  and  see  His  face  in 
heaven  ?    Will  the  higher  knowledge  be  more  of  the  illumined  intellect,  and  less  of 
the  adoring  heart  ?    If  so,  it  would  not  be  a  higher  knowledge  in  the  spiritual  order ; 
it  would  be  a  lower,  with  more  of  earth  in  it  and  less  of  heaven.     Every  one  that 
loveth  wlU  still  know  God,  and  he  that  loveth  not  will  still  not  know  God.     Or,  if 
we  pass  beyond  the  region  of  glowing  words,  and  think  calmly  of  what  we  have  seen 
and  felt  in  our  short  passage  through  life,  what  report  have  we  to  bring  on  this  high 
matter  ?    When  have  we  seemed  to  ourselves  to  be  least  ignorant  of  our  God,  or, 
may  I  dare  say,  understand  Him  best  ?    Has  it  been  when  we  were  trying  to  spell 
out  some  hard  passages  in  the  Bible,  or  the  Creed,  or  when  we  caught  the  echo  of 
some  far  off  thunder  of  controversy ;  or  has  it  not  rather  been  when  our  hearts 
■were  touched  by  something  "lovely"  or  "of  good  report";  when  we  mourned 
unselfishly  some  common  loss ;  when  something  so  moved  us  at  the  very  centre 
of  our  being  that  aU  distinctions  of  age,  of  ability,  of  position  were  merged  and 
lost  in  one  full  tide  of  brotherly  affection,  and  we  seemed  for  a  time  almost  surprised 
at  the  nearness  and  clearness  of  heaven  ?     There  are  times,  for  example,  in  early 
childhood,  when  we  have  committed  some  fault.     Conscience  acts  with  sternness, 
and  makes  her  terrors  known,  but  soon  love  casts  out  fear ;  we  cannot  bear  to  have 
done  wrong  to  a  mother,  or  a  sister ;  confession  is  a  necessity ;  we  must  have  human 
forgiveness,  because,  though  as  yet  we  know  it  not,  it  is  to  us  the  image  and  the 
representative  of  the  Divine.     Then  in  that  weakness  and  majesty  of  childish  love 
which  resists  sin  and  insists  on  pardon,  we  have  the  knowledge  of  God.     Young  as 
we  are,  we  look  on  life  with  the  eyes  of  love  and  hope.     We  long  to  succour,  to 
reform,  to  purify,  to  save.    But  these  eyes  of  love  and  hope  are  in  truth  the  eyes  of 
God.     Or  once  more,  that  which  has  touched  us  has  been  the  closing  scene  of  life. 
We  have  gathered  round  some  good  man's  grave.    Who  shall  measure  the  teaching 
power  of  the  great  ?    What  pulpit,  what  creed,  what  treatise  on  theology,  can  match 
for  one  moment  with  the  open  tomb  in  teaching  the  knowledge  of  God  ?    And  why  ? 
Because  we  then  have  ears  to  hear ;   because  the  heart  is  not  closed,  but  open ; 
because,  if  I  may  dare  to  say  so,  the  spirit  of  Christian  love  is  in  the  air.     Our 
hearts  recall  the  gifts  and  the  graces  of  the  Christian  dead  which  made  him  the 
loved  and  honoured.      Such  lives,  such  characters,  such  memories  are,  indeed, 
teachers  in  the  knowledge  of  God.      Yes,  if  it  be,  indeed,  the  sober  truth,  if  it 
be  the  real  state  of  the  case  in  the  external  world,  iSiat  "  every  one  that  loveth 
knoweth  God,"  then  our  best,  perhaps  our  only  teachers  in  this  high  knowledge  are 
those  who  have  loving,  unselfish  hearts,  and  draw  us,  whether  by  the  loving  voice 
of  an  inexorable  silence,  to  think  of  Him  who  in  the  language  of  heaven  is  love. 
(H.  M.  Butler,  D.D.)  The  love  of  God  .—I.  The  title  "  beloved."      It  comes 

most  naturally  from  John.  He  was  old,  and  yet  the  ardent  affection  of  youth 
still  animated  his  soul.  It  is  a  noble  triumph  of  grace  to  see  this  spirit  main- 
tained and  manifested  to  the  last.  John  had  seen  and  felt  much  to  disappoint 
and  distress  hkn.     How  he  must  have  been  exercised  when  he  wrote  3  John  9,  10. 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  309 

All  this,  and  much  of  the  same  kind,  did  not  cool  his  warm  heart.     Its  love  stiU 
came  gushing  forth  as  it  had  done  in  the  days  of  his  Divine  Master.      II.  The 
DUTY  OF  CHERISHING  BROTHERLY  LOVE  Implied  in  the  exhortatioH,  "Let  us  love  one 
another."    While  love  is  natural  to  the  gracious  soul,  and  cannot  be  suppressed,  it 
is  yet  very  susceptible  of  culture,  and  may  be  much  strengthened  by  the  exercise  of 
the  duty.     Love  may  be  increased  by  contemplating  its  object.     In  the  present  case 
that  object  is  the  believer.    Suppose,  then,  that  we  consider  him  thoughtfully,  what 
will  be  the  effect?     We  think  of  his  position  and  what  is  peculiar  to  it.     His 
advantages   and  temptations,  and  duties  and  responsibilities  present  themselves 
io  us.    As  we  think  of  these  we  cannot  help  sympathising  with  him,  and  praying 
for  him,  and  helping  him  as  we  have  the  opportunity.    Again,  as  we  are  in  the 
presence  of  a  loved  object,  so  is  our  affection  increased.     Hence  arises  the  duty 
of  cultivating  the  society  of  the  godly.     Acquaintance  will  secure  many  common 
advantages,  and  prevent  many  evils.     How  often  have  we  cherished  a  prejudice 
against  some  one  until  it  was  dissipated  by  one  friendly  interview !     We  may  add, 
the  more  we  serve  the  object  we  love,  the  greater  wUl  be  our  attachment  to  it.    It  is 
not  merely  that  habit  confirms  and  increases  the  grace  ;  but  while  this  is  true,  every 
act  of  kindness  we  render  draws  out  the  heart  in  greater  kindliness.     HI.  Many 
COGENT  REASONS  are  assigned  by  the  apostle  for  the  exercise  of  this  duty,  which  we 
proceed  to  consider.     1.  "  Love  is  of  God."     It  has  its  origin  in  Him.     The  more 
we  possess  it,  the  more  we  resemble  Him.     To  have  loved,  therefore,  is  to  be  God- 
like.    2.  "Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God."     Such  love  as  He  cherishes  is 
not  natural  to  man.     It  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  and  habit  of  a  sinner.     It  exists 
only  in  the  renewed  heart.     It  is  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     In  all  its  exercises, 
its  gracious  nature  and  source  are  conspicuous.     It  is  directed  mainly  to  the  people 
of   God.      3.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  knoweth  God."      4.  "  He  that  loveth  not 
knoweth  not  God."     This  is  said  in  the  way  of  warning  and  confirmation.    Let 
no  man  deceive  himself.     If  there  be  not  love  there  cannot  be  the  knowledge  of 
God.     5.  But  the  weightiest  reason  of  all  yet  remains,  "  God  is  love."     The  essence 
of  God  is  love.     Power  is  a  perfection.     Wisdom  is  a  perfection.     Truth  is  a  per- 
fection.   But  it  would  not  be  sufficient  to  say  love  is  a  perfection.     It  lies  as  the 
substratum  of  the  Divine  character  beneath  all  the  perfections  of  God.    It  stimulates 
and  employs  them  all.      (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)         Christian  love  : — Nothing  can  be 
more    explicit.      The  whole    nature   of    religion,   as  it   is   interpreted  to  us  in 
Christianity,  is  comprised  in  that  one  word — love.      The  Divine  nature  is  love; 
and  piety  in  us  is  to  be  love.      When  a  great  structure  is   arising,   there  are 
multitudes  of  labourers ;   there  are   artisans  in  wood,  in   stone,  in  clay,  in  iron 
and  metals  ;  and  each  in  his  own  department  is  in  lawful  authority.    But  higher 
than  all  of  them  is  the  artist  and  architect.     His  controlling  authority  brings  all 
these  various   workers  together,   Umits   and   directs    their  tasks,   gives  to  their 
co-operative  skUl  a  central  unity  toward  which  they  all  are  unconsciously  tending. 
Does  he,  then,  abate  or  limit  the  power  of  the  heads  of  departments  underneath 
him  ?    Is  not  his  influence  necessary  to  their  greatest  development  and  the  highest 
triumphs  of  their  several  skills  ?     So  in  that  temple  of  the  human  soul,  which  each 
one  of  us  is  building  by  the  industries  of  many  noble  and  potent  faculties,  Love  is 
the  architect,  and  gives  the  lines  for  a  foundation,  and  forms  the  proportions,  and 
teaches  all  these  diverse  faculties,  not  how  to  work  in  their  kind  and  nature,  but 
how,  working  in  their  kind  and  nature,  to  subserve  higher  purposes  by  a  Divine 
unity,  and  purity,  and  moral  excellence.     Love  unites  their  agencies.     I.  Let  us 
employ  this  truth  as  a  criterion  of  human  character.     The  law  of  God  is  the 
only  thing  by  which  we  can  measure  a  character.     That  law,  set  forth  for  man's 
obedience,  is  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  supremely,  and  thy  fellow  man  as 
thyself.     Now  let  us  apply  this  test.     Does  any  man  hve  that  does  not  violate  this 
command  of  God,  "  Thou  shalt  love  "  ?    Let  us  look  inward  for  one  single  moment. 
Did  you  ever  know  a  man  who  could  say,  I  have  never,  from  the  hour  of  conscious 
intelligence,  carried  my  intellect  so  that  in  its  operations  I  have  violated  the  law  of 
love  ?     Let  a  man  summon  to  the  bar  of  his  own  conscience,  pride.     What  a  man 
would  be  physically  without  a  backbone,  that  he  would  be  mentally  without  the 
element  of  pride.     And  yet,  has  this  element  been  so  controlled  in  any  man  that  it 
can  rise  up  and  say,  "  I  have  never  disregarded,  either  negatively  or  positively,  the 
supreme  law  of  love  "  ?     Summon  that  most  lithe  and  nimble  feeling — the  love  of 
praise — and  what  man  can  say,  "  I  have  so  carried  my  vanity,  my  approbativeness, 
that  it  has  always  been  in  subordination  to  the  law  of  love  "  ?     Can  any  man  say, 
"  My  imagination  has  so  acted  as  never  to  infract  the  law  of  love  "  ?    Or,  can  any 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

man  say,  "  My  moral  sentiments  have  so  acted  as  never  to  overstep  the  law  of  love  "  ? 
What,  then,  shall  we  say  of  the  lower  feelings  ?  What  of  the  business,  executive 
powers  ?  What  of  the  passions  and  appetites  ?  Go  through  the  soul,  and  look  at 
every  one  of  the  faculties,  and  is  there  one  that  has  not  violated  this  law  ?  I  go 
still  further.  The  action  of  each  element  in  the  soul  has  been  such  that  its  obedience 
to  the  law  of  love  has  been  occasional,  has  been  rare.  There  are  spots  where  almost 
everybody,  first  or  last,  has  felt  some  glow  and  warming  of  love  ;  but  to  the  greatest 
number  of  men  that  ever  dwelt  on  earth,  love  has  been  just  what  Northern  days  are, 
when  the  sun  stands  above  the  horizon  only  one  short  hour,  is  sunk  below  it  for  the 
other  twenty-three,  and  is  growing  worse  and  worse  toward  the  six-months  night. 
Is  not  the  whole  of  our  outer  life,  is  not  our  daily  conduct,  are  not  our  ambitions, 
are  not  our  secular  ends,  is  not  our  treatment  of  men,  organised  and  solidly  con- 
structed upon  a  selfish  motive  ?  Thus  the  inward  life  and  the  outward  conduct  of 
men  both  come  to  one  and  the  same  testimony.  They  are  both  of  them  built  up 
not  only  outside  of  God's  law,  but  right  over  against  it,  and  in  antagonism  with  it. 
These  being  the  facts  :  God's  command  of  love  being  neglected,  and  your  character 
and  whole  history  turning  on  the  infraction  of  it,  ought  I  not  to  lay  this  terrible 
truth  before  you,  and  roll  it  again  and  again  upon  you  ?  In  my  own  case,  the  belief 
of  this  doctrine,  instead  of  being  an  injury,  has  been  a  benefit.  My  charity  for 
men  has  been  augmented  in  the  proportion  in  which  my  opinion  of  their  goodness 
has  been  lowered.  When  I  deal  with  men  on  the  supposition  that  they  are  good,  I 
am  roused  with  impatience  at  the  manifestations  of  their  wickedness ;  and  when  I 
deal  with  them  on  the  supposition  that  they  are  altogether  sinful,  I  expect  nothing 
from  them,  and  I  find  myself  prepared  beforehand  to  treat  them  with  charity  and 
forbearance.  11.  This  truth  affords,  also,  a  ckiterion  of  conveksion.  There  are 
such  loose  notions  of  what  religion  is,  that  we  cannot  too  urgently  hold  attention 
to  the  fact  that  in  Christ's  kingdom  love  is  a  characteristic  element  of  piety ;  and 
that  when  a  man  is  converted  genuinely,  he  must  be  converted  to  the  spirit  of  love. 
There  may  be  other  things  with  this  spirit,  but  it  is  this  that  makes  piety  in  Christ's 
kingdom.  Let  us  make  some  discriminations.  A  man  may  come  to  a  certain  state 
of  great  and  sudden  joy,  and  of  relish  for  religious  exercises,  and  yet  not  be  a 
Christian.  Eeligious  inspirations  and  great  fertility  of  feeling,  of  fancy,  fervour 
of  emotion,  and  elegant  utterance,  are  not  evidences,  in  themselves,  of  piety. 
They  are  blessed  concomitants  of  it  often ;  but  they  may  exist  separately  from 
and  independently  of  piety.  Your  piety  is  to  be  tested  by  its  consistency  with 
God's  law  of  love.  The  power  of  right  ideas,  the  clearness  with  which  you 
take  hold  of  them,  the  aptness  with  which  you  are  able  to  state  them,  your 
zeal  for  them — all  these,  while  they  are  desirable  in  piety,  are  not  characteristic 
of  it ;  and  a  man  may  have  them  and  not  be  a  Christian.  God's  orthodoxy  is  of 
the  heart  always.  That  will  make  the  head  con-ect.  A  man,  also,  may  have  great 
faith  and  not  be  a  Christian.  I  go  further,  and  say  that  a  man  may  be  a  very 
generous,  good  fellow,  a  very  agreeable,  companionable  man,  and  yet  not  be  a 
Christian.  A  man,  likewise,  may  have  an  unflinching  zeal  in  religion,  and 
constancy  in  its  service,  even  to  martyrdom,  and  yet  not  be  a  Christian.  How 
many  there  are  that  are  wardens  and  doorkeepers  of  God's  house,  who  have  no  love, 
no  benevolence,  no  conscience,  no  fidelity.  Zeal  they  may  have,  but  summer  in  the 
soul  they  have  not.  I  go  still  further,  and  say  that  religiousness  is  not  piety.  Far 
be  it  from  me  to  say  a  word  to  discourage  reverence,  devoutness,  awe,  in  the  presence 
of  God.  But  that  alone,  that  without  love,  is  not  enough.  With  love,  it  makes 
piety  broader  and  deeper,  and  life  more  massive  and  noble ;  but  unless  there  be, 
first,  intermediate,  and  last,  the  spirit  and  the  law  of  love,  there  is  no  piety.  When 
a  man  is  converted,  therefore,  it  is  very  important  that  he  should  be  converted  to 
the  right  thing.  No  man  is  a  Christian  till  he  is  converted  to  the  law  of  love. 
Since  you  made  a  profession  of  religion,  are  you  kinder  in  the  various  relations  of 
life  ?  Is  your  life  more  full  of  the  fruits  of  love  ?  Have  you  a  more  comprehensive 
benevolence  toward  all  mankind  ?  Every  year  do  you  less  and  less  accept  the 
service  of  loving  men  as  a  task,  and  do  you  more  and  more  accept  it  with 
cheerfulness?  Do  you  find  that  the  currents  of  your  thought  and  feeling  are 
setting  outward  instead  of  inward  ?  Are  you  more  full  of  the  sweetness  of  a 
true  Christian's  love  ?  In  this  direction  you  must  measure  to  know  whether 
you  are  growing  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.      {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christian  love  ; — If   a  writer  upon   the   vegetable 

kingdom  should  say,  "  The  tree  is  of  God,"  he  would  not  be  supposed  to  state 
any  such  commonplace  fact  that  all  the  trees  of  the  orchard  and  grove  are  Hia 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  311 

handiwork,  but  would  be  thought  to  mean  some  special  genus  or  species  of  tree,  so 
far  exalted  in  form,  uses,  or  beauty  above  other  trees  as  to  entitle  it  to  this  great 
distinction.  It  is  the  tree  by  eminence — the  tree  of  God.  So  when  John  says  "  love 
is  of  God,"  he  indicates  a  special  kind  of  love — a  peculiar  form  or  expression  of 
love,  so  different  from  every  other,  so  far  above  and  beyond  every  other  as  to  merit 
the  distinction  that  it  is  from  God.  I.  Such  is  Christian  love,  and  that  we  may 
understand  and  appreciate  it,  we  must  contbast  it  with  other  tokms  and  degrees 

OF    THAT   AFFECTION  OF    THE    SOUL   WHICH   WE    CALL   LOVE.       1.    It  iS  HOt  the  loVC  of  the 

parent  for  the  child,  nor  of  the  child  for  the  parent.     This  is,  doubtless,  God- 
emplanted.     2.  Christian  love  is  not  the  love  of  friend  for  friend,  nor  what  is  called 
sexual  love.     This  often  springs  from  the  most  trivial  causes — caprices  of  fancy. 
3.  It  is  not  the  love  of  complacency,  which  in  its  first  and  highest  sense  belongs  to 
God,  or  His  love  for  all  men,  which  bears  with  sin,  defiance,  rebellion,  and  suspends 
penalty.    4.  It  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  even  the  finest  intellectual  apprehensions 
of  the  perfect  and  glorious  attributes  of  God.     5.  Nor  is  it  identical  with  profound 
admiration  for  the  work  of  God,  with  that  easy  and  prevalent  sentimentalism  which 
is  the  creature  of  sublimity,  magnitude,  and  natural  beauty.     11.  Let  us  reach  it 
BY  DEGREES — POSITIVELY — 1.  With  icspcct  to  God  as  its  object,  it  is  an  affection 
largely  independent  of  extensive  and  accurate  knowledge.    A  man  may  be  a  sage 
or  philosopher,  and  know  it  not.     The  savage  or  boor  may  know  its  meaning, 
feel  its    power.      2.   It  flows    out    toward    man  in  the    proportion    that  he  is 
like   God.      3.   It  is   elective — knows  by  a  singular  instinct  the  true   and  the 
false.      4.   It  is  unselfish    and   disinterested.      5.   Christian    love  is  charitable. 
6.    It    is    operative    and    practical.       7.    It    is    progressive.       (J.    C.    French.) 
Love  of  relations  and  friends  : — There  have  been  men  who  have  supposed  Christian 
love  was  so  diffusive  as  not  to  admit  of  concentration  upon  individuals,  so  that  we 
ought  to  love  all  men  equally.    And  many,  without  bringing  forward  any  theory,  yet 
consider  practically  that  the  love  of  many  is  something  superior  to  the  love  of  one  or 
two,  and  neglect  the  charities  of  private  life,  while  busy  in  the  schemes  of  an  expan- 
sive benevolence,  or  of  effecting  a  general  union  and  concihation  among  Christians. 
I  shall  here  maintain,  in  opposition  to  such  notions,  that  the  best  preparation  for 
loving  the  world  at  large,  and  loving  it  duly  and  wisely,  is  to  cultivate  an  intimate 
friendship  and  affection  towards  those  who  are  immediately  about  us.     It  has  been 
the  plan  of  Divine  Providence  to  ground  what  is  good  and  true  in  religion  and  morals 
on  the  basis  of  our  good  natural  feeUngs.    What  we  are  towards  our  earthly  friends 
in  the  instincts  and  wishes  of  our  infancy,  such  we  are  to  become  at  length  towards 
God  and  man  in  the  extended  field  of  our  duties  as  accountable  beings.     To  honour 
our  parents  is  the  first  step  towards  honouring  God ;  to  love  our  brethren  according 
to  the  flesh,  the  first  step  towards  considering  all  men  our  brethren.    The  love  of  God 
is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  love  of  our  parents,  though  parallel  to  it ;  but  the  love  of 
mankind  in  general  should  be  in  the  main  the  same  habit  as  the  love  of  our  friends, 
only  exercised  towards  different  objects.     The  great  difficulty  in  our  reUgious  duties 
is  their  extent.     This  frightens  and  perplexes  men,  naturally ;  those  especially  who 
have  neglected  rehgion  for  a  while,  and  on  whom  its  obligations  disclose  themselves 
all  at  once.     This,  for  example,  is  the  great  misery  of  leaving  repentance  tiU  a  man 
is  in  weakness  or  sickness ;   he  does  not  know  how  to  set  about  it.    Now  God's 
merciful  providence  has  in  the  natural  course  of  things  narrowed  for  us  at  first  this 
large  field  of  duty ;  He  has  given  us  a  clue.    We  are  to  begin  with  loving  our  friends 
about  us,  and  gradually  to  enlarge  the  circle  of  our  affections,  till  it  reaches  all 
Christians,  and  then  all  men.      By  trying  to  love  our  relations  and  friends,  by 
submitting  to  their  wishes,  though  contrary  to  our  own,  by  bearing  with  their 
infirmities,  by  overcoming  their  occasional  waywardness  by  kindness,  by  dwelling 
on  their  excellences  and  trying  to  copy  them,  thus  it  is  that  we  form  in  our  hearts 
that  root  of  charity  which,  though  small  at  first,  may,  like  the  mustard  seed,  at  last 
even  overshadow  the  earth.      Further,  that  love  of  friends  and  relations,  which 
nature  prescribes,  is  also  of  use  to  the  Christian,  in  giving  form  and  direction  to  his 
love  of  mankind  at  large,  and  making  it  intelligent  and  discriminating.     A  man  who 
would  fain  begin  by  a  general  love  of  all  men,  necessarily  puts  them  all  on  a  level, 
and,  instead  of  being  cautious,  prudent,  and  sympathising  in  his  benevolence,  ia 
hasty  and  rude,  does  harm  perhaps  when  he  means  to  do  good,  discourages  the 
virtuous  and  weU-meaning,   and  wounds  the  feelings   of  the  gentle.      Men  of 
ambitious  and  ardent  minds,  for  example,  desirous  of  doing  good  on  a  large  scale, 
are  especially  exposed  to  the  temptation  of  sacrificing  individual  to  general  good  in 
their  plans  of  charity.    We  can  easily  afford  to  be  liberal  on  a  large  scale,  when  we 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

have  no  affections  to  stand  in  the  way.  Those  who  have  not  accustomed  themselves 
to  love  their  neighbours  whom  they  have  seen,  will  have  nothing  to  lose  or  gain, 
nothing  to  grieve  at  or  rejoice  in,  in  their  larger  plans  of  benevolence.  They  will 
take  no  interest  in  them  for  their  own  sake  ;  rather,  they  will  engage  in  them 
because  expedience  demands,  or  credit  is  gained,  or  an  excuse  found  for  being  busy. 
Hence  too  we  discern  how  it  is  that  private  virtue  is  the  only  sure  foundation  of 
public  virtue  ;  and  that  no  national  good  is  to  be  expected  (though  it  may  now  and 
then  accrue)  from  men  who  have  not  the  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes.  I  have 
hitherto  considered  the  cultivation  of  domestic  affections  as  the  source  of  more 
extended  Christian  love.  Did  time  permit,  I  might  now  go  on  to  show  besides  that 
they  involve  a  real  and  difficult  exercise  of  it.  Nothing  is  more  likely  to  engender 
selfish  habits  (which  is  the  direct  opposite  and  negation  of  charity)  than  independence 
in  our  worldly  circumstances.  And  this  is  one  among  the  many  providential  benefits 
(to  those  who  will  receive  them)  arising  out  of  the  holy  estate  of  matrimony,  which 
not  only  calls  out  the  tenderest  and  gentlest  feelings  of  our  nature,  but,  where 
persons  do  their  duty,  must  be  in  various  ways  more  or  less  a  state  of  self-denial. 
Or,  again,  I  might  go  on  to  consider  the  private  charities,  which  have  been  my  subject, 
not  only  as  the  sources  and  as  the  discipline  of  Christian  love,  but  further,  as  the 
perfection  of  it ;  which  they  are  in  some  cases.  The  Ancients  thought  so  much  of 
friendship  that  they  made  it  a  virtue.  In  a  Christian  view,  it  is  not  quite  this ;  but 
it  is  often  accidentally  a  special  test  of  our  virtue.  For  consider — let  us  say  that  this 
man,  and  that,  not  bound  by  any  very  necessary  tie,  find  their  greatest  pleasure  in 
living  together  ;  say  that  this  continues  for  years,  and  that  they  love  each  other's 
society  the  more  the  longer  they  enjoy  it.  Now  observe  what  is  impUed  in  this. 
Young  people,  indeed,  readily  love  each  other,  for  they  are  cheerful  and  innocent, 
more  easily  yield  to  each  other,  and  are  fuU  of  hope — types,  as  Christ  says,  of  His 
true  converts.  But  this  happiness  does  not  last ;  their  tastes  change.  Again,  grown 
persons  go  on  for  years  as  friends ;  but  these  do  not  live  together ;  and,  if  any 
accident  throws  them  into  famiharity  fof  a  while,  they  find  it  difficult  to  restrain 
their  tempers  and  keep  on  terms,  and  discover  that  they  are  best  friends  at  a 
distance.  But  what  is  it  that  can  bind  two  friends  together  in  intimate  converse  for 
a  course  of  years  but  the  participation  in  something  that  is  unchangeable  and  essen- 
tially good,  and  what  is  this  but  religion  ?  (J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  Brotherly 
love  : — A  famous  writer  has  said  that  "  religion  is  moraUty  touched  with  emotion." 
That  is  a  very  inadequate  and  unsatisfactory  definition  of  Christianity ;  the  only 
word  that  can  adequately  define  the  religion  of  Christ  is  love.  I.  A  very  tendeb 
appeal:  "Beloved."  1.  The  cold,  stoical  nature  is  a  power,  but  it  is  a  power  that 
repels  from  it,  it  never  draws,  it  has  not  the  least  attractive  force  m  it.  If  we  would 
win  men  and  persuade  them  to  act  as  brethren,  let  us  use  tenderness.  We  need  not 
use  it  to  the  exclusion  of  the  light,  purity,  and  truth  of  reUgion.  2.  The  sweet 
reasonableness  of  the  appeal  would  have  great  force  with  those  to  whom  the  apostle 
wi'ote.  Did  they  not  owe  everything  in  a  religious  sense  to  love,  for  had  they  not 
been  told  over  and  over  again  that "  God  so  loved  the  world  ?  "  &c.  The  hardest  and 
most  sohd  ice  will  yield  to  the  genial  influences  of  the  sun,  and  the  most  hardened 
and  stubborn  hearts  will  yield  to  the  gracious  power  of  love  when  every  other  force 
will  fail  to  influence  them.  3.  It  was  a  consistent  appeal.  John's  tender  words 
came  from  a  large  and  loving  heart ;  it  was  because  his  heart  felt  that  his  Ups  spake 
the  soft  and  gentle  word.  U.  An  argument.  "  For  love  is  of  God."  Fire  is  found 
in  many  objects  very  dissimilar  one  from  the  other.  It  is  found  in  coal  in 
considerable  quantity,  it  abounds  in  wood,  it  is  contained  in  iron,  and  it  is  locked 
up  in  the  flint ;  and  it  appears  that  there  is  some  little  measure  of  it  in  water  even. 
It  would  seem  that  the  sun  cannot  touch  any  object  without  imparting  to  some 
degree  its  own  nature  to  that  object;  for,  as  you  are  aware,  the  sun  is  the 
inexhaustible  source  of  fire  wherever  it  is  found,  whether  in  the  coal,  or  flint,  or 
water.  And  wherever  we  meet  with  love,  whether  in  the  husband  to  the  wife,  or  the 
wife  to  the  husband,  the  brother  to  the  sister,  or  the  sister  to  the  brother,  the  friend 
to  the  friend,  or  in  one  Christian  to  another  ;  wherever  we  meet  with  it,  God  is  the 
source  of  it,  "  for  God  is  love."  In  this  argument  John  appeals  to  one  of  the  most 
powerful  instincts  in  man — the  desire  to  be  like  ihe  great.  To  imitate  the  great  is 
a  universal  passion  in  men.  To  paint  like  the  great  masters  is  the  one  all-consuming 
passion  of  artists.  If  we  carefully  considered  the  thought  in  our  calmer  moments 
that  to  love  is  to  be  like  God,  the  very  sublimity  of  the  idea  would  be  enough  to 
inspire  us  to  "  love  one  another,"  even  if  every  other  motive  failed.  Where  there  is 
brotherly  love,  there  is  sure  to  be  generous  help  if  it  be  needed.     III.  Two  liipouTANX 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  313 

SIGNS  OF  LOVE.  1.  Divine  sonship — "  And  every  one  that  loveth  is  begotten  of  God." 
These  are  very  encouraging  words.  Almost  all  Christian  people  are  sorely  tried  with 
dark  and  crushing  doubts  at  one  time  or  other  in  their  history.  In  such  moments 
of  spiritual  experience  one  of  the  most  effectual  ways  of  removing  the  wretched  doubt 
is  to  ask  ourselves  the  question,  "  Do  I  love  God  and  my  brethren  ?  "  If  the  answer 
be  "  Yes,"  then  we  may  console  ourselves  that  we  possess  one  of  the  most  unmistakable 
Bigns  of  sonship.  2.  A  power  to  recognise  God.  "  And  every  one  that  loveth  .  .  . 
knoweth  God."  The  great  intellect  may  recognise  Him  in  His  works  and  deaUngs 
with  men,  but  much,  if  not  everything,  in  regard  to  our  knowledge  of  God  depends 
upon  the  state  of  the  heart.  It  is  not  of  a  mere  superficial  acquaintance  with  God 
that  the  apostle  is  speaking,  such  as  we  obtain  of  an  object  or  a  person  by  just  seeing 
him  a  few  times ;  he  is  speaking  of  that  knowledge  which  is  the  grand  result  of 
apprehending  God  as  the  Father  of  our  spirits  and  the  Author  of  salvation — it  is  the 
knowledge  that  ripens  into  a  firm  faith  and  a  calm  trust  in  God  as  our  unfailing 
Friend,  who  is  reconcUing  the  world  to  Himself  in  Jesus  Christ.  (D.  Rhys  Jenkins.) 
The  voice  of  God  through  human  love : — The  true  love,  of  which  I  would  speak, 
may  be  thus  defined — desire  for  the  well-being  of  another.  Whenever  a  person  acte 
in  the  sole  interest  of  another,  and  on  his  behalf  alone,  he  is  showing  his  love  for 
him.  1.  That  love  is  an  instinct  or  property  of  human  nature  needs  httle  or  no 
illustration.  2.  There  is  a  word  to  say  also  about  the  difference  between  love  and 
the  conscience.  There  is  no  conflict  of  claims  here.  Love  and  conscience  both  alike 
demand  that  we  shall  do  our  duty.  But  love  will  often  discern  what  that  duty  is 
before  the  reason  has  a  chance  to  be  heard  or  the  conscience  has  uttered  its  call. 
Love  leaps  up  to  enjoy  doing  what  the  colder  and  more  sluggish  conscience  only  says 
we  ought  to  do.  3.  That  we  depend  largely  on  knowledge  for  a  right  indulgence  of 
our  love.  Just  as  conscience  requires  us  to  do  our  best  and  to  take  pains  to  discover 
what  is  right,  so  true  love  demands  still  more  anxiety.  A  mother  bending  over  the 
sick  bed  of  her  son  is  racked  with  feverish  anxiety  to  know  what  wUl  do  him  good. 
With  no  less  anxiety  does  a  truly  loving  heart  long  to  know  and  try  to  discover  what 
is  best  to  be  done  for  the  dear  one's  benefit.  Love  is  an  active,  not  a  passive 
principle.  It  is  self-sacrifice,  not  self-will  or  the  worship  of  crotchets.  True  love 
begins  at  home,  and  if  she  is  allowed  her  due  rights  there,  she  will  not  be  wanting 
when  we  go  abroad,  nor  fail  us  in  our  dealings  with  strangers  or  with  the  lower 
creation.  4.  Love  is  the  parent  of  many  virtues.  In  the  first  place,  love  begets 
justice.  Not  only  justice  of  deed  but  justice  of  thought,  of  which  we  all  stand  even 
more  in  need.  You  cannot  be  just  to  any  one  whom  you  dislike  or  hate,  you  cannot 
be  just  and  true  to  any  one  for  whom  your  love  is  not  pure  and  true.  True  love 
then  adds  to  justice  the  quality  of  mercy,  not  sparing  in  the  condemnation  of  the 
Bin,  but  tender,  merciful,  and  forgiving  to  the  sinner.  Then  we  find  love  the  faithful 
parent  of  patience,  forbearance,  humility,  and  meekness,  aU  elements  of  the  highest 
humanity  and  sources  of  unspeakable  blessing  and  peace.  When  we  truly  love,  we 
show  all  these  virtues  in  their  lustre.  But  I  pass  over  them  to  lay  emphasis  on  the 
healing  and  purifying  effects  of  love  upon  our  own  sinful  hearts.  Nothing  but  love 
can  make  us  truly  repent.  Just  as  we  all  have  some  unkindness  to  repent  of,  so  we 
aU  have  something  to  forgive.  And  love  alone  can  teach  us  how  to  forgive  right 
nobly  and  generously.  We  know  also  how  love  is  the  parent  of  the  commonest 
virtues,  diUgence  in  business,  honesty,  trustworthiness — all  such  virtues  are  a 
thousand  times  over  begotten  and  preserved  by  the  love  we  bear  to  those  dependent 
on  us.  For  them  we  toil  and  work  and  keep  our  hands  clean  from  dishonesty.  For 
them  we  strive  to  preserve  our  character  and  the  confidence  of  the  world.  Aiid  love 
is  the  mother  of  truthfulness.  We  all  know  and  feel  that  the  most  cruel  act  we  can 
do  is  to  deceive  one  who  trusts  us.  Never  can  we  deceive  or  cheat  one  whom  we  triily 
love.  And  lastly,  love  begets  courage  and  heroism.  Time  would  fail  me  to  recount 
the  long  and  glorious  catalogue  of  those  who  have  given  their  lives  for  others — aye, 
for  the  undeserving.  {C.  Voysey.)  For  love  is  of  God. — Love  is  of  God : — The 
point  which  I  wish  to  illustrate  is  that  aU  the  love  in  the  universe  is  the  gift  of  God. 
This  proposition  involves  consequences  of  the  most  responsible  character.  Let  us 
first  unfold  the  principle,  and  then  ascertain  some  of  its  resulting  consequences. 
When  the  apostle  tells  us  that  "  God  is  love  "  he  wishes  to  convey  to  us  the  idea  that 
love  is  the  great  motive  power  of  the  Divine  Being.  Love  is  that  which  shapes  and 
guides  all  His  attributes,  so  that  each  is  manifested  under  the  working  of  love,  and 
each  directed  to  the  securing  of  love.  But  when  the  apostle  says  "  Love  is  of  God  " 
he  looks  at  love  from  another  standpoint.  He  marks  it  in  its  human  manifestations  ; 
and  beholding  it  not  so  much  as  a  great  and  original  attribute  of  the  Most  High,  but 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

as  seen  in  daily  life,  ramifying  through  all  the  grades  and  conditions  of  society,  he 
traces  the  affection  to  its  source,  and  says,  "  Love  is  of  God."  1.  Take  the  first  love 
which  one  human  being  ever  felt  for  another — conjugal  love — and  mark  how  that  is 
of  God.  In  making  the  woman  out  of  the  rib  of  man — in  uniting  them,  by  the  act 
of  God  Himself,  in  holy  wedlock ;  in  inspiring  prophets  and  apostles  to  urge  men 
to  love  their  wives  as  their  own  bodies  ;  and  in  likening  the  union  of  husband  and 
wife  to  the  mystical  union  which  exists  between  Christ  and  the  Church — God  has 
indicated,  by  the  most  direct  and  authoritative  way,  that  He  was  the  author  and  giver 
of  conjugal  affection.  2.  Take  the  second  love  which  grew  up  on  earth — ^parental 
love — and  see  how'  this  is  of  God.  We  say,  in  common  parlance,  that  it  is  natural 
for  a  man  to  love  his  child.  But  what  constitutes  the  naturalness  of  this  love,  other 
than  the  fact  that  God  implanted  it  in  parents'  hearts,  as  a  part  of  their  moral 
constitution  ?  3.  Take  the  third  kind  of  affection,  which,  in  the  order  of  time,  rises 
in  the  human  breast — the  love  of  children  for  parents — and  we  shall  find  the  same 
truth  holds  here  also.  "What  would  a  household  be,  devoid  of  children's  love  ?  What 
would  a  parent's  heart  be  if  its  outgoings  of  affection  found  no  response  in  prattling 
boys  and  gentle  girls?  And  how  much  of  the  sunlight  of  home  would  become 
darkness  if  filial  love  were  blotted  out  from  mind  and  memory  and  heart  ?  Filial 
love  constitutes  a  large  part  of  human  happiness,  and  pervades  every  class  and 
condition  of  our  race,  and  as  it  could  never,  by  its  very  nature,  create  itself,  because 
it  is  begotten  before  reason  and  judgment  begin  their  workings,  it  must  be  Divine. 
4.  The  same  line  of  remark  applies  also  to  that  love  of  kindred  which  constitutes  a 
part  of  man's  moral  being.  He  it  is  "  who  setteth  the  solitary  in  families,"  who 
groups  men  into  social  circles,  and,  bestowing  upon  His  creatures  affections,  calls 
out  these  affections  in  the  various  forms  of  social  and  domestic  life.  5.  Once  more, 
look  at  love  in  the  form  of  philanthropy.  Here  we  behold  it  breaking  over  the  dikes 
and  channels  of  conjugal,  family,  or  social  affection,  and  spreading  away  like  the 
Nile  in  its  overflow,  until  it  covers  the  entire  lowlands  of  our  race.  This  earth- 
encompassing  and  man-elevating  love  is  of  God.  It  is  because  the  Bible  tells  us  that 
we  have  one  common  Father,  one  common  Saviour,  one  common  Comforter,  one 
common  salvation,  and  one  common  earthly  destiny.  Now,  what  would  earth  be 
without  these  various  kinds  of  love  ?  What  without  philanthropy  ?  It  would  be  a 
mass  of  conglomerate  selfishness,  a  world  of  war,  of  social  discord,  and  of  domestic 
misery.  What  would  earth  be  without  this  love  of  kindred  ?  The  interlacing  bonds 
of  family  with  family  would  be  sundered  ;  society  would  be  disintegrated,  save  only 
when  force  or  interest  made  a  union  of  what  was  else  repulsive  and  undesired. 
What  would  the  world  be  without  filial  or  parental  love  ?  A  family  where  there 
was  parental  authority  without  parental  love,  and  where  filial  obedience  was  required 
without  filial  affection  rendered,  would  not  be  a  home  but  a  prison.  And  above  all, 
what  would  earth  be  without  conjugal  love — if  there  was  no  heart-union  between 
man  and  wife ;  no  love  to  cheer,  soften,  and  irradiate  the  lot  of  woman ;  no  responsive 
affection  to  nerve  and  lift  up  and  make  happy  the  soul  of  man ;  if  the  marriage  tie 
was  only  a  bond  of  interest  or  of  lust — a  bond  galling  as  the  manacle  of  the  convict  ? 
It  would  be  as  if  some  angel  of  the  pit  should  pass  through  this  world  and  turn  ita 
green  fields  into  sand-wastes,  its  forest-crowned  and  picturesque  hills  into  bald  rock, 
its  floral  kingdom  into  bramble-land,  its  dancing,  leaping,  silvery  waters  into  asphaltio 
streams,  its  exquisitely  tinged  clouds  and  its  brilliant  sunsets  into  Cimmerian  gloom, 
its  thousand  bird-melodies  into  discordant  screams.  Seeing,  then,  that  with  all  man's 
sins  and  ill-doings,  with  all  God's  punishments  and  curses.  He  has  continued  to  us 
this  love,  the  question  arises,  Have  you  ever  seriously  thought  how  much  you  ought 
to  love  God,  who  has  given  you  the  inestimable  boon  of  human  affection  ?  Can  you 
sum  up  your  debt  to  Him  for  this  one  gift  ?  Yet,  when  man  rebelled  against  God, 
and  cast  off  His  sway,  and  virtually  said  to  Him,  "  We  desire  not  a  knowledge  of  Thy 
ways,"  God  might  most  justly  have  stripped  him  of  love  and  left  him  to  the  curse  of 
the  loveless  and  the  unloved.  It  was  His  love  to  us  which  caused  Him  to  continue  love 
in  us.  There  is  no  love  in  hell.  There  is  one  other  aspect  of  the  subject  which  I 
must  touch  upon.  Wondrous  as  is  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  our  sins,  God  still 
continued  to  us  human  love,  and  highly  exalting  as  that  fact  is  of  His  grace  and 
mercy,  it  is  not  so  great  a  display  of  His  love  as  that  manifested  in  providing  for 
man's  redemption.  (Bp.  Stevens.)  Every  one  that  loveth  is  bom  of  God. — Love 
and  religion: — The  phrase  "  begotten  of  God  "  is  not  a  large,  but  it  is  a  very  great 
one.  Whither  can  our  genealogy  be  traced?  I.  The  Bible  answers  this  immense 
question  by  the  doctrine  that  God  and  man  stand  to  each  other  in  the  relation  of 
Father  and  child.    This  fact  gives  to  human  sin  its  crimson  dye,  and  to  human 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  815 

sorrow  its  peculiar  pathos.  Human  sin  is  the  sin  of  Absalom — of  a  son  against  his 
father.  Here  is  a  fall  from  heaven  1  II.  But  the  phrase  "begotten  of  God"  means 
much  more  than  this.  It  answers  the  question,  What  is  religion?  "  Keligion 
is  orthodox  belief,"  say  some;  a  "cult,"  say  others;  "morality  fired  with 
emotion,"  say  others.  But  the  New  Testament  says  that  "  Except  a  man  be 
born  again  from  above  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  So  far  as  man 
is  a  son  by  nature  only,  he  may  grow  up  to  be  dissatisfied  with  his  father's  mode 
of  life,  and  with  the  law  of  his  father's  house.  He  may  also  adopt  a  course  of 
action  so  widely  divergent  from  his  father's  that  the  natural  bond  between  them  shall 
serve  only  to  reveal  the  widening  gulf  of  character  that  separates  them.  To  become 
truly  a  son  he  must  be  born  again — must  of  his  own  choice  accept  as  his  father  the 
parent  Providence  gave  him,  and  must  by  his  own  love  and  conduct  make  the  house 
in  which  Providence  placed  him  a  home.  To  be  then  fully  "  born  of  God  "  is  for 
the  soul,  being  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  accept  the  salvation  that  is  in  Christ  by 
faith  in  His  blood,  to  acknowledge  God's  fatherly  authority,  accept  God's  law,  live 
His  life,  do  His  work  ;  or,  in  one  word,  to  love  God — "  he  that  loveth  is  born  of  God." 
ni.  Eeligion,  then,  is  love.  Love  is  not  something  elementary,  something  for  Uttle 
children  and  babes  in  Christ.  Love  is  final,  infinite.  It  is  both  Alpha  and  Omega 
in  religion.  "  But  what,"  you  ask,  "  of  life  and  conduct  ?  "  Well,  a  holy  life  is  the 
natural  outcome  of  love  to  God.  If  a  man  love  God,  he  will  avoid  all  sin  and  do  aU 
the  good  he  can.  It  is  related  of  an  eminent  singer  that  his  teacher  kept  him  day 
after  day,  and  even  month  after  month,  practising  the  scales,  in  spite  of  the  pupil's 
entreaties  for  something  more  advanced.  At  last  the  master  told  him  to  go  forth  as 
the  best  singer  in  Europe,  having  mastered  the  scales.  Not  otherwise  did  our  Lord 
teach  His  first  disciples.  For  three  years  He  taught  them  "  to  love  "  by  miracle  and 
parable,  by  prayer  and  sermon.  HJe  grounded  them  in  love.  When  seated  with 
them  at  the  last  supper  He  said :  "  A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,"  and 
behold  it  was  the  old  one,  "  That  ye  love  one  another."  After  His  resurrection  He 
met  the  disciples  on  the  beach,  and  He  took  the  repentant  Peter  and  put  him  through 
the  scales  :  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  Me  ?  "  Having  learnt  to  love,  their 
education  was  complete,  their  training  ended.  They  could  go  everywhere  and  do  aU 
things.  So,  if  we  truly  love  God,  and  love  aU  men  in  God,  we  are  truly  religious. 
(J.  M.  Gibbon.)  And  knoweth  God. — Love  and  knowledge : — The  desire  for  know- 
ledge, like  the  thirst  of  riches,  increases  ever  with  the  acquisition  of  it.  Knowledge 
is  like  fire  :  it  must  first  be  kindled  from  without ;  but  once  set  burning,  it  propagates 
itself.  Man's  power  is  in  his  mind,  not  his  arm.  By  his  knowledge  he  is  the  true 
king  of  nature,  saying  to  one  element  "  Go,"  and  it  goeth  ;  to  another  "  Come,"  and 
it  dare  not  disobey.  I.  Yes,  Heaven  has  secrets.  The  soul,  by  the  necessity  of  its 
constitution,- must  look  for  God;  and  its  prayer  is,  "  Show  us  the  Father,  and  it 
sufiQceth  us."  Now  the  text  meets  this  desire  of  the  soul  to  know  God  by  the 
emphatic  declaration  that  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God  and  knoweth  God. 
Love  knows  God,  serves  God,  possesses  God.  II.  Well,  every  one  that  loveth 
KNOWETH — knoweth  the  men  that  have  been,  understandeth  that  which  history  saith 
of  them.  Love  is  very  old.  Love  came  in  with  Adam  and  Eve.  Here  is  an  old 
picture  of  love  :  "  The  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with  the  soul  of  David,  and  Jonathan 
loved  him  as  his  own  soul."  He  that  loveth  knoweth.  He  that  loveth  knoweth  the 
love  that  Jonathan  had  for  David,  and  his  own  heart  is  his  best  commentary  on  the 
verse.  HI.  Move  one  step  further :"  He  that  loveth  knoweth  God."  Love  is  the 
clue  to  human  love.  Love  is  the  clue  to  the  love  of  God.  Wouldst  thou  know  God  ? 
Have  love  in  thine  heart,  and  when  thine  heart  is  full  of  love,  look  into  it,  and  the 
image  thou  shalt  see  will  be  a  likeness  of  the  face  of  God.  Wouldst  thou  know  God's 
feelmg  for  thy  sin?  Look  how  sensitive  a  thing  is  love — how  easily  wounded  1 
Wouldst  thou  know  the  joy  of  love  ?  Then  look  at  thine  own  joy  at  the  recovery  of 
a  loved  one,  or  the  reclamation  of  an  erring  one.  All  faults  are  forgotten.  And 
wouldst  thou  know  something  of  the  life  beyond  the  veU,  of  the  things  that  are  to  be  ? 
Go  to  your  own  home.  See  how,  out  of  your  love,  you  provide  aU  things  good  for 
those  you  love  most.  See  how  love  works,  and  watches,  and  prays — how  tenderly 
it  cares  for  the  sick  and  the  weak !  Oh  !  what  would  not  human  love  do  had  it  the 
power  ?  Well,  God  is  love  with  wealth,  love  with  knowledge,  love  with  power. 
{Ibid.)  Knowing  God  by  love : — To  know  is  man's  highest  ambition.  Knowledge  of 
God — what  is  it  and  how  can  we  secure  it  ?  LI  remark  that  knowledge  is  vert 
various,  and  in  evert  department  must  be  secured  by  its  own  methods,  in  its  own 

DIRECTION,    BY   ITS    OWN    APPLIANCES,    AND    FOR    ITS    OWN    USES.       If   I  wish   tO  knOW  an 

object  that  is  near,  I  must  use  my  eyes ;  an  object  that  is  remote,  I  call  for  a  field- 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.iv. 

glass  or  a  telescope ;  an  object  that  is  minute,  a  microscope.  If  I  would  test  the 
texture  of  an  object,  I  touch  it  with  my  hands ;  the  solidity,  I  strike  it  with  a 
hammer.  If  I  want  to  know  the  chemical  or  medicinal  properties,  I  have  my 
chemical  tests,  my  medicinal  tests.  The  most  valuable  knowledge  is  the  knowledge 
of  things  with  reference  to  their  uses  ;  with  reference  to  what  we  can  do  with  them 
by  combining  them  with  other  things  ;  with  reference  to  how  we  can  make  them 
serve  us.  This  is  the  dominion  which  God  intended  for  man.  If  with  reference  to 
things  immaterial,  to  things  not  seen  and  eternal,  scientific  men  have  sometimes 
said  they  are  unknowable,  it  is  because  they  have  tried  to  test  them  by  material 
appliances,  with  microscopes  and  telescopes  and  hammers,  which  cannot  be  done. 
Men  have  proposed  a  prayer-gauge  on  the  principle  of  the  rain-gauge.     11.  Our 

KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD  MAY  BE  JUST   AS   VARIOUS    AS   OUR  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MATERIAL  THINGS, 

for  He  has  put  Himself  variously  into  material  things  ;  but,  like  all  other  scientific 
knowledge,  it  must  always  be  recognised  by  its  own  appropriate  tests.      The 
knowledge  can  come  only  in  its  own  correspondent  way.     There  is  an  intellectual 
knowledge  of  God — that  is,  if  God  is  a  thinker,  an  architect,  a  builder,  man,  who  is 
made  in  God's  image,  may  think  God's  thoughts  over  after  Him,  may  trace  his 
achievements  to  His  plans  and  make  inferences  as  to  His  wisdom  and  power — that 
is,  may  thus  know  Him.     God  is  thus  revealed  in  what  we  call  nature.     This  is 
natural  theology.    If  we  want  to  know  God  as  a  thinker,  we  must  use  our  thinking 
powers,  employ  our  thinking  processes.     As  a  thinker,  God  reveals  Himself  to  our 
thinking.    Geology  reveals  to  us  God  as  an  architect  and  builder ;  so  does  astronomy. 
One  of  the  methods  of  intellectual  culture  is  to  think  over  the  thoughts  of  other 
thinkers.      When  you  say,  "  That  man  knows  Shakespeare,  is  a  good  Shakesperean 
scholar,"  I  understand  this,  that  he  has  thought  over  Shakespeare's  thought  in  all 
of  his  great  dramas,  knows  Shakespeare  through  these  thoughts.      In  one  passage, 
for  example,  he  has  felt  the  power  of  Shakespeare's  imagination,  has  felt  it  in  his 
own  imagination,  by  yielding  his  imagination  up  to  the  control  of  Shakespeare's 
imagination,  as  a  sparrow  might  try  the  same  flight  as  an  eagle.     Thus  only  can  he 
feel  it.     There  is  an  ethical  knowledge  of  God — a  knowledge  of  God  as  He  has 
revealed  Himself  to  the  human  conscience.     When  Coleridge  says  that  the  Bible 
finds  him  in  deeper  depths  of  his  nature  than  any  other  book,  he  refers  to  this 
revelation  of  God  which  He  has  there  made  of  Himself  to  man's  moral  sense.     It  is 
not  the  book,  but  the  Author,  who  finds  him  there.     It  is  this  ethical  revelation  of 
God  in  the  Bible  which  gives  its  grip  upon  man's  nature.     The  conscience  is  man's 
deepest  part,  the  essential  man.     There  is  an  ethical  knowledge  of  Shakespeare 
which  is  quite  as  real  as  our  intellectual  knowledge.     To  his  treatment  of  our 
moral   sense  we   respond  with   perfect  unanimity.      Hamlet's    uncle   and  Lady 
Macbeth  feel  just  as  you  and  I  should  feel  had  we  the  conscience  of  a  murderer. 
They  both  break  down  in  their  threefold  nature  under  the  burden  of  their  guilt ; 
go  utterly  to  pieces  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.     This  ethical  character  of  the  Bible 
and  of  Shakespeare  is  revealed  only  to  our  moral  sense.    That  this  ethical  character 
of  the  Bible  appears  to  us  so  marked  and  prominent  is  partly  owing  to  our  own 
moral  attitude  toward  its  Author,  to  the  moral  hurt  of  our  own  nature.     We  feel 
as  though  a  surgeon  were  dressing  a  wound  which  we  dread  to  have  disturbed. 
A  creature  of  sinless  nature  would  be  very  differently  affected,  would  not  find  this 
ethical  character  at  all  offensive,  even  if  he  consciously  recognised  it.     III.  The 
knowledge  of  God  spoken  of  in  the  text  is  neither  intellectual  nob  ethical, 
although  it  requires  both  the  intellect  and  the  conscience  in  order  to  reach  it,  to 
prepare  the  way  for  it.     Those  who  do  not  go  beyond  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
stop  with  the  intellectual  and  ethical  in  Christianity.     They  know  God  only  so  far 
as  that.     There  is  a  higher  mountain  than  that  on  which  this  sermon  was  delivered 
— namely,  Mount  Calvary.     There  is  something  beyond  them  that  is  distinctively 
Christian.     God  is  the  Creator ;  He  is  the  moral  Sovereign  ;  but  He  is  more,  and 
Christianity  shows  it.     The  text  reads,  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is  bom  of  God,  for 
God  is  love."     It  is  a  charmed  circle,  to  be  entered  only  thus.     It  is  very  evident 
that  the  knowledge  of  God  here  spoken  is  not  intellectual.     Nor  is  it  ethical  know- 
ledge.    It  does  not  imply  any  disrespect  to  the  law  of  conscience  to  say  this.    They 
are  both  preparatory  to  something  higher  and  better.     If  the  views  already  pre- 
sented are  correct,  if  knowledge  must  come  through  methods  correspondent  to  that 
knowledge,  this  other  knowledge  of   God  cannot  come  through   the  intellect  or 
through  the  conscience.     It  is  impossible.     God  is.     Is  what?     He  is  a  Creator. 
Yes.     He  is  a  Sovereign.     Yes.     These  are  what  He  does.     God  is.     Is  what  ?    la 
love!     How  can  I  know  Him?    By  loving  Him.     There  is  no  other  way.     "He 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  317 

tliat  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God ;  for  God  is  love."  It  is  just  like  saying,  He 
that  wiU  not  think  God's  thoughts  shall  not  know  God  intellectually  ;  he  who  will 
not  observe  the  working  of  God  in  his  conscience  shall  not  know  God  morally.  So, 
here,  he  who  wUl  not  love  shall  not  know  God  essentially,  for  God  is  love.  Love 
understands  love.  Nothing  else  does.  This  is  the  solution,  and  God  has  adopted 
it.  If  you  begin  by  asking  how  the  Son  of  God  knows  God,  He  Himself  has  told 
ns:  by  loving  Him.  "I  and  My  Father  are  one."  The  teachings  of  the  Saviour 
are  thiown  into  the  simplest  intellectual  form.  Indeed  it  would  be  a  strong  epithet 
to  apply  to  them  to  call  them  intellectual  at  aU.  Intellect  is  not  prominent  in 
them,  does  not  preponderate  there;  truth  is  there;  life  is  there.  It  is  just  so  as 
to  the  conscience.  Ethics  are  not  prominent  in  them.  He  Himself  has  said,  "  For 
I  came  not  into  the  world  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  Me 
might  be  saved."  Humanity  already  carries  its  great  burden  of  condemnation. 
How  can  the  burden  be  relieved?  Lifted?  By  showing  humanity  that  God  is 
love.  The  love  which  reveals  to  us  God,  is  love  which  we  are  taught  by  experiencing 
it  and  trying  to  imitate  it.  We  learn  to  know  God  by  loving  as  God  loves ;  loving 
Him,  loving  man,  and  entering  into  God's  purposes  to  save  him.  We  find  God's 
love  in  the  Bible.  The  Bible  is  the  record  of  God's  patience  with  men  and  nations. 
How  are  we  to  know  God,  who  is  love  ?  Only  by  loving  Him  and  walking  in  the 
footsteps  of  the  Being  who  says,  "  He  that  hatk  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father." 
God,  who  is  love,  has  taken  this  pains  to  show  us  Himself.  By  studying  this 
life  for  the  sake  of  making  our  lives  like  it,  for  the  sake  of  putting  into  our  lives 
the  mind  and  spirit  of  it,  we  may  come  to  know  God.  True  knowledge  of  God  can 
come  only  as  we  are  like  Him.  You  can  come  to  an  intellectual  knowledge  of  the 
live  of  God  as  you  see  its  exercise  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  Many  a  student  of 
the  Bible  does  that.  You  can  bring  yourself  to  know  God  in  the  sense  of  the  text 
odly  as  you  try  to  do  as  Christ  did,  and  from  the  motives  that  actuated  Him. 
There  is  a  proper  emphasis  to  be  put  upon  what  are  called  good  works.  They  have 
their  place  in  the  Christian  system  ;  but  it  is  not  in  the  light  of  present  merit  or 
of  future  reward  that  we  are  chiefly  to  regard  them.  They  will  have  their  suitable 
recognition  when  He  shall  eome  whose  reward  is  with  Him.  But  in  good  works — 
and  that  is  of  more  practical  Importance — in  imitation  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  our 
lives,  are  we  to  find  the  sphere  where  we  are  to  know  God,  since  only  thus  do  we 
become  like  Him.  A  great  deal  is  said,  and  rightly  said,  about  the  necessity  of 
being  practical  Christians  in  order  to  keep  our  Christianity  alive ;  but  it  is  the 
only  way  also  in  which  we  can  keep  vivid  our  knowledge  of  God,  which  is  the  basis 
of  all  our  Christianity.  Every  such  effort  brings  one  into  closer  sympathy  with 
that  God  who  is  love.  The  reformed  man  is  urged  to  try  to  save  other  men  who 
need  the  same  change.  It  is  his  only  safety.  {J.  E.  Rankin,  D.D.)  Only  love 
can  know  love  : — Blindness  cannot  understand  what  light  is ;  it  has  not  the  power 
to  experience  it.  '  The  degraded  savage  carmot  appreciate  the  noble  man.  He  has 
not  in  himself  the  moral  qualities  by  which  the  higher  nature  can  be  understood. 
A  coward  cannot  have  just  and  adequate  ideas  of  courage ;  it  is  a  thing  foreign  to 
him.  So,  to  understand  the  love  of  God,  there  must  be  something  within  us  akin 
to  it,  to  which  it  appeals.  He  who  loves  most  understands  God  best ;  he  who  does 
not  love  does  not  know  God  in  the  slightest  degree.  {Geo.  Thompson.)  Love  the 
organ  of  the  highest  knowledge : — The  question  is  as  to  God  revealing  Himself, 
making  Himself  known  to  us  as  a  loving  Father.  How  can  it  be  done  ?  God  is 
love,  and  love  cannot  be  seen  or  handled  or  anatomised.  It  is  even  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  subtlest  chemical  tests.  A  spiritual  test  is  needed  to  discover  its 
presence.  What  is  that  test  ?  It  is  love  in  our  own  hearts.  Suppose  some 
philosopher  had  been  brought  up  from  his  birth  by  himself,  apart,  on  the  most 
rigid  system  of  intellectual  training,  as,  e.g.,  John  Stuart  Mill,  only  stiU  more  apart 
than  he  or  any  one  else  could  be,  so  that  his  heart  could  be  utterly  destitute  of 
natural  affection,  so  that  he  has  plenty  of  logic  but  not  a  particle  of  love.  Suppose 
that  he  is  fully  trained  in  scientific  method,  so  that  everything  of  the  nature  of 
an  emoti^on  has  been  rigidly  suppressed.  He  can  therefore  approach  every  subject 
with  the  utmost  impartiality.  Well,  one  day  he  goes  out  to  the  world  to  spy  its 
learning.  He  sees  a  mother  fondling  her  babe.  What  can  it  mean  ?  It  is  quite 
familiar  to  you ;  it  is  new  and  strange  to  our  scientific  critic.  He  proceeds  by  the 
true  inductive  method.  And  after  he  has  noted  all  carefully  down  he  goes  home 
to  discover  what  it  all  means.  A  plain,  simple  woman  who  never  heard  of  induc- 
tion has  aho  witnessed  the  performance.  She  has  taken  no  notes,  made  no 
calculations,  and  yet  she  knows  a  great  deal  more  about  it  than  a  soientifie  man 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i v. 

does  after  spending  a  year  about  it.  What  is  her  advantage?  There  is  some- 
thing in  her  heart  which  answers  to  the  mother  love  in  the  heart  of  the  other 
woman,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  man's  heart.  He  may  apply  every  test  and 
every  method  of  inquiry  that  science  knows  without  getting  nearer.  There  are 
some  cases  in  which  an  ounce  of  heart  is  worth  more  than  a  ton  of  intellect  for 
the  purposes  of  investigation.  It  is  as  true  as  ever  that  only  love  can  understand 
love.  It  cannot  possibly  be  discovered  by  any  process  of  induction.  It  is  the 
function,  not  of  the  critical  faculty,  but  of  the  heart.  It  is  a  loving,  longing  heart 
that  recognises  the  presence  of  Him  whose  name  is  Love.    {Christian  Weekly.) 

Ver.  8.  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ;  for  God  Is  love. — The  love  of 
God :  the  God  of  love  : — Is  God  knowable  ?  The  answer  is  no — and  yes.  No,  He 
is  not  knowable  to  the  intellect,  with  its  prying  and  searching  ;  provable,  perhaps, 
but  not  knowable.  Yes,  He  is  knowable  indeed  to  the  heart.  It  is  a  poor  kind  of 
love  that  depends  for  its  proof  upon  the  skill  of  the  logician.  The  love  is  lost  by 
default  that  must  hire  counsel  to  take  up  its  case  and  eloquently  contend  for  its 
existence.  Love  must  tell  its  own  story,  and  carry  its  own  proof.  This  loftiest 
knowledge  dwells  not  with  intellectual  strength.  See  how  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
recognises  this  truth,  and  bases  all  prayer  upon  it.  "  Our  Father  which  art  in 
heaven."  The  relationship  which  is  the  strongest  possible  claim  upon  help  and 
love  is  to  be  transferred  to  God.  "  Our  Father  " — what  does  it  mean  but  that  He 
is  bending  over  us  to  pity  us  and  to  help  us ;  to  teach  us  and  to  make  us  good ; 
glad  indeed  when  we  do  well  ?  This  is  the  first  step  and  beginning  of  the  know- 
ledge of  God.  Let  us  try  to  think  how  otherwise  we  can  know  God.  Tell  me  of 
Him  as  the  Omniscient — the  All-wise.  How  can  I  know  what  that  means  ?  I 
know  only  by  what  I  am  conscious  of  in  myself,  or  by  what  I  see  about  me.  But 
within  me  or  about  me  what  is  there  that  can  teach  me  of  the  All-wise  ?  I  am  only 
bewildered  as  I  hear  of  such  an  One — I  know  Him  not.  I  hear  of  the  Almighty, 
but  what  does  it  mean?  I  judge  of  strength  by  my  own  arm,  or  by  the  winds  and 
angry  seas ;  or  by  the  power  of  human  mechanism.  In  all  these  I  can  see  only 
matter  overcoming  matter.  I  have  nothing  by  which  to  know  the  Omnipotent.  I 
hear  of  the  Self-existent,  the  Independent.  What  is  that  ?  I  see  all  things  depend- 
ing alike  for  their  source  and  their  sustenance  upon  others.  What  then  can  I  know 
of  Him  whose  name  is  "  I  Am  "  ?  And  if  I  turn  from  these  aspects  to  the  moral 
character  of  God,  I  am  yet  more  bewildered.  Tell  me  of  the  righteousness  of 
God.  Sin  has  put  out  the  eyes  by  which  I  can  see  true  righteousness ;  and  perhaps 
as  much  in  mercy  as  in  punishment.  But  think  again.  If  I  did  know  all  this  about 
God,  I  should  not  know  Him.  Vastness,  immensity,  knowledge,  power,  leave  me 
as  utterly  as  ever  a  stranger  to  God.  But  tell  me  that  He  is  love — that  what  love 
is,  that  is  God — then  I  know  Him.  I  know  now  how  He  feels  and  thinks  and  acts. 
I  know  now  how  to  come  to  Him,  and  to  speak  to  Him.  Now  do  I  know  Himself 
when  I  know  that  He  is  love.  He  that  loveth  knoweth  God — look  at  this  faculty 
within  us  by  which  we  know  God.  Love  is  ours  as  nothing  else  is  ours.  The  slow 
and  irksome  toil  of  learning  is  not  needful  for  love.  The  dullest  scholar  may  be  a 
very  master  of  this  art,  and  the  most  unlettered  may  read  aright  the  signs  and 
mysteries  of  love.  (Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  The  loving  heart  the  faculty  for  k-nowing 
God : — I.  The  loving  heart,  not  the  inquiring  intellect.  II.  The  loving  heart, 
not  the  CKEATivE  imagination.  Imagination  has  swept  the  universe,  and  yet  failed 
to  discover  God.  III.  The  loving  heart,  not  the  excited  conscience.  The  excited 
conscience  has  formulated  a  God,  but  it  has  been  a  God  of  vengeance,  wrath,  and 
fury.  God  is  only  known  to  the  loving.  If  I  know  the  controlling  feelings  of  a 
being,  I  know  him,  though  I  may  be  ignorant  of  his  person  and  his  history.  Pro- 
foundly philosophical,  therefore,  is  the  statement  that  "  He  that  loveth  not,  knoweth 
not  God."  {Homilist.)  The  love  of  God  manifested  by  the  sending  of  His  Son : 
— There  is  singular  force  in  the  expression  "  God  is  love."  He  does  not  say  that 
God  is  benevolent,  or  kind,  or  merciful,  or  compassionate,  or  affectionate  :  he  does 
not  say  that  God  is  a  Being  of  infinite  goodness,  or  mercy,  or  loving-kindness  :  but, 
as  if  he  intended  to  magnify  above  measure  this  most  adorable  of  the  Divine 
attributes,  he  pronounces  Him  to  be  the  quality  in  the  abstract,  and  thus,  as  it 
were,  identifies  the  Godhead  with  love.  I.  With  respect  to  that  B?;ino  whom  wb 
CALL  God,  infinite  as  He  is  in  all  His  perfections,  our  limited  understandings  can 
comprehend  only  a  very  small  portion  of  His  excellence.  "  The  heaven  of  heavens 
cannot  contain  Him  ":  still  less  can  His  nature  be  compassed  by  the  little  span  of 
the  human  mind.    Yet  of  this  much  we  are  assured,  that  His  power  is  su.ih,  as  to 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  319 

be  incapable  of  being  controlled,  and  that  His  happiness  is  such,  that  nothing  can 
enhance  or  augment  it.  And  these  are  two  of  the  Divine  attributes  which,  when 
we  reflect  on  the  Godhead  by  Himself,  tend  most  satisfactorily  to  prove  His 
benevolence  in  condescending  to  interfere  for  the  salvation  of  mankind.  H.  From 
the  Sender,  let  us  turn  our  thoughts  to  Him  who  was  sent.  "  God  sent  His  only- 
begotten  Son."  The  greatest  trial  which  human  nature  can  sustain  is  perhaps  the 
loss  of  a  son,  of  an  only  son.  HI.  And  whither  was  He  sent  ?  He  was  sent  mto 
a  world  which  was  altogether  "  lying  in  wickedness."  How  unbounded,  in  this 
respect  again,  how  great,  how  disinterested  appears  the  love  of  God !  IV.  Let  us 
not  forget  the  puepose  for  which  He  was  sent,  as  a  farther  testimony  that  God 
is  love.  "  He  was  sent  that  we  might  live  through  Him  "  :  for  us  men,  and  for  our 
salvation  He  came  down  from  heaven.  And  as  the  love  of  God  is  thus  manifested, 
in  that  we  were  His  enemies,  for  whose  salvation  His  Son  was  sent,  so  is  it,  more- 
over, manifested  by  the  greatness  of  the  salvation,  which  was  wrought  by  His 
coming :  a  salvation  great  in  every  particular  respect ;  great  in  respect  to  its 
extent ;  great  in  respect  of  the  deliverance  which  it  affords  ;  great  in  respect  to  the 
means  of  grace  which  it  now  affords  us,  and  of  the  all-sufficient  aid  of  Christ's 
Holy  Spirit  to  overcome  our  natural  weakness  and  corruption  ;  and  great  in  respect 
of  the  hope  of  everlasting  glory  which  it  reveals  to  those  who  shall  hereafter  be 
admitted  into  His  presence.  {Bp.  Mant.)  Our  salvation  intelligible  in  the 
light  of  God's  love : — I.  In  the  sight  of  God  man  is  a  being  of  unspeakable 
worth.  And  the  fact  is  only  intelligible  in  the  light  of  this  first  fact,  "  God  is 
love."  It  is  very  easy  to  prove  the  insignificance  of  man.  The  scientist,  for 
instance,  traces  him  to  the  ape,  and  says,  "  This  is  where  he  came  from"  ;  or  he 
dissects  his  brain,  and  says,  "  Thought,  emotion,  love,  imagination,  poetry,  worship 
— see  the  marks  of  every  one  of  them  upon  this  material  tablet,  which  we  call  the 
brain."  And  this  gospel  story — the  cynic  indulges  in  cheap  sneers  at  it,  and  asks 
if  you  are  going  to  make  an  angel  out  of  this  sorry  being  with  his  vulgar  appetites 
and  animal  lusts.  The  sober-minded  Deist,  out  of  pure  reverence  for  God,  he 
thinks,  refuses  to  believe  the  story.  That  the  infinite  God  should  concern  Himself 
with  man  and  his  paltry  destiny  is  incredible.  And  it  is  incredible.  Man  is  so 
small,  mean,  ignoble,  unworthy,  until  you  read  his  story  with  the  eyes  of  love ; 
until  you  remember  this — "  God  is  love."  But  every  mother  will  waste  the  wealth 
of  her  brave  heart  upon  the  boy  in  whom  no  one  but  herself  can  see  one  sign  of  grace 
or  virtue.  But  it  is  a  luxury  to  her  to  serve  him.  The  man  who  believes  in  no 
prophet  but  the  political  economist  thinks  that  Christian  philanthropy  is  sheer 
infatuation,  sheer  waste  of  human  energy.  And  so  it  is  to  everything  but  love. 
Love  sees  worth  in  what  to  every  other  eye  is  contemptible.  The  poorest,  most 
sin-sodden  is  to  God  a  mirror  in  which  He  sees  Himself.  Beautiful,  of  infinite 
worth  to  Him !     Divine  in  Him,  for  "  God  is  love."     II.  God  seeks  for  evert 

MAN    THE    MOST    PERFECT    DESTINY;     THE    MOST    PERFECT    GOOD.       1.    The   gOOd    of    man 

includes  the  whole  man.  It  includes  the  body.  To  preach  the  gospel  of  health  is 
to  preach  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  God  intended  us  to  die  as  the  ripe  fruit  falls 
from  the  tree.  The  physician  is  God's  servant,  as  well  as  the  preacher.  It  includes 
the  mind.  God  claims  every  pure-minded  writer  as  His  workman.  It  includes  the 
sunniest  as  well  as  the  gloomiest  sides  of  human  life.  The  frosts  of  winter  work 
for  the  harvest.  2.  But  these  things  are  preliminaries.  They  exist  merely  for  the 
sake  of  a  greater  thing  than  themselves.  Beyond  these  there  is  something  stiU 
sacreder  and  more  precious — the  spirit.  Here  man  finds  his  most  perfect  good,  and 
God  works  through  every  other  good  to  this.  There  lies  the  difference  between 
Divine  love  and  human  love.  We  ignore  the  highest  for  the  sake  of  the  lowest. 
We  ruin  our  children  in  the  name  of  the  vulgarest  and  ignoblest  thing  in  them, 
and  we  imagine  that  to  be  love.  The  child's  native  indolence  grumbles  against  the 
drill  and  what  he  calls  the  hard  work  of  the  school.  "  Poor  ovei-taxed  boy  !  "  says 
the  mother  ;  "  I  must  not  permit  it  "  ;  and  he  grows  up  \vith  a  flabby  mind  that  is 
not  fit  for  such  a  world  as  this.  I  often  saw  in  Upper  Egypt  an  ancient  temple 
pulled  to  pieces  to  build  a  village  of  hovels.  I  have  seen  a  band  of  roving  gipsies 
tear  down  the  exquisitely  carved  panels  of  an  old  palace  to  light  a  fire  to  boU  their 
kettle  with.  And  I  have  seen  young  people  take  the  studies  in  which  they  had  been 
long  immersed,  and  with  them  light  the  fires  of  sordid  pleasures  and  the  many 
foolishnesses  of  fashionable  life.  We  use  the  highest  to  light  the  lowest.  Not  so 
God.  God  also  has  His  fire ;  and  the  fire  is  your  religious  life.  And  God  uses  your 
whole  soul,  your  whole  nature,  to  supply  fuel  for  that  fire.  Your  intellectual  life ; 
you  read,  you  think  ;  but  you  read  and  think  that  you  may  have  fuel  for  the  fire. 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

You  go  through  the  drill  of  your  daily  work,  you  wrestle  with  temptations ;  it  is 
fuel  for  the  fire.     You  join  hands  with  others  in  the  joy  of  worship.     The  Word  of 
God  feeds  you,  the  common  hymn  and  the  common  prayer  thriU  you ;  it  is  aU  fuel 
for  the  fire.    This  is  man's  highest  good  as  God  reads  it ;  this  God  feeds,  for  "  God 
is  love."    III.  God  has  made  sufficient  peovision  to  secure  evert  man's  highest 
GOOD.      There  is  a  very  famous  English  poem — of  course  you  know  who  wrote  it — 
it  is  called  "  Pictor  Ignotus,"  the  painter  who  chose  to  remain  unknown ;  the  man 
of  genius,  the  born  painter,  who  refused  to  paint  because  men  would  not  under- 
stand, would  not  properly  appreciate  his  work.     He  would  never  degrade  the  genius 
that  was  in  him  by  pandering  to  vulgar  wealth.    But  that  is  not  the  noblest  genius. 
Beal  genius  must  express  itself,  even  for  its  own  sake.    Forgive  the  illustration. 
God  must  express  Himself  for  His  own  sake.     God  has  poured  out  the  wealth  of 
His  redemption.    We  may  reject  it  or  receive  it:  God  must  give  it.     He  has  been 
telling  it  unweariedly  through  the  ages.     Men  have  rejected  it,  treated  it  with 
contempt.     It  matters  not :  to  God  to  tell  Himself  was  a  necessity,  for  "  God  is 
love."    1.  In  the  redemption  of  man  God  has  found  a  work  by  which  He  may  fully 
express  Himself.     Men  talk  of   the  wonders  of   nature.     They  often   become  so 
absorbed  in  nature  that  they  have  no  wish  to  look  beyond  it.    But  these  were  the 
mere  trifles  of  God's  works.    God  had  never  been  able  to  tell  Himself  in  these.   But 
Christ  came ;  Calvary  came.     This  is  God ;  this  was  the  solution  of  the  world's 
problem  :  God  had  told  Himself  at  last.     Pardon,  hope,  life,  for  all  the  world ;  the 
break  of  the  eternal  day.    This  is  God.     2.  The  love  of  God  makes  it  all  credible. 
It  would  be  impossible  to  beUeve  it  did  we  not  know  that  "  God  is  love."    Every 
one  beUeves  the  Bible  to  be  a  marvellous  book.     It  is  when  you  speak  of  the  Cross, 
when  you  speak  of  the  "Lamb  of  God,"  of  the  sins  of  the  world  being  laid  upon 
Him,  that  men  begin  to  hesitate  and  stammer.     "No,  no;  that  is  incredible;  that 
can  never  be,"  they  say.    But  love — the  love  of  God — makes  even  that — makes 
every  item  of  the  story  credible.    I  have  seen  the  miracles  that  love  works.     The 
Cross  shall  be  for  ever  the  symbol  of  love's  perfect  triumph.     It  was  love,  it  was 
love  that  did  it.     "  God  is  love."    IV.  God  will  work  out  the  provisions  that 
He  has  made  so  that  they  sHAiiL  NOT  MISS  what  they  aim  at.     Set  it  down  as 
s  certainty  that  God's  love  will  win,  that  the  gospel  of  love  will  tell.     This  love 
often  uses  terrible  means  to  secure  its  purpose.     Do  not  miss  that.    Not  terrible 
means  for  the  sake  of  using  them,  but  terrible  means  because  it  will  not  submit  to 
be  beaten.    Terrible  disasters  require  terrible  remedies  ;  but  he  who  can  use  terrible 
remedies,  loves.     So  is  it  with  some  of  you.    You  have  been  sore  tried ;  but  God 
set  so  much  store  upon  the  design  He  is  cutting  into  you,  that  He  may  set  you  in 
the  fire  even  yet.     He  will  not  miss  His  aim ;  for  "  God  is  love."     {J.  Morlais 
Jonee.)        Affections  essential  to  the  moral  perfection  of  tlie  Deity  : — God  is  perfect 
love,  all  His  affections  are  pure  and  clear  as  the  crystal  stream.     1.  Benevolent 
affections  form  the  moral  beauty  of  the  Divine  character.     Ged  is  love.     His 
independence,  almighty  power,  and  unerring  wisdom  are  mere  natural  perfections ; 
but  His  benevolent  feelings  are  moral  beauties.    2.  Men  are  required  to  imitate  their 
heavenly  Father.     Power,  wisdom,  and  all  the  natural  perfections  of  the  Deity  are 
above  imitation.    There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  God  which  any  of  His  creatures 
can  imitate,  except  His  benevolent  feeUngs.    3.  The  Scriptures  ascribe  affections  to 
God  in  the  most  plain  and  unequivocal  terms.    (1)  It  may  be  said  that  the  passages 
which  ascribe  affections  to  God  are  figurative,  and  ought  not  to  be  taken  in  a  literal 
sense.     We  are  never  to  depart  from  the  Uteral  sense  of  Scripture,  without  some 
apparent  necessity.    (2)  It  may  be  said  that  affections  are  painful,  and  consequently 
cannot  belong  to  God,  who  is  perfectly  happy.     It  is  true,  affections  are  always 
painful  when  they  cannot  be  gratified  ;  and  this  is  often  the  case  among  mankind. 
But  since  all  the  affections  of  the  Deity  are  only  different  modifications  of  pure, 
disinterested  benevolence,  they  admit  of  a  constant  and  perfect  gratification,  and 
always  afford  him  a  source  of  complete  and  permanent  felicity.     (3)  It  may  be 
asked,  "  How  is  this  notion,  of  Divine  affections  compatible  with  that  perfect 
immutability  and  simplicity  which  aU  divines  ascribed  to  the  Deity  ?  "    We  may 
observe  here  that  there  is  a  plain  distinction  between  such  a  mutabihty  as  does, 
and  such  a  mutability  as  does  not,  imply  imperfection.    If  a  man  who  wag  a  sinner 
yesterday  becomes  a  saint  to-day,  it  implies  no  imperfection  in  God  to  change  His 
affections  towards  that  person.    Improvement : — 1.  This  subject  may  give  us  some 
faint  conceptions  of  the  strength  and  ardency  of  the  Divine  affections.     2.  In  the 
view  of  this  subject  we  may  discover  what  it  was  which  moved  God  to  the  work  of 
creation.    3.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  that  God  is  pleased  with  the 


CHAT.  IT.]  I.  JOHN.  321 

existence  of  everything  which  takes  place  in  the  universe.  His  heart  is  in  all  His 
works.  4.  This  subject  suggests  matter  of  great  consolation  to  those  who  are 
interested  in  the  Divine  favour.  5.  This  subject  warns  sinners  to  flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  God  and  love  : — I.  In  the  first  place,  I 
think  we  should  take  this  text  as  it  stands — as  being  literally  and  completely  true. 
It  needs  no  qualification,  admits  of  no  complement.  That  "  God  is  love  "  is  not 
one  side  of  the  truth,  but  the  whole  truth,  about  God.  No  addition  is  possible. 
The  leaf,  we  are  told,  is  the  stem  expanded — the  stem  is  the  leaf  closed.  This 
text  is  theology  closed.  All  theology  is  this  text  expanded.  U.  We  are  to  take  it 
as  true  of  God  at  all  times  and  in  all  places.  Nothing  but  love  has  ever  reigned  on 
the  throne  of  creation  ;  nothing  but  love  ever  will  reign.  Christ  did  not  create,  He 
revealed,  the  love  of  God.  The  love  of  God  has  no  shallows.  It  is  equally  deep 
everywhere — Calvary  deep  wherever  you  try  it.  HI.  "  God  is  love."  When  ? 
Always.  "God  is  love  I"  Where?  Everywhere.  Love  built  heaven.  Love  made 
earth.  Love  made  hell ;  and  its  pains  are  the  measure  of  God's  love  for  goodness 
— its  flames  are  love  on  fire.  IV.  Now,  one  word  as  to  the  effect  this  revelation 
ought  to  have  on  us.  One  effect  is  joy.  This  text,  if  we  believe  it,  will  assuage 
our  sorrow,  lighten  our  hearts,  and  brighten  our  Hves.  "  God  is  love,"  I  say.  "  Of 
course  !  "  you  say.  How  commonplace !  But  look  into  old  creeds,  look  into  modern 
philosophy,  where  God  is  Force  without  heart,  and  Law  without  pity.  Look  at 
your  own  lives,  at  the  records  on  the  pages  of  memory.  Are  you  not  glad  for  your 
own  sakes  that  God  is  love  ?  (J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The  love  of  the  eternal : — I.  Lovb 
THE  DOMINANT  QUALITY.  H.  Man's  PRESUMPTUOUS  CRITICISM.  St.  John's  Statement 
does  not  imply  that  love's  activities  are  necessarily  in  accordance  with  human  con- 
ceptions of  love.  Who  art  thou,  0  man,  with  thy  limited  perception,  blind  to  all 
the  future — who  art  thou,  that  thou  darest  to  say  what  infinite,  omniscient,  eternal 
love  ought  to  do  ?  As  well  expect  the  fly  that  crawls  on  the  dome  of  this  majestic 
cathedral  to  interpret  the  purposes  and  methods,  the  disposition  and  attributes  of 
the  architect.  Do  not  expect  that  because  God  is  love  you  are  going  to  understand 
all  that  God  is  doing  around  you  and  for  you.  It  may  be  a  token  of  the  greatest 
love  that  you  know  nothing  of  it.  HI.  Indulgence  not  love.  It  is  the  office 
of  love  to  seek  the  final  good  of  its  object ;  to  bless  the  object  rather  than 
pamper  it;  to  raise  and  ennoble  and  glorify  it  rather  than  minister  to  its 
passing  whimS  and  caprices.  Does  not  this  thought  interpret  some  of  the 
mysteries  of  life  to  us  ?  Does  it  not  let  in  daylight  and  sunlight  upon 
the  dark  experiences  of  this  sorrowing  earth  ?  {W.  J.  Hocking.)  Originating 
love : — God  has  many  attributes,  and  we  see  Him  and  adore  Him  under  many 
aspects ;  but  the  essence  of  Deity  is  single,  and  His  being  is  "  love  "  1  Other 
things  He  does,  but  this  He  is.  And  observe  the  power  of  the  present  tense.  It  is 
not,  "  God  was,"  or  "  God  will  be,"  but  now, — in  an  eternal  and  unchanging  now^ 
— "  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever," — "  God  is  love  !  "  Take  the  sweetest  moment 
of  your  whole  life, — take  the  moment  of  the  greatest  manifestation  of  God's  good- 
ness that  has  ever  been  seen  in  this  world,  and  it  is  the  very  same  now,  unshaded,, 
undimmed ;  no  sins  of  yours  will  alter  it.  Doubtless  there  are  difficulties.  The 
brightest  lights  throw  the  deepest  shadows.  But  the  mists  which  cloud  the  summer 
morning  are  only  made  to  melt  into  the  sweeter  noonday  brightness.  "  Was  it 
love,"  a  man  says,  "  to  make  man,  and  then  let  him  fall  into  sin  and  misery?  " 
The  answer  is  two-fold.  First,  man  was  made  a  free  agent.  This  was  a  first 
principle  in  the  creation  of  this  world.  Secondly,  man,  the  whole  race  of  man,  is 
better  for  the  fall.  Had  man  not  fallen,  Christ  would  not  have  come  to  this 
world.  But  another  objects : — "  See  aU  thesuffering  and  wretchedness  there  is  now  in 
this  world — how  is  that  consistent  with  the  Divine  government  of  love  ?  "  First,  all 
the  suffering,  in  the  main,  is  man's  own  fault.  The  suffering  is  the  result,  directly, 
or  indirectly,  of  voluntary  sin,  whidi  might  have  been  avoided.  But  secondly,  this 
world,  having  fallen,  is  now  passing  under  discipline  and  training  for  another  and 
better  world ;  and  the  suffering  is  the  discipline  essential  to  the  educating  processes 
of  the  present  life.  Thirdly,  if  there  are  degrees  in  glory,  the  degree  of  the  glory 
must  depend  on  the  degree  of  the  grace ;  and,  to  a  great  extent,  the  degree  of  the 
grace  is  dependent  on  the  degree  of  the  schooling.  But  I  hear  it  said  again,  "  Why 
has  God  left  such  a  vast  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  earth  ignorant  of 
Christ,  and  of  the  way  of  salvation  ?  "  God  has  not  left  them  ignorant.  He  willed 
and  provided  that  "  all  should  know  Him."  He  commanded  His  people  from  the 
very  first,  to  "  Go  into  aU  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Had 
we  done  our  duty,  all  would  have  been  right,  and  this  whole  world  have  been 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

evangelised.  And  we  believe  that  the  heathen  who  have  not  known  God  will  not 
be  judged  as  we  shall  be.  Every  one  wiU  be  judged  according  to  his  knowledge  and 
his  conscience.  But,  leaving  all  these  cavils,  let  us  look  at  this  matter  very 
practically.  At  this  moment  there  is  not  a  person — whatever  his  past  might  have 
been,  or  whatever  his  present  is — who  might  not,  this  very  day,  be  freely  and 
perfectly  forgiven,  and  be  quite  happy.  He  might  have  the  sweetest  peace,  and 
perfect  assurance  in  his  mind.  He  might  be  quite  confident  of  the  love,  the  infinite 
love  of  God.  He  has  a  Father,  a  tender,  loving  Father  in  heaven.  Treat  God  as 
"Love,"  and  you  wiU  find  Him  "Love."  But  remember  "love"  is  sensitive. 
"  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way."  If  you  wish  a 
picture  of  God  in  your  mind,  study  the  "  father  "  in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal. 
If  "  God  is  love,"  may  I  not  say,  "  Love  is  God  "  ?  The  highest  characteristic  of  our 
religion  is  "love."  If  you  have  no  love,  you  have  no  Godl  The  measure  of  the 
"  love  "  is  the  measure  of  the  "  God."  (J.  Vaugha7i,  M.A.)  The  love  of  God : — 
I.  This  emphatic  description  refers  to  the  nature,  as  well  as  to  the  operations  of 
God.  II.  The  truth  of  the  assertion,  that  God  is  love,  appears  in  His  providential 
DEALINGS  with  the  children  of  men.  III.  In  the  redemption  of  mankind  our  Lord 
has  displayed  the  full  glories  of  His  love.  IV.  The  truth  of  the  assertion  appears 
with  peculiar  evidence,  by  tracing  the  dealings  and  methods  of  His  grace  towards 
every  individual  who  has  interest  in  the  Saviour.  Conclusion  :  1.  Let  me  address 
careless  sinners  in  the  language  of  warning  and  reproof.  2.  Let  me  address 
those  who,  drawn  by  the  attractions  of  Divine  love  and  redeeming  grace,  are 
saying  in  sincerity,  "  Whatever  others  do,  we  will  serve  the  Lord."  (1)  Submit, 
without  murmuring,  to  the  various  dispensations  of  His  providence.  (2)  Love  this 
God  with  supreme  regard  and  gratitude.  (3)  Imitate  this  God  of  love,  and  seek, 
through  grace,  to  resemble  your  heavenly  Father.  (4)  Is  that  glorious  Jehovah,  to 
whom  you  have  devoted  your  hearts  and  lives,  indeed  the  God  of  love  ?  Then 
recommend  Him  as  such  to  your  friends  and  families  while  you  are  on  earth,  and 
long  to  be  with  Him  in  the  heaven  of  heavens.  {A.  Bonar.)  "  God  is  love"  : — A 
briefer  sentence  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  ;  yet  now  infinitely  vast  and  wonderful 
is  the  truth  which  lies  within  its  compass !  The  very  centre  and  source  of  all 
things.  Although  this  is  the  one  truth  about  God  which  we  can  know,  yet  it  is  the 
last  truth  which  we  accept.  Most  men  believe  in  the  existence  of  God,  in  His 
power,  in  His  wisdom.  There  are  others  who  vaguely  believe  that  He  is  good  and 
kind.  But  there  are  few  men  who  really  think  of  God  as  love.  And  very  many 
spend  their  time  in  putting  up  fences  and  limits  to  the  love  of  God,  as  if  it  were 
beset  with  statutes,  and  thoughts  of  precedents,  and  dread  of  presumption.  Would 
that  we  believed  it  as  God  has  taught  it  in  His  Word  !  The  great  power  in  the 
world  to  redeem  men,  to  uplift,  to  ennoble  men,  is  the  power  of  love.  To  love,  to 
be  loved,  is  a  restraint,  a  constraint,  a  transformation.  Love  is  the  true  salvation. 
And  yet  what  can  it  avail  to  tell  of  love  ?  Words  may  do  for  some  things,  but  to  hold 
love  they  are  too  little,  too  shallow,  too  coarse,  too  cold.  And  even  if  words  could 
tell  of  it,  who  were  the  richer  for  hearing  them  ?  What  avails  to  tell  a  hungry  man 
of  a  banquet  ?  To  see  and  not  to  have  may  be  an  agony.  A  sermon  about  the  love 
of  God,  if  it  be  a  sermon  only,  is  a  stone  that  mocks  one's  hunger.  The  love  of  God  is 
ours  not  in  words  only,  but  ours  in  deed  and  in  truth  ;  ours  to  accept  it ;  to  rest  in 
it ;  to  delight  in  it.  How  then  may  we  make  it  ours  ?  Well,  take  the  words  and 
brood  over  them  until  the  very  Spirit  of  God  speaks  them  to  the  heart.  "  God  is 
His  own  interpreter  " — and  only  love  can  tell  of  love.  To  its  anointed  eye  all  things 
are  revelations  and  emblems,  and  to  its  tuned  heart  every  breath  is  music.  Love  is 
not  to  a  crowd  ;  compassion,  pity  there  may  be  for  a  multitude,  but  love  is  separate ; 
it  is  personal ;  it  is  distinct  and  peculiar.  God's  love  is  like  His  sunlight,  diffused 
throughout  the  heaven,  catching  the  heights  of  the  hills  and  crowning  them  with  ruddy 
gold  and  clothing  them  in  purple.  So  it  seems  to  us  an  easy  and  a  natural  thing  for 
God  to  love  some  people  ;  outstanding  men  and  women  whose  goodness  might  make 
them  dear  to  Him.  But  this  is  not  all  that  the  sun  does.  It  climbs  higher  that  it  may 
creep  lower — down  the  hill-sides  further  and  further,  vmtil  it  lifts  the  mists  of  the 
valley  and  covers  the  meadows  with  its  glory ;  and  kisses  the  daisy  and  fills  its  cup 
with  gold,  and  puts  energy  and  strength  into  its  very  heart.  God  loves  the  good, 
the  true,  the  pure,  but  His  love  rises  higher  that  it  may  come  down  lower ;  and  He 
loves  me — me.  Do  not  grieve  Him  any  longer  by  doubting  it.  God  is  love. 
Is— eternity  lies  within  the  compass  of  that  httle  word.  {M.  G.  Pearse.)  God's 
love  unfathomable : — I  know  what  it  means  to  love  ;  but  I  have  no  conception  what 
love  is  when  it  rolls  in  the  bosom  of  an  infinite  God.      I  know  what  light  is  as  it 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  323 

shines  from  my  candle,  but  do  I  know  what  the  sun  is  from  that  ?  I  know  what 
water  is  when  I  take  a  drop  of  it  in  my  tumbler,  but  do  I  know  the  thunder  of  the 
ocean  from  that?  I  know  that  when  I  see  God  He  will  be  wise;  but  how 
little  do  I  know  of  the  wisdom  of  God  ?  I  know  that  He  will  be  a  God  of  love, 
but  oh  I  how  little  do  I  know  of  the  extent  and  grandeur  of  that  love  !  How- 
imperfect  are  my  slender  ideas  as  means  by  which  to  fashion  this  supremest 
attribute  of  the  infinite  and  eternal  God.  It  is  by  these  qualities  that  I  know  my 
God  ;  but  I  know  Him  only  by  specimens — by  small  samples.  My  conceptions  of 
Him  are  imperfect.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  God  always  love  : — "  God  is  love,"  was 
the  motto  on  a  weathercock.  The  owner  on  being  asked  "  if  he  meant  to  imply 
that  the  love  of  God  was  as  fickle  as  the  wind?  "  replied,  "  No,  I  mean  which  ever 
way  the  wind  blows,  God  is  love ;  if  cold  from  the  north,  or  biting  from  the  east, 
still  God  is  love  as  much  as  when  the  warm  south,  or  genial  west  wind  refreshes 
our  fields  and  flocks."  Yes,  so  it  is ;  our  God  is  always  love.  God's  love 
changeless : — You  have  seen  the  stream  that  in  summer  was  broad  and  flowing,  in 
winter  covered  with  a  thick  coating  of  ice ;  but  God's  love  is  a  stream  that  never 
freezes.  You  have  seen  the  fountains  that  in  winter,  when  the  springs  were  active, 
had  an  abundant  supply  of  water,  but  when  summer  came  with  its  drought,  were 
dry ;  God's  love,  however,  is  a  fountain  that  never  becomes  dry.  You  have  seen 
the  sun  pour  a  flood  of  golden  beams  upon  the  earth  through  the  Uve-long  day,  and 
set  in  darkness  as  night  approached ;  but  God's  love  is  a  sun  that  never  sets.  You 
shall  see  the  world  burning,  and  the  stars  drop  from  their  orbits,  and  the  heavens 
be  roUed  up  like  a  scroU ;  but  God's  love  lasts  for  ever  and  ever.     (W.  G.  Pascoe.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  toward  us,  because  that  God 
sent  His  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world. — Divine  love  in  its  highest  manifesta' 
tion : — Mark  in  illustration  of  the  immensity  of  that  love — I.  The  dignity  and 
WORTH  OF  Him  who  was  given  to  the  world  for  its  manifestation.  "  God  sent 
His  only- begotten  Son  into  the  world."  This  was  the  first  step  in  the  demonstration 
of  His  matchless  benignity.  II.  Observe,  as  a  further  illustration  of  God's  love  as  here 
set  forth,  the  condition  to  which  He  freely  surrendered  His  Son.  "  He  sent 
Him  into  the  world."  "  He  sent  Him  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."  And 
think ! — this  love  has  been  shown  to  you  I  All  this  God  did  to  prove  Himself 
gracious  to  you — to  you,  the  most  ungrateful  and  hard-hearted  here  this  day,  who 
do  not,  wUl  not  love  Him  in  return  ?  III.  Consider  a  third  particular  which  the 
text  adduces  in  illustration  of  the  great  love  wherewith  God  has  loved  us,  namely, 

THE  GLORIOUS  END,  IN  RELATION  TO  OUR  RACE,  WHICH  THAT  LOVE  CONTEMPLATED.       "  God 

sent  His  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  might  Uve  through  Him." 
That  which  the  apostle  here  means  by  "life,"  is  happy  existence — existence  in 
connection  with  the  highest  and  fullest  development  of  all  our  powers,  both  of 
perception  and  enjoyment ;  existence  in  the  possession  of  the  Divine  favour  and 
love,  moral  rectitude,  and  internal  purity.  A  life  is  it  whose  vigour  no  power  of 
disease  can  undermine,  whose  actings  are  superior  to  waste  and  fatigue,  whose 
duration  is  lasting  as  Jehovah.  Oh  !  what,  then,  must  be  the  measure  of  that  love 
which  gave  Christ  to  procure  for  us  such  a  benefit  as  this  ?  IV.  Consider,  in  the 
last  place,  how  marvellously  this  love  is  enhanced  by  the  fact,  that  it  was  love  to 
the  unloving.  "  Herein  is  love,"  says  our  text,  "  not  that  we  loved  God."  What 
should  be  the  effect  upon  us  of  such  contemplations.  1.  Love  begets  love,  and  if 
God  has  so  loved  us,  we  should  surely  love  Him  in  return.  2.  Love  is  examplary, 
and  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another.  (G.  M.  Merry.)  The 
love  of  God  : — There  are  two  notions  of  God  that  have  more  or  less  prevalence 
among  men.  One  represents  Him  that  if  there  were  not  a  man  on  earth,  if  there  were 
nothing  in  all  creation  from  side  to  side,  there  is  that  in  Himself  that  would  make 
Him  for  ever  overflow  with  taste,  and  feehng,  and  love.  The  one  ascribes  to  Him 
a  nature  that  is  merely  susceptible  of  being  called  out  upon  the  apphcation  of  the 
motive.  The  other  ascribes  to  Him  a  nature  that  pours  itself  abroad  in  the  earth 
by  reason  of  its  own  fulness  and  richness.  It  is  the  latter  of  these  two  ideas  that 
I  suppose  the  Scriptures  to  teach.  In  our  text  God's  love  for  us  is  not  affirmed  to 
exist  because  God  perceived  a  spark  kindled  in  us,  gradually  flaming  forth  and 
reaching  up  toward  Him.  God  did  not  love  man  because  man  had  prepared 
himself  and  made  himself  lovely,  nor  did  Divine  love  spring  forth  from  any  deed  of 
God's  by  which  He,  for  purposes  of  government,  aroused  and  incited  Himself  to 
strong  emotion.  Love  springs  not  from  an  act,  not  from  a  fact  of  redemptive 
sacrifice.    The  love  of  God  for  the  world  was  manifested  in  the  Cross,  instead  of 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

being  created  by  it.  I.  God's  love  does  not  depend  upon  oub  chaeactek,  but  upon 
His  own.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  it  makes  no  difference  whether  a  man  has  a 
good  or  a  bad  character.  I  do  not  mean  to  affirm  that  there  do  not  spring  up, 
between  the  Divine  nature  and  ourselves,  by  reason  of  our  relations  to  that  nature, 
certain  deep  intimacies  and  more  wonderful  affections.  But  I  do  mean  to  affirm 
that  there  is  a  great  overshadowing  of  love  to  us,  that  exists,  not  on  account  of  our 
character,  but  on  account  of  His.  II.  The  Divine  lovb  exists  and  works  upon  us, 
NOT  alone  when  WE  ARE  CONSCIOUS,  BUT  EVERMORE.  Men  mount  up  under  flashes 
of  glorious  realisation,  and  it  seems  as  if  God  then  began  to  love  them,  because  they 
then  first  become  sensitive  to  His  love.  When  a  man  has  passed  through  religious 
changes  from  darkness  to  light ;  when  he  has  put  off  his  worldly  character,  and 
taken  on  the  character  of  Christ ;  when,  coming  out  of  despondency,  the 
compassionate  Saviour  rises  before  his  imagination,  and  he  says,  "  Christ  has  begun 
to  love  me  " — his  impression  is  that  the  Divine  love  for  him  began  when  the  burden 
which  had  weighed  down  his  soul  was  rolled  off.  This  is  as  if  a  blind  man,  who 
had  never  seen  the  heavens,  nor  the  earth,  nor  the  sweet  faces  of  those  who  loved 
him,  should  have  a  surgical  operation  performed  upon  his  eyes,  resulting  in  the 
restoration  of  his  sight,  and  he  should  think  to  himself  on  going  out  of  doors,  "  Oh  ! 
how  things  are  blossoming  !  The  earth  is  beginning  to  be  beautiful !  Mountains 
and  hills  are  springing  up  in  every  direction !  The  forms  of  loving  friends  are 
being  raised  up  to  meet  my  gaze  !  And  the  sun  has  just  begun  to  shine  forth  from 
the  heavens  1 "  But  have  not  these  things  existed  since  the  creation,  although  the 
man's  eyes  have  not  before  been  in  a  condition  to  enable  him  to  see  them  ?  A  man 
has  lived  in  a  cellar,  where  he  has  been  a  poor,  confined  creature,  striving  to  live 
a  life  which  was  but  like  a  prolonged  death.  At  last  he  is  permitted  to  go  up  one 
storey,  and  then  one  storey  higher,  and  then  yet  another  storey.  Thus  he  keeps  on 
exploring  and  going  up,  until  finally  he  reaches  the  roof.  There  he  beholds  the 
heavens  over  his  head,  and  the  sun  in  the  east,  and  he  is  tranced  with  amazement 
by  the  glory  of  the  things  which  surround  him.  And  yet,  every  single  day  during 
his  existence,  and  for  countless  ages,  the  heavens  have  hung  above  the  earth,  the 
sun  has  shone  forth  in  splendour,  and  the  creations  which  astonish  his  vision  have 
been  beheld  by  men.  For  forty  years  he  has  been  in  the  cellar,  and  now  he  has 
come  up  where  he  can  see,  it  seems  to  him  that  objects  now  appear  for  the  first  time, 
because  he  sees  them  for  the  first  time.  So  it  is  with  the  disclosures  of  the  love  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus  to  Christians.  They  think  that  the  time  at  which  they  first  realise 
God's  love  is  the  time  when  it  is  first  shed  upon  them.  But  as  God  pours  abroad 
infinite  breadths  of  His  being  without  an  eye  except  His  own  to  behold,  so  He 
spreads  over  our  heads  an  unknown,  an  immeasurable  love,  waiting  for  our 
recognition,  but  in  no  wise  depending  upon  it.  IH.  There  is  something  imspeakably 
affecting  to  me  in  this  thought  of  the  solicitude  of  Divine  love  fob  men,  and  its 

JATtENT    continuance    IN     GoD    WITHOUT    CONSCIOUSNESS    ON     OUB     PABT.        There     iS 

something  sweet  in  interpreting  the  nature  of  God  from  the  famUy.  Now  who  can 
tell  the  sum  of  the  thoughts  which  the  mother  bestows  on  the  child  ?  And  yet  he 
is  unconscious  of  most  of  her  solicitude  concerning  him.  He  knows  that  she  loves 
him,  but  he  only  feels  the  pulsations  of  her  love  once  in  awhQe.  I  think  we  never 
know  the  love  of  the  parent  for  the  child  till  we  become  parents.  Not  only  does 
God  think  of  us  constantly,  and  love  us  steadfastly,  but  there  is  a  healing,  curative 
nature,  for  ever  outworking  from  the  Divine  mind  upon  ours,  even  although  we  may 
co-operate  voluntarily  with  His  will.  All  these  yearnings  which  we  have  for  good, 
are  the  cryLog  out  of  the  soul  for  God,  under  the  influence  of  His  love  to  us.  Every 
throb  of  our  spirits  that  answers  to  spiritual  things  is  caused  by  the  influence  of 
God.  And  that  is  not  all.  We  have  testimony  in  the  workings  of  the  providence 
of  God  in  the  experiences  of  our  daily  life,  that  God's  love  is  still  shed  upon  us, 
although  we  may  be  unconscious  of  it.  I  recollect  to  have  read  the  case  of  a  man 
in  a  city  of  Southern  Europe,  who  spent  his  life  in  getting  property,  and  became 
unpopular  among  his  fellow-citizens  on  account  of  what  seemed  to  them  his  miserly 
spirit.  When  his  will  was  read  after  his  death,  it  stated  that  he  had  been  poor,  and 
had  suffered  from  a  lack  of  water  ;  that  he  had  seen  the  poor  of  the  city  also 
suffering  from  the  same  want,  and  that  he  had  devoted  his  life  to  the  accumulation 
of  means  sufficient  to  build  an  aqueduct  to  bring  water  to  the  city,  so  that  for  ever 
afterward  the  poor  should  be  supplied  with  it.  It  turned  out  that  the  man  whom 
the  poor  had  cursed  till  his  death  had  been  labouring  to  provide  water  for  the 
refreshment  of  themselves  and  their  children.  Oh!  how  God  has  been  building 
an  aqueduct  to  bring  the  water  of  life  to  us,  He  not  interpreting  His  acts  and  we 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  325 

not  understanding  them  !     IV.  God's  love   is  not,   as  too  often  ours  is,  the 

COLLATERAL   AND    INCIDENTAL   ELEMENT    OF    HiS   LIFE    AND    BEING.       It    is    His    abiding 

state.  All  time  and  aU  eternity  are  filled  with  it.  All  plans  are  conceived  and 
directed  by  it.  All  histories  and  all  administrations  are  transfused  with  and  carried 
forward  in  it.  All  triumphs  are  to  end  in  it,  while  all  that  cannot  be  made  to 
harmonise,  and  blend,  and  co-operate  with  it  shall  be  utterly  swept  away.  1.  Can 
any  other  truth  so  justify  and  enforce  an  earnest,  instant,  manly  search,  to  see  if 
these  things  be  so?  2.  If  what  I  have  said  is  true,  can  any  honourable  man  justify 
himself  for  not  coming  into  a  living  faith  in  and  communion  with  God  ?  3.  Will 
not  the  realisation  of  such  a  nature,  brought  home  to  us  personally,  account  for  all 
the  sometimes  discredited  Christian  experiences?  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ  the 
manifestation  of  Divine  love : — 1.  The  love  of  God  as  a  principle  is,  of  course, 
eternal.  Like  His  own  nature,  it  is  uncreated,  self-existent,  and  independent. 
2.  But,  while  the  love  of  God  as  a  principle  is  from  everlasting,  the  manifestations 
of  this  love  are  related  to  events,  and  to  circumstances,  and  to  time.  Now  the 
manifestation  of  God's  love  not  only  makes  us  acquainted  with  it,  but  renders  that 
love  available  to  us.  Now,  in  the  text,  a  gift  is  introduced  as  manifesting  God's 
love.  I.  The  natore  of  this  gift.  Now  here,  you  observe,  a  being  is  given  to  us, 
and  a  being  closely  related  to  God  Himself  ;  so  closely  related  to  the  Father  that  we 
must  look  upon  Him  as  the  Son  of  the  Highest.  This  Being  is  sent  into  our  world 
— sent  to  Uve  in  close  connection  with  it ;  for  He  is  born  of  a  woman,  and  sent  into 
our  world  to  become  thoroughly  indentified  with  it.  He  is  indentified  with  it  as  a 
new-born  babe  ;  He  is  indentified  with  it  as  an  infant ;  He  is  indentified  with  it  as 
a  child ;  He  is  indentified  with  it  as  a  youth  ;  He  is  indentified  with  it  as  a  man  ; 
He  is  indentified  with  it  as  pursuing  the  ordinary  occupations  of  His  country  and 
age.  11.  The  INTENT  OF  THIS  gift.  To  give  "life."  Originally,  life  was  staked 
upon  a  covenant.  God  said  to  our  first  father,  "Do  this,  and  you  shaUlive."  That 
was  a  covenant  of  works,  and  the  continuance  of  life  to  Adam  under  that 
arrangement  was  his  due.  The  covenant  is  broken,  and  it  is  utterly  impossible 
for  God  to  place  us  now  under  a  covenant  of  similar  character.  If  we  are 
to  have  life  now,  it  must  be  by  a  dispensation  of  mercy.  And  while  He 
personally  imparts  to  us  that  life  which  consists  in  freedom  from  condemna- 
tion. He  gives  us  life  in  soul  and  spirit  by  "the  Spirit  of  God."  (S.  Martin,) 
The  manifestation  of  Divine  love  in  the  gospel : — The  wife  of  Tigranes  was  among 
the  captives  on  a  certain  public  day  when  Cyrus,  the  conqueror  of  Asia,  was 
reviewing  his  troops.  While  the  captives  pressed  forward  to  see  the  conqueror, 
Tigranes  presented  himself  before  Cyrus  and  oiJered  a  thousand  talents  for  the 
redemption  of  his  wife.  Among  the  observations  afterwards  made  respecting  the 
appearance  and  glory  of  the  conqueror,  this  noble  lady  was  asked  what  she  thought 
of  Cyrus.  She  had  not  seen  him.  On  what  then  was  your  attention  fixed  ?  On 
the  man  who  offered  a  thousand  talents  for  my  redemption.  And  on  whom  should 
the  attention  of  Christians  be  chiefiy  fixed,  but  on  Him  who  gave,  not  a  thousand 
talents,  but  His  own  most  precious  life,  for  their  redemption?  We  admire  the 
magnanimity  of  Judah,  when  we  behold  him,  in  concern  for  the  sorrows  of  an 
aged  parent,  offering  himself  to  servitude  in  the  room  of  the  favourite  son  of  the 
deceased  Eachel.  But  what  was  this  compared  with  Him  who  took  the  sinner's 
place  under  law,  and  so  to  speak,  received  the  fuU  discharge  of  wrath  Divine  ? 
Let  aU  the  archives  of  antiquity  be  explored  ;  bring  foi-ward  all  the  generous 
sacrifices  of  Greece  and  Eome ;  and  what  are  they  all  to  the  amazing  love  here 
displayed  ?  The  love  which  we  celebrate  stands  alone  and  without  a  second.  It 
is  the  most  profitable  subject  of  contemplation  that  can  occupy  the  mind.  It 
carries  you  up  to  those  views  of  God  which  are  the  most  sublime,  the  most  trans- 
forming, and  the  most  happy.  {E.  D.  Griffin,  D.D.)  Thelove  of  God  to  men  in  the 
Incarnation  of  Christ : — I.  It  is  a  great  evidence  of  the  love  of  God  to  mankind, 

that    HE    was    PLEASED     TO    TAKE     OUR     CASE    INTO     CONSIDERATION,     AND     TO     CONCERN 

Himself  for  our  happiness.  Now  that  He,  who  is  far  above  us,  and  after  that 
we  by  wilful  transgression  had  lost  ourselves,  had  no  obligation  to  take  care  of  us, 
but  what  His  own  goodness  laid  upon  Him ;  that  He  should  be  so  solicitous  for  our 
recovery,  is  a  great  evidence  of  His  good-wiU  to  us,  and  cannot  be  imagined  to 
proceed  from  any  other  cause.  H.  Another  evidence  of  God's  great  love  to  us  is, 
that  He  was  pleased  to  design  so  great  a  benefit  for  us.  This  the  Scripture 
expresseth  to  us  by  life ;  because,  as  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  blessings,  so  it  is  the 
foundation  of  all  other  enjoyments.  1.  We  were  spiritually  dead,  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins,  as  the  apostle  speaks   (Eph.  ii.  1,  2).    2.  We  were  likewise  judicially 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

dead  in  law,  being  condemned  by  the  just  sentence  of  it.  What  a  surprise  of 
kindness  is  here !  that,  instead  of  "  sending  His  Son  to  condemn  us,"  He  should 
*'  send  Him  into  the  world  to  save  us."  But  His  love  stopped  not  here ;  it  was  not 
contented  to  spare  us  and  free  us  from  misery,  but  was  restless  till  it  had  found 
out  a  way  to  bring  us  to  happiness.  HI.  The  last  evidence  of  God's  great  love  to 
XXB  was  this,  that  God  was  pleased  to  use  such  a  means  fob  the  obtaining 
AND  PEocuBiNG  OF  THIS  GREAT  BLESSING  "  He  Sent  His  only-bcgottcn  Son  into 
the  world,  that  we  might  live  through  Him."  1.  The  person  whom  He  was  pleased 
to  employ  upon  this  design  :  "  He  sent  His  only-begotten  Son."  2.  How  much  He 
abased  Him,  in  order  to  the  accomplishing  of  this  design,  implied  in  these  words, 
♦'He  sent  Him  into  the  world."  3.  To  whom  He  was  sent,  to  the  world.  4.  That 
He  did  all  this  voluntarily  and  freely,  out  of  His  mere  pity  and  goodness ;  not 
constrained  hereto  by  any  necessity.  What  remains  but  to  apply  this  to  ourselves? 
1.  Let  us  propound  to  ourselves  the  love  of  God  for  our  pattern  and  example.  2. 
Let  us  readily  comply  with  the  great  design  of  this  great  love  of  God  to  mankind. 
3.  With  what  joy  and  thankfulness  should  we  commemorate  this  great  love  of  God 
to  mankind.  {Abp.  TilloUon.)  The  love  of  God: — I.  The  chakacteristicb  op 
God's  love.  1.  Everlasting  in  its  date  (Jer.  xxxi.  3).  2.  Unmerited  in  the 
objects  of  it  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  21-28).  3.  Immutable  in  its  nature  (Psa.lxxxix.  30-36).  4.  Of 
unspeakablevalue(Eph.iii.  17-19).  5.  Eternal  in  itsduration(Eph.  iii.  11,12).  11.  Thb 
MANIFESTATION  OF  God's  LOVE.  1.  The  grcatncss  and  glory  of  the  person  sending : 
God  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  2.  The  dignity  of  the  person  sent:  Christ,  the  God-man 
(Heb.  i.  3).  3.  The  place  into  which  He  was  sent :  this  world  (1  John  iv.  9).  4. 
The  purpose  for  which  He  was  sent:  salvation  (Gal.  iv.  4,5).  III.  The  geaciods 
DESIGN.  1.  A  Ufe  of  reconciliation  with  God  (2  Cor.  v.  18).  2.  A  life  of  justifi- 
cation before  God  (Eom.  v.  1).  3.  A  life  of  Divine  communion  in  God  (1  John 
i.  3).  4.  A  life  of  consolation  and  genuine  happiness  (2  Cor.  i.  5).  5.  A  life  of 
eternal  glory  in  heaven,  body  and  soul  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  24  ;  Gal.  vi.  8).  IV.  Improvement. 
The  nature  of  this  life  has  many  most  paradoxical  traits  connected  with  it.  1.  A 
warlike  yet  victorious  life.  2.  A  painful  yet  pleasurable  life.  3.  A  friendless  yet 
friendly  life.  4.  An  humble  yet  exalted  life.  5.  A  dying  yet  eternal  life.  6.  A 
worthless  yet  most  precious  life.  (T.  B.  Baker,  M.A.)  The  supreme  manifestation 
of  God's  love : — I.  The  amazing  manifestation  of  Divine  love,  which  is  here 
DESCRIBED.  As  whcu  some  eminently  beautiful  object  rivets  the  attention  of  a 
traveller,  so  that  he  scarcely  gives  even  a  passing  glance  to  other  objects ;  so  the 
believer's  thoughts  are  so  fixed  upon  one  manifestation  of  God's  love.  "  In  this 
■was  manifested  the  love  of  God,"  &c.  II.  Foe  whom  this  wondrous  love  has 
BEEN  manifested.  "  God  sent  His  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world."  It  might  have 
happened  that,  for  some  reason  known  to  the  Creator,  such  a  sacrifice  should  have 
been  necessary  for  the  world  in  its  first  state  of  innocence  ;  and  even  in  such  a  case 
the  love  of  God  in  sending  His  Son  would  have  been  inconceivably  great ;  but  what 
was  really  the  state  of  the  world,  when  this  love  was  manifested  in  its  behalf  ?  We 
shall  learn  what  the  state  of  the  world  is,  by  considering  what  we  ourselves  are. 
Some  are  sincerely  desirous  of  living  to  the  glory  of  God,  while  others  are 
seeking  to  please  themselves.  But  what  are  the  best  feelings  of  the  best  of 
us  towards  God?  What  is  the  best  conduct  of  the  best  of  us  in  comparison 
with  the  will  of  God  ?  Alas !  how  cold  are  our  affections !  How  inconsistent 
is  our  habitual  deportment !  The  devices  of  Satan,  how  often  we  allow  our- 
selves to  be  deceived  by  them !  And,  if  the  best  are  so  bad,  what  must  the 
worst  be  ?  And  yet  God  sent  His  Son  into  such  a  world !  Oh,  what  won- 
drous love  I  III.  The  object  which  God's  love  had  in  view  when  He  bent 
His  Son.  "  That  we  might  live  through  Him."  (A.  Staekhouse,  M.A.)  God's 
love  manifested  in  Christian4i  : — The  love  of  God  is  not  a  public  spectacle. 
Love  is  not  a  material  thing,  that  all  can  see  alike.  Thousands  saw  the  Cross  who 
saw  nothing  of  the  love.  Where  can  the  love  of  all  that  passion,  that  blood,  that 
death,  be  seen  ?  "  In  us,"  who  by  faith  in  the  blood  are  saved  to  life  eternal.  A 
man  goes  down  to  the  shore  when  a  storm  is  raging.  He  sees  a  wreck  in  the 
offing  and  a  crowd  on  the  beach.  He  finds  that  he  is  too  late  to  see  what  they 
have  seen — the  lifeboat  manned  and  launched — to  see  the  rescue  of  those  on  board. 
He  has  come  too  late  for  all  that,  but  he  can  yet  see  the  love  of  it  all  in  the  grati- 
tude and  gladness  of  the  saved.  In  all  those  saved  folk  he  can  see  the  love  of  it 
all  made  manifest.  Well,  Calvary  is  hidden  from  us.  The  dying  ended  in  three 
hours,  but  the  love  of  it  all  is  manifest  in  us — in  every  soul  saved  from  hell — in 
every  gleam  of  hope  that  lights  the  gloom  of  death — in  all  the  ways  by  which 


CHAP.rvr.]  I.JOHN.  327 

Christian  charity  ministers  to  the  needs  of  men.  "  When  thou  seest  an  eagle," 
said  Blake,  "  thou  seest  a  portion  of  genius ;  lift  up  thy  head."  Yes,  and  when  thou 
eeest  a  Christian — a  soul  saved  from  hell,  and  being  saved  from  sin — thou  seest  a 
manifestation  of  the  love  of  God.  Lift  up  thy  soul  in  praise.  (J.  M.  Gibbon.) 
The  love  of  God : — I.  God  loves  man.  Why,  with  a  little  child  speaking  of  hia 
mother's  love,  sometimes  they  fail ;  how  much  more  when  we  speak  of  God's  love ! 
I  saw  a  little  child  the  other  day  clasp  its  arms  round  its  mother's  neck,  and  say, 
"  Mother,  I  loves  'ou,  and  I  know  'ou  loves  me,  but  I  don't  know  how  much  'ou 
loves  me."  So  the  Uttle  child  spoke ;  and  if  it  is  true  in  that  love,  how  much 
more  in  the  love  of  God,  of  which  all  human  love  is  but  a  shadow,  a  spark ! 
II.  God  has  manifested  His  love.  "  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God." 
Of  course  God  has  manifested  His  love  in  ten  thousand  ways.  Why  everything 
in  Nature,  if  we  only  see  it  rightly,  is  a  manifestation  of  God's  love.  Every  ray 
of  warm  sunshine  is  but  a  going  out  of  God  in  lovd.  But  oh,  the  mani- 
festation of  God's  love  in  nature  is  not  enough  to  make  us  live.  When  some 
great  artist  manifests  his  skill  in  a  work  of  art,  begotten  of  his  genius,  it  is 
exhibited  in  carpeted  saloons,  amid  grandeur  and  pomp,  and  within  tapestried 
walls.  But  when  God  manifested  this  masterpiece  of  grace  His  only-begotten 
Son — it  was  in  the  manger  of  Bethlehem,  amidst  the  surroundings  of  poverty. 
Oh,  have  you  believed  that  love  ?  Many  of  you  have  heard  about  it,  but  it  makes 
a  vast  difference  when  you  believe  it.  The  other  day  I  stood  by  the  death-bed  of 
a  young  man ;  his  wife  was  beside  it,  and  some  friends  were  in  the  adjoining  room; 
and  I  stayed  there  talking  with  them.  And  one  earnest  young  man  said,  "  Sir,  can 
you  understand  why  God  allows  such  sorrow  as  that?"  And  I  said,  " Honestly, 
sir,  I  don't  understand  it ;  but  I  know  that  God  loves  us,  and  He  knows  what  is 
best  for  us.  Supposing  I  had  a  friend  in  trouble  and  I  lent  him  £20,000 ;  do  you 
think  that  after  I  had  done  that  I  should  see  him  starve  for  the  want  of  a  sixpence  ? 
Well,  then,  if  God  loves  us  so  much  that  He  gives  His  Son,  let  us  trust  Him  for 
the  rest,  though  we  cannot  understand  it."  (M.  Rainsford,  M.A.)  The  love 
of  God  manifested  in  the  Son : — "  In  this,"  it  was  shown,  manifestly  and  undeni- 
ably, beyond  the  reach  of  misapprehension  or  comparison.  It  had  been  shown 
before,  but  how  feebly,  how  doubtfully,  compared  with  that  strength  of  evidence, 
that  display  of  power  which  attends  its  existence  now.  During  that  whole  period 
which  preceded  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  sin  was  thus  spread  over  the  whole 
of  human  kind  ;  and  like  the  fog  that  hangs  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  it 
intercepted  those  bright  rays  which  issue  externally  from  the  great  source  of 
light  in  heaven.  And  this  seems  to  have  been  the  case  with  man  previously 
to  the  dispensation  of  grace  in  the  gospel.  He  felt  the  love  of  God  in  part. 
The  love  of  God  may  be  beheld  in  every  object  that  we  see,  but  they 
alone  see  this  glorious  attribute  in  its  true  colour,  in  its  full  development, 
who  fix  their  eyes  on  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  who  study  the  real  greatness 
of  the  love  of  God  as  revealed  in  Him.  I.  We  say  it  is  shown  in  the  natuke  of 
THAT  WORK  WHICH  He  CAME  TO  DO.  Let  US  Consider  that  work,  its  character,  its 
object,  in  order  to  understand  the  greatness  of  the  love  which  prompted  it.  To 
silence  every  cavil,  to  give  an  evidence  of  the  love  of  God  which  imagination 
should  not  reach,  to  place  it  above  the  level  of  every  doubt  or  insinuation,  Christ 
came,  not  to  cure  our  natural  evils,  not  to  teach,  not  to  direct,  though  any  one  of 
these  acts  might  well  have  awakened  amazement ;  but  He  came  to  die  for  sinners. 
II.  Let  us  now  endeavour  to  remark  the  evidence  of  the  love  of  God,  which  is 

INCLUDED   IN   THE   MANNEB   IN   WHICH    THAT   WORK  WAS    ACCOMPLISHED,  AND  THE  EFFECT 

PRODUCED  BY  His  MINISTRY.  1.  Let  US  observc  first,  in  the  certainty  of  its  accom- 
plishment. Eternal  Ufe  is  purchased  for  us  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  it  is  offered  to  all 
in  Him,  absolutely  and  universally.  "  This  is  the  record,"  says  St.  John,  "  that 
God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life  ;  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son."  He  hath  given  it. 
He  who  is  the  truth  itself  hath  given  it,  and  hath  given  it  in  His  Son.  "  He,  there- 
fore, that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  He  that  hath  the  one  is  secure,  absolutely 
secure  of  the  other.  Unlike  other  marks  of  love,  where  there  is  no  positive  connec- 
tion between  the  pledge  and  the  possession,  between  the  means  and  the  end; 
unlike  the  gift  of  riches,  for  instance,  which  does  not  ensure  contentment ;  unlike 
the  gift  of  health,  which  does  not  ensure  joy ;  unlike  these,  the  gift  of  Christ 
ensures  eternal  life.  2.  Again,  let  us  observe  it  in  the  largeness  of  its  offers,  in 
the  multitude,  the  innumerable  multitude  of  those  who  are  included  in  the  com- 
pass of  this  love  of  God.  Who  has  ever  come  to  Christ,  and  been  excluded  for 
want  of  room  ?    3.  Think,  finally,  how  much  it  exceeds  in  magnitude  aU  that  was 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

ever  before  expected.  Eternal  life,  a  life  of  everlasting  joy,  of  uninterrupted  holiness 
and  peace.  Compared  with  this,  what  are  the  distinctions  and  circumstances  of 
the  world  but  the  colours  which  adorn  a  shadow ;  the  illusions  of  a  dream  which 
passes  away  and  is  gone?  {H.  Raikes,  M.A.)  God's  love  manifested  in  redemp- 
tion : — I.  The  redemption  of  mankind  was  an  act  of  the  freest  and  most 
UNMERITED  GRACE.  1.  God's  dcsigns  of  mcicy  could  not  arise  from  His  thinking 
the  constitution  He  had  made  with  Adam  as  the  representative  of  his  posterity 
severe  and  unrighteous.  2.  God  was  not  moved  to  provide  a  Saviour  for  His 
creatures  by  any  sense  that  His  law  was  too  strict  in  its  demands.  3.  The  inability 
to  perform  his  duty,  which  man  contracted  by  his  fall,  did  not  render  his  case  in 
the  least  more  deserving  of  compassion.  4.  God  was  not  moved  to  this  act  of 
unmerited  grace  by  any  foreknowledge  He  had  that  mankind  would  receive  it  with 
thankfulness.  II.  The  redemption  of  mankind  is  a  full  demonstration  of  thb 
UNBOUNDED  LOVE  OF  THE  DiviNE  NATURE.  {R.  Walker.)  God's  love  proved : — 
Does  God's  love  need  to  be  proved  ?  Yes,  as  all  paganism  shows.  Gods  vicious, 
gods  careless,  gods  cruel,  gods  beautiful,  there  are  in  abundance ;  but  where  is  there 
a  god  who  loves  ?  Non-Christian  thinkers  can  now  talk  eloquently  about  God's 
love,  and  sometimes  reject  the  gospel  in  the  name  of  that  love,  thus  kicking  down 
the  ladder  by  which  they  climbed.  But  it  was  the  Cross  that  taught  the  world  the 
love  of  God  ;  and,  apart  from  the  death  of  Christ,  men  may  hope  that  there  is  a 
heart  at  the  centre  of  the  universe,  but  they  can  never  be  sure  that  there  is. 
Nature  and  history  give  but  ambiguous  oracles  on  that  subject.   {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent 
His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins. — Herein  is  love : — I.  The  infinite 
SPRING  OF  LOVE.  Our  text  has  two  words  upon  which  I  would  place  an  emphasis — 
"not"  and  "but."  The  first  is  "not."  "Herein  is  love,  not" — "not  that  we 
loved  God."  Very  naturally  many  conclude  that  this  means  "not  that  we  loved 
God  first."  That  is  not  exactly  the  truth  taught  here,  but  still  it  is  a  weighty  truth, 
and  is  mentioned  in  ver.  19  in  express  words — "We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved 
us."  We  inscribe  a  negative  in  black  capital  letters  upon  the  idea  that  man's  love 
can  ever  be  prior  to  the  love  of  God.  That  is  quite  out  of  the  question.  "Not  that 
we  loved  God."  Take  a  second  sense — that  is,  not  that  any  man  did  love  God  at 
all  by  nature,  whether  first  or  second.  The  unregenerate  heart  is,  as  to  love,  a 
broken  cistern  which  can  hold  no  water.  We  come  nearer  to  John's  meaning  when 
we  look  at  this  negative  as  applying  to  those  who  do  love  God.  "  Not  that  we 
loved  God  " — that  is,  that  our  love  to  God,  even  when  it  does  exist,  and  even  when 
it  influences  our  Uves,  is  not  worthy  to  be  mentioned  as  a  fountain  of  supply  for 
love.  What  poor  love  ours  is  at  its  very  best  when  compared  with  the  love  where- 
with God  loves  us !  Let  me  use  another  figure.  If  we  had  to  enlighten  the  world, 
a  child  might  point  us  to  a  bright  mirror  reflecting  the  sun,  and  he  might  cry, 
"Herein  is  light!"  You  and  I  would  say,  "Poor  child,  that  is  but  borrowed 
brightness ;  the  light  is  not  there,  but  yonder,  in  the  sun :  the  love  of  saints  is 
nothing  more  than  the  reflection  of  the  love  of  God.  We  have  love,  but  God  is 
love.  Let  us  contrast  our  love  to  God  with  His  love  to  us.  We  do  love  God,  and 
we  may  well  do  so,  since  He  is  infinitely  lovable.  When  the  mind  is  once 
enlightened  it  sees  everything  that  is  lovable  about  God.  He  is  so  good,  so 
gracious,  so  perfect  that  He  commands  our  admiring  affection.  In  us  there  is  by 
nature  nothing  to  attract  the  affection  of  a  holy  God,  but  quite  the  reverse ;  and  yet 
He  loved  us.  Herein,  indeed,  is  love!  When  we  love  God  it  is  an  honour  to  us; 
it  exalts  a  man  to  be  allowed  to  love  a  Being  so  glorious.  He  that  loves  God  does 
in  the  most  effectual  manner  love  himself.  We  are  filled  with  riches  when  wo 
abound  in  love  to  God ;  it  is  our  wealth,  our  health,  our  might,  and  our  delight. 
It  is  our  duty  to  love  God  ;  we  are  bound  to  do  it.  As  His  creatures  we  ought  to 
love  our  Creator ;  as  preserved  by  His  care  we  are  under  obligation  to  love  Him  for 
His  goodness :  we  owe  Him  so  much  that  our  utmost  love  is  a  mere  acknowledg- 
ment of  our  debt.  But  God  loved  us  to  whom  He  owed  nothing  at  all ;  for  what- 
ever might  have  been  the  claims  of  a  creature  upon  his  Creator,  we  had  forfeited 
them  all  by  our  rebellion.  Let  us  turn  to  the  "  but."  "  But  that  He  loved  us."  I 
should  like  you  to  meditate  on  each  one  of  these  words — "He  loved  us."  Three 
words,  but  what  weight  of  meaning!  "He,"  who  is  infinitely  holy  and  cannot 
endure  iniquity — "He  loved  us";  "  He,"  whose  glory  is  the  astonishment  of  the 
greatest  of  intelligent  beings — "He  loved  us."  Now  ring  that  second  silver  bell: 
"  He  loved  us."     He  saw  our  race  ruined  in  the  fall,  and  He  could  not  bear  that 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  329 

man  should  be  destroyed.  He  saw  that  sin  had  brought  men  into  ^trretchedness 
and  misery,  and  would  destroy  them  for  ever;  and  He  would  not  have  it  so.  He 
loved  them  with  the  love  of  pity,  with  the  love  of  sweet  and  strong  benevolence. 
"Would  a  man  want  any  other  heaven  than  to  know  for  certain  that  he  enjoyed  the 
love  of  God?  Note  the  third  word.  "He  loved  us" — "us" — the  most  insignificant 
of  beings.  Observe  that  the  previous  verse  speaks  of  us  as  being  dead  in  sin. 
He  was  wroth  with  us  as  a  Judge,  but  yet  He  loved  us :  He  was  determined 
to  punish,  and  yet  resolved  to  save.  H.  The  makvellous  outflow  of  that 
liOVE.  Consider  every  word :  "He  sent  His  Son."  God  "  sent."  Love  caused  that 
mission.  Oh,  the  wonder  of  this,  that  God  should  not  wait  till  rebellious  men  had 
sent  to  His  throne  for  terms  of  reeonciliation,  but  should  commence  negotiations 
himself !  Moreover,  God  sent  such  a  One  :  He  "  sent  His  Son."  Yes,  "  He  spared 
not  His  own  Son,  but  freely  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all."  He  knew  what  would 
come  of  that  sending  of  Him,  and  yet  He  sent  Him.  Note  further,  not  only  the 
grandeur  of  the  Ambassador,  but  the  tenderness  of  the  relationship  existing  between 
Him  and  the  offended  God.  "  He  sent  His  Son"'  The  previous  verse  says,  "  His 
only-begotten  Son."  Christ's  death  was  in  fact  God  in  human  form  suffering  for 
human  sin;  God  incarnate  bleeding  because  of  our  transgressions.  Are  we  not  now 
carried  away  with  the  streams  of  love?  Go  a  step  further.  "  God  sent  His  Son  to 
be  a  propitiation,"  that  is,  to  be  not  only  a  reconciler,  but  the  reconciliation.  Hia 
sacrifice  of  Himself  was  the  atonement  through  which  mercy  is  rendered  possible 
in  consistency  with  justice.  HI.  The  consequent  outflow  of  love  fbom  tjs. 
"  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another."  Our  love  then 
to  one  another  is  simply  God's  love  to  us,  flowing  into  us,  and  flowing  out  again. 
If  you  and  I  desire  to  love  our  fellow  Christians  and  to  love  the  fallen  race  of  man, 
we  must  be  joined  on  to  the  aqueduct  which  conducts  love  from  this  eternal  source, 
or  else  we  shall  soon  fail  in  love.  Observe,  then,  that  as  the  love  of  God  is  the 
source  of  all  true  love  in  us,  so  a  sense  of  that  love  stimulates  us.  Whenever  you 
feel  that  you  love  God  you  overflow  with  love  to  all  God's  people ;  I  am  sure  you 
do.  Your  love  will  respect  the  same  persons  as  God's  love  does,  and  for  the  same 
reasons.  God  loves  men ;  so  will  you ;  God  loves  them  when  there  is  no  good  in 
them,  and  you  will  love  them  in  the  same  way.  Our  love  ought  to  follow  Qie  love 
of  God  in  one  point,  namely,  in  always  seeking  to  produce  reconciliation.  It  was 
to  this  end  that  God  sent  His  Son.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  perfect  lm>e  : — God 
is  love.  But  if  we  say  that,  do  we  not  say  that  God  is  good  with  a  fresh  form  of 
goodness,  which  is  not  justice,  nor  truthfulness,  nor  purity,  bounty,  nor  mercy, 
though  without  them  it  cannot  exist?  And  is  not  that  fresh  goodness,  which  we 
have  not  defined  yet,  the  very  kind  of  goodness  which  we  prize  most  in  human 
beings?  And  what  is  that?  What — save  self-sacrifice?  For  what  is  the  love  worth 
which  does  not  show  itself  in  action ;  and  more,  which  does  not  show  itself  in 
passion,  in  the  true  sense  of  that  word,  namely,  in  suffering?  On  the  Cross  of 
Calvary,  God  the  Father  showed  His  own  character  and  the  character  of  His  co- 
equal and  co-eternal  Son,  and  of  the  Spirit  which  proceeds  from  both.  For  there 
He  spared  not  His  only-begotten  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  for  us.  The  comfortable 
prosperous  man  shrinks  from  the  thought  of  Christ  on  His  Cross.  It  tells  him  that 
better  men  than  he  have  had  to  suffer ;  that  the  Son  of  God  Himself  had  to  suffer. 
And  he  does  not  like  suffering ;  he  prefers  comfort.  The  lazy,  selfish  man  shrinks 
from  the  sight  of  Christ  on  His  Cross ;  for  it  rebukes  his  laziness  and  selfishness. 
Christ's  Cross  says  to  him — Thou  art  ignoble  and  base,  as  long  as  thou  art  lazy  and 
selfish.  Rise  up,  do  something,  dare  something,  suffer  something,  if  need  be,  for 
the  sake  of  thy  fellow-creatures.  He  turns  from  it  and  says  in  his  heart — Oh ! 
Christ's  Cross  is  a  painful  subject,  and  Passion-week  and  Good  Friday  a  painful 
time.  I  will  think  of  something  more  peaceful,  more  agreeable  than  sorrow,  and 
shame,  and  agony,  and  death.  Yes,  so  a  man  says  too  often,  as  long  as  the  fine 
weather  lasts,  and  all  is  smooth  and  bright.  But  when  the  tempest  comes ;  when 
poverty  comes,  affliction,  shame,  sickness,  bereavement,  and  still  more,  when  perse- 
cution comes  on  a  man ;  then,  then  indeed  Passion-week  begins  to  mean  something 
to  a  man ;  and  just  because  it  is  the  saddest  of  all  times,  it  looks  to  him  the  brightest 
of  all  times.  For  in  his  misery  and  confusion  he  looks  up  to  heaven  and  asks.  Is 
there  any  one  in  heaven  who  understands  all  this  ?  Then  does  the  Cross  of  Christ 
bring  a  message  to  that  man  such  as  no  other  thing  or  being  on  earth  can  bring. 
For  it  says  to  him — God  does  understand  thee  utterly.  For  Christ  understands 
thee.  Christ  feels  for  thee.  Christ  feels  with  thee.  Christ  has  suffered  for  thee, 
and  suffered  with  thee.    Thou  canst  go  through  nothing  which  Christ  has  not  gone 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  '     [chap.  iv. 

throngh.     Passion-week  tells  us,  I  believe,  what  is  the  law  according  to  which  the 
whole  world  of  man  and  of  things,  yea,  the  whole  universe,  sun,  moon,  and  stars, 
is  made :  and  that  is,  the  law  of  self-sacrifice  ;  that  nothing  lives  merely  for  itself ; 
that  each  thing  is  ordained  by  God  to  help  the  things  around  it,  even  at  its  own 
expense.     On  this  day  Christ  said — ay,  and  His  Cross  says  still,  and  will  say  to  all 
eternity — Wouldest  thou  be  good  ?    Wouldest  thou  be  like  God  ?     Then  work,  and 
dare,  and,  if  need  be,  suffer,  for  thy  fellow-men.     (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)        The  love 
of  God : — I.  John  would  have  us  magnify  the  love  of  God  by  the  demerit  op  its 
OBJECTS.     God  had  thoughts  of  love  towards  us  before  man  had  existence.     "  We 
rejoice  in  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God  that  cannot  lie  hath  given  us  before  the 
world  began."     Then  view  man  as  created.      "  God  made  man  upright,  but  he 
sought  out  many  inventions."     Sin  soon  entered  our  "  world,  and  death  by  sin ; 
and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned."     The  apostle,  speaking 
of  the  heathen  nations,  says,  "  When  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  Him  not  as 
God,  neither  were  thankful,"  &c.     So  when  God  looked  down  upon  the  children  of 
men,  to  see  if  there  were  any  that  sought  after  God,  He  says,  "  They  are  all  gone 
out  of  the  way,  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one."    Do  you  ask,  "  Were 
not  the  Jews  an  exception  here  ?  for  to  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God." 
God  planted  them  in  His  vineyard,  and  fenced  it  in,  and  gave  it  every  kind  of 
culture,  so  that  He  said,  "  What  more  could  have  been  done  than  1  have  done  to 
My  vineyard?"    Yet  what  was  His  testimony?     "When  I  looked  that  it  should 
bring  forth  grapes,  wherefore  brought  it  forth  wild  grapes  ?  "    We  pass  from  the 
prediction,  and  read  the  history  of  the  transgression.     "  He  was  in  the  world,  and 
the  world  knew  Him  not.     He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not." 
What  must  have  been  the  condition  of  man,  not  to  love  the  perfection  of  holiness, 
the  source  of  excellence,  the  fountain  of  life,  the  supreme  good  ?     WTiat  must  have 
been  the  perversity  of  his  mind  which  should  induce  Him  to  regard  God  as  an 
invader,  and  to  say,  "Depart  from  us,  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  Thy  ways"? 
Now  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God ;  there  is  no  neutrality  here.     "  He 
that  is  not  with  Me,"  says  the  Saviour,  "is  against  Me ;  and  he  that  gathereth  not 
with  Me,  scattereth  abroad."    We  are  alienated  in  our  minds  by  wicked  works.     11. 
The  exclusiveness  of  the  exeecise.     (W.  Jay,  M.A.)        The  love  of  God,  and  the 
response  due  to  it : — I.   In  refekbing  to  the  love  of  God,  as  exhibited  by  the 
apostle,  there  are  a  variety  of  aspects  offered  to  our  notice.     1.  There  is  the 
fact  that  the  free,  unbought  love  of  God,  is  the  source  of  human  redemption.     2. 
The  matchlessness  of  the  Divine  love,  as  demonstrated  in  the  mode  of  its  expression. 
3.  The  signal  issues  of  the  Divine  love,  as  it  achieved  a  propitiation  for  sin.     4.  A 
propitiation  has  been  made.     H.  The  response  which  is  due  on  the  part  of  bian 
to  these  matchless  displays  of  the  Divine  love.   1.  It  is  by  faith  that  we  embrace 
the  propitiation  of  the  gospel.     2.  The  costly  character  of  the  propitiation  of  God 
bespeaks  a  corresponding  dedication  to  its  benefits.    3.  Infinite  love  bespeaks  fervent 
response  from  us.     (A.  Forman.)        The  great  benefit  received  by  the  Incarnation : — 
I.  From  the  excellency  of  the  fountain  and  original,  from  which  it  springs  ; 
that  is  the  love  of  God  to  us.     1.  The  instance:  "Herein  is  love."    A  speech  it  is  of 
great  emphasis,  spoken  by  the  apostle  with  great  strength  of  affection;    and  it 
carrieth  with  it  a  threefold  intimation.     (1)  It  is  a  specification  of  that  affection,  or 
rather  attribute,  in  God,  which  most  of  all  shone  in  this  great  work  of  Christ's 
Incarnation.     It  was  His  love  that  employed  His  wisdom,  His  power.  His  righteous- 
ness ;  set  them  on  working  for  our  good  and  benefit.    (2)  It  shows  the  real  proof  and 
manifestation  of  His  love.     It  was  love  testified  in  the  reality  of  love.     It  intimates  not 
only  an  act  of  love,  but  an  effect  of  love,  a  fruit  of  love.     It  was  not  a  well-wishing  love 
only,  but  a  love  that  breaks  forth  into  action  and  evidence.    (3)  It  carries  with  it  the 
most  clear  and  full  demonstration  of  love  to  us.  Other  fruits  of  love  He  hath  vouchsafed 
us,  and  we  enjoy  them  daily ;  but  none  so  evident  proofs  of  His  love  as  the  sending  of 
His  Son  tons.   2.  The  illustration  of  the  greatness  and  excellency  of  this  love.   "Not 
that  we  loved  Him,  but  that  He  loved  us."   (1)  We  may  resolve  these  words  into  a  pre- 
venting sense.     We  began  not  with  Him  in  this  league  of  love,  but  He  began  with 
us.     That  is  one  excellency  of  His  love ;  it  was  a  forward,  antecedent,  preventing 
love.     (2)  We  may  resolve  it  into  a  negative  sense.     We  loved  not  Him,  and  yet  He 
loved  us.    That  is  another  excellency  of  His  love ;  it  was  a  free,  undeserved  love,  no 
way  due  to  us.     (3)  We  may  resolve  it  into  a  comparative  sense.     Had  we  loved 
Him,  or  do  we  love  Him  ?     Yet  that  is  nothing  in  comparison  of  His  love  to  us. 
"  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  Him  " :  no  great  matter  in  that.    Our  love  to  Him — 
it  is  not  worth  the  naming.     11.  The  excellency  of  the  benefit  which  flows  from 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  331 

THE  FOUNTAIN — that  is  the  sending  of  Christ  to  accomplish  our  salvation.  And  here 
are  three  great  and  gracious  fruits  of  love.  1.  That  He  would  send  to  us.  (1)  This 
act  of  sending  to  us  argues  much  love.  It  had  been  much  for  Him  to  admit  of  our 
sending  addresses  to  Him.  Consider  upon  what  terms  we  stood  with  God,  and 
we  will  confess  it.  (a)  The  inferior  should  send  and  seek  to  the  superior,  (b)  The 
party  offending  to  the  party  offended,  (c)  The  weaker  should  send  to  the  stronger, 
(d)  They  that  need  reconciliation  should  seek  to  him  that  needs  it  not.  (2)  God 
sent  Him  to  us  wittingly  and  willingly.  Our  Saviour  came  not  of  Himself  only,  but 
the  Father  sent  Him.  It  was  a  full  mission  and  commission.  He  sent  Him ;  yea,  more 
than  so.  He  sent  Him  and  authorised  Him  (John  vi.  27).  (3)  He  sent  Him — (a)  Not  as 
a  Messenger  only  but  as  a  Gift  also ;  that  is  the  best  kiiid  of  sending.  He  so  sent  Him 
as  that  He  gave  Him  to  us.  (b)  He  was  a  gift  not  only  promised  but  actually 
bestowed  and  exhibited  to  us.  We  enjoy  Him,  whom  the  prophets  promised,  the 
patriarchs  expected.  2.  Here  is  an  higher  expression  of  His  love  in  that  He  sent 
His  Son  to  us.  (1)  Take  notice  of  the  dignity  of  Him  that  was  sent  (PhU.  ii.  6,  7). 
(2)  For  so  great  a  God  to  send  any,  though  never  so  mean,  to  such  wretches  as  we 
were,  had  been  a  favour  more  than  we  could  expect ;  but  to  send  His  only  Son,  His 
beloved  Son,  is  a  testimony  of  love  beyond  all  comprehension.  3.  The  purpose  and 
end  of  sending  Him — that  is,  "  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."  (1)  It  was  for  sins, 
(o)  It  had  been  much  for  just  and  good  men  and  for  their  benefit,  (b)  To  mediate 
for  those  that  have  offended  another  is  a  kindness  and  office  of  love  that  may  be 
found  amongst  men ;  but  God  is  the  Person  wronged,  our  sins  are  aU  against  Him, 
His  law  was  broken,  His  will  disobeyed.  His  name  dishonoured.  Yet  see  His  love 
— He  sends  to  propitiate  and  expiate  our  sins  against  Himself,  (c)  To  send  to  rebels 
in  arms  and  to  oiler  them  pardon,  hath  been  found  amongst  men ;  but  for  rebels 
subdued  and  under  the  power  of  their  sovereign,  nay,  shut  up — we  lay  all  at  His 
mercy — and  then  He  sends  unto  us  His  propitiation.  (2)  It  was  for  the  propitiating 
of  our  sins.  That  was  the  great  work  for  which  He  came  (Isa.  xxvii.  9).  That  was 
His  errand  on  which  He  came.  This  He  published  and  made  known  to  the  world, 
(a)  To  propitiate  is  to  appease  God's  wrath  and  displeasure,  justly  taken  against  us, 
and  to  reduce  us  iuto  grace  and  favour  again.  He  loved  us  in  our  deformity,  that 
He  might  put  upon  us  a  spiritual  beauty.  He  loved  us  when  we  displeased  Him, 
that  He  might  work  in  us  that  which  pleaseth  Him.  (b)  He  did  it  by  the  means  of 
making  a  full  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  for  us.  He  hath  done  away  our  sins, 
not  by  a  free  dispensation,  but  by  a  full  and  just  compensation,  (c)  What  is  the 
matter  of  our  propitiation — the  price  of  our  ransom  ?  That  is  the  highest  improve- 
ment of  love.  He  is  our  propitiation :  not  only  our  propitiator,  but  our  propitiation. 
He  is  not  only  our  Saviour,  but  He  is  become  our  salvation — as  David  speaks.  He 
is  not  only  our  Bedeemer,  but  our  ransom  (1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  Isa.  liii.  10 ;  Eom.  iii.  25 ; 
Lev.  xvii.  11).  He  was  not  only  the  Priest,  but  the  Sacrifice  also.  He  not  only 
acted  for  us,  but  suffered  for  us  (Gal.  ii.  20,  iii.  13).  IH.  What  eftect  should 
THIS  LOVE  OF  GoD  woBK  IN  US  ?  1.  It  should  teach  us  to  fasten  our  admiration  on 
this  great  love  of  God,  to  work  ourselves  to  an  holy  wonderment,  that  God  should 
bestow  such  love  upon  us.  2.  This  great  love  of  God  to  us  calls  for  another  effect : 
that  is  an  holy  retribution  of  love  to  Him  again.  Provoke  thyself,  inflame  thine 
heart  with  the  love  of  Him  who  hath  so  loved  thee.  8.  This  love  of  God  requires 
in  us  an  holy  imitation.  In  particular,  imitate  this  love  of  God  in  all  the  characters 
of  love  expressed  in  my  text.  (1)  The  reaUty  of  thy  love.  Show  thy  love  by  the 
fruits  of  love,  as  St.  John  speaks  (1  John  iii.  18).  (2)  We  must  imitate  this  love  of 
God  in  the  preventions  of  love,  in  showiag  of  love,  going  one  before  another.  (3) 
We  must  imitate  this  love  of  God  in  the  condescensions  of  His  love  to  our  inferiors, 
to  our  enemies.  (4)  We  must  imitate  this  love  of  God  in  that  great  and  main 
effect  of  His  love  to  our  souls  in  freeing  them  from  sin  (Lev.  xix.  17).  Love  to 
the  soul  of  thy  brother,  it  is  the  best  love;  and  to  keep  him  from  sin,  or  to 
free  him  of  sin,  it  is  the  best  love  to  his  soul.  (Bp.  Brownrigg.)  Christ 
the  great  propitiation: — Leave  Christ  as  God's  salvation  out  of  the  Bible,  and 
it  is  of  Uttle  account  to  a  guilty,  perishing  sinner.     I.  We  are  to  state  the  import 

OF    THE    TEBM,  OB    SHOW    TOU    WHAT    WE    ARE    TO    UNDEBSTAND    BT   PEOPITIATION.       And 

here  I  would  appeal  to  the  understanding  of  all  men,  whether  we  have  not  some 
other  idea  of  this  word  than  what  is  contained  in  repentance,  amendment,  and 
mortification.  The  Jews  well  understood  the  meaning  of  it :  they  had  their 
eucharistical  and  expiatory  or  atoning  sacrifices.  Now  can  it  reasonably  be  sup- 
posed that  the  apostles  would  recede  from  the  well-known  meaning  of  this  word, 
especially  in  their  writings  to  the  Jews,  and  always  use  it  in  a  metaphorical  or 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

figurative  sense  ?  Further,  the  heathens  were  no  strangers  to  the  sense  of  the  word 
propitiation.  11.  To  inqlibe  into  the  necessity  and  importance  of  it.  By 
necessity,  I  do  not  mean  that  God  was  obliged  to  provide  an  atonement  for  the  sin 
of  man.  Misery  may  excite  but  not  obUge  to  pity,  especially  where  guilt  is  the 
spring  of  it;  and  ruin  the  just  consequence  of  apostasy.  I  know  the  Sociniana 
suppose  the  goodness  of  God  will  not  admit  Him  to  demand  or  receive  a  satis- 
faction. Mercy  is  abundantly  more  natural  and  glorious  without  a  propitiation ; 
but  the  Scripture  asserts  the  fact,  and  points  out  the  necessity  of  it.  I  stay  not  to 
inquire  whether  God  could  not  have  fixed  on  any  other  method  of  recovery.  Had 
we  proper  apprehensions  of  the  holiness  and  justice  of  God  when  we  consider  this, 
and  our  circumstances  as  transgressors  without  saying  what  He  might  do,  we  may 
well  adore  Him  for  what  He  has  done.  The  necessity  of  an  atonement  might  be 
further  evinced  from  the  sanction  of  the  law,  clothed  with  the  authority  of  a  God 
who  cannot,  lie ;  a  God  as  jealous  of  His  glory  as  of  His  faithfulness.  As  to  the 
importance  of  the  blessing  of  propitiation.  Is  there  anything  valuable  in  the 
favour  and  friendship  of  God  ?  IH.  To  point  out  something  of  the  excellence 
AND  peefection  OF  THIS  PBOPiTiATiON.  1.  That  God  Sent  His  Son  to  be  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins.  2.  The  doctrine,  worship,  and  faith  of  the  Old  Testament 
saints  were  directed  to  this  as  the  great  centre  of  efficacy  and  perfection.  3.  God 
the  Father,  sustaining  the  character  of  a  Judge,  has  declared  the  highest  satis- 
faction in  it,  by  raising  His  Son  from  the  dead  and  crowning  Him  with  honour  and 
glory  as  Mediator.  4.  He  wUl  receive  no  confession,  petition,  or  thanksgiving  but 
through  His  hands.  No  man  can  come  unto  the  Father  but  by  Him.  Lastly,  the 
virtue  of  this  sacrifice  remains  the  same  through  all  ages.   IV.  That  propitiation  is 

THE   pure   effect    OF   DiVINE    LOVE,  AND   THE   BRIGHTEST   DISPLAY  OF   IT.      By  love  WO 

mean  not  a  foolish,  weak  passion,  but  such  favour,  grace,  or  mercy  as  founded  in 
infinite  wisdom  and  in  full  agreement  with  all  the  perfections  of  God ;  and  that  the 
gift  of  His  Son  is  the  fruit  of  Divine  love  stands  uncontested.  Love  is  the 
noble  spring  of  all  the  good  the  believer  has  in  time,  and  all  the  glory  he  will 
possess  in  eternity ;  but  the  gift  of  God's  Son  exceeds  them  all.  AppUcation : 
1.  Sinner,  art  thou  deeply  affected  with  thy  guilt,  and  afraid  of  the  consequences 
of  thy  transgressions?  Here  is  a  remedy  exactly  suited  to  thy  case.  2.  Let 
believers  labour,  in  the  strength  of  grace,  after  the  comfortable  evidence  of  an 
interest  in  that  which  is  to  be  their  great  support  in  death  and  security  in  judgment. 
Lastly,  let  us  all  take  heed  that  we  are  not  deceived  ;  repentance  and  reformation 
without  Christ  will  leave  us  short  of  heaven.  (Samuel  Wilson.)  The  propitiation: — 
I.  The  state  of  man  required  a  propitiation.  1.  The  perfection  and  excellence 
of  the  law  which  he  has  broken.  2.  The  inabihty  of  man  to  expiate  his 
offences.  3.  The  inflexible  nature  of  Divine  justice,  which  supports  the  honour 
of  the  law,  and  enforces  its  claims.  II.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  propitiation  required. 
1.  No  creature  could  or  would  become  a  propitiation  for  man.  2.  Jesus  Christ 
is  every  way  adapted  to  become  our  propitiation.  3.  The  Scriptures  everywhere 
testify  that  Jesus  Christ  is  our  propitiation  (Isa.  liii.  5,  6,  7,  10 ;  Matt.  xx.  28 ; 
Bom.  iii.  24,  25,  iv.  25 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21  ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  Col.  i.  20 ;  1  Tim.  1.  15 ; 
Heb.  ix.  22-26 ;  1  John  ii.  2).  The  Father  gave  the  Son  (John  iii.  16).  The  Son 
gave  Himself  (Gal.  i.  4).  He  offered  Himself  through  the  Eternal  Spirit  (Heb.  ix  14), 
in.  This  propitiation  is  a  glorious  display  of  the  love  of  God.  1.  Unparalleled 
in  its  nature.  2.  Intense  in  its  ardour.  3.  Immense  in  its  extent.  4.  Glorious  in 
its  purpose  and  final  issue.  Inferences :  1.  How  pernicious  is  the  doctrine  of 
Socinianism,  which  completely  destroys  this  only  hope  of  a  penitent — redemption  by 
Christ !  2.  How  dangerous  is  the  delusion  of  the  self-righteous  !  3.  What  abundant 
consolation  does  this  subject  afford  penitent  sinners !  4.  In  this  love  of  God  we 
are  furnished  with  a  rule  and  a  motive  for  love  to  each  other,  "  Beloved,  if  God  so 
loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another."  (Sketches  of  Sermons.)  The  atone- 
ment for  sin,  by  the  death  of  Christ : — I.  State  the  case,  with  regard  to  thb 
nature  and  necessity  of  the  atonement,  as  represented  in  Scripture.  II. 
Establish  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  has  offered  a  true  and  proper  atonement 
for  sin.  1.  I  am  well  aware  it  does  nothing  towards  the  proof  of  this  proposition  to 
observe  that  this  is  precisely  such  a  provision  as  the  circumstances  of  man  required, 
while  it  was  perfectly  consistent  with  all  the  attributes  of  Deity  that  God  should 
grant  it.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Scripture  doctrine  of  the  atonement  by  Jesus 
Christ  repugnant  to  the  most  correct  ideas  of  fitness  and  propriety,  with  regard 
either  to  the  offending  or  the  offended  party.  If  man  had  never  sinned,  we  should 
have  seen  the  glory  of  the  Divine  power,  wisdom,  and  benevolence  in  the  creation  of 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  333 

the  world.  If,  having  sinned,  man  had  been  left  to  perish,  we  should  have  seen  the 
glory  of  the  Divine  justice.  If  he  had  been  freely  pardoned,  without  any  satis- 
factory atonement,  we  should  have  seen  the  glory  of  the  Divine  mercy ;  but,  having 
sinned,  and  receiving  free  forgiveness  and  eternal  life  by  means  of  an  adequate, 
because  infinitely  valuable,  atonement,  we  see  the  glory  of  all  the  Divine  attributes, 
and,  overwhelmed  with  the  astonishing  exhibition,  exclaim  with  the  apostle,  "  Herein 
is  love."  2.  The  universal  prevalence  of  sacrifices.  3.  The  sacrifices  of  the  Mosaic 
economy.  4.  The  language  of  the  prophets.  5.  The  testimony  of  the  apostles, 
from  that  of  Philip,  in  his  preaching  to  the  eunuch,  to  that  of  John,  in  the  visions 
of  the  Apocalypse.  6.  The  language  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  (T.  Raffies,  LL.D.) 
Love  descends  : — Love  is  its  own  perennial  fount  of  strength.  The  strength  of 
affection  is  a  proof  not  of  the  worthiness  of  the  object,  but  of  the  largeness  of  the 
soul  which  loves.  Love  descends,  not  ascends.  The  Saviour  loved  His  disciples 
infinitely  more  than  His  disciples  loved  Him,  because  His  heart  was  infinitely 
larger.  Love  trusts  on,  ever  hopes  and  expects  better  things,  and  this  a  trust 
springing  from  itself  and  out  of  its  own  deeps  alone.  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  God 
seeks  our  love: — A  mother  said  to  her  pastor,  "I  wish  some  one  could  tell  me  why 
the  Saviour  died  for  us.  I  have  never  heard  it  answered  to  my  satisfaction.  You 
will  say  it  was  because  He  loved  us ;  but  why  was  that  love  ?  He  certainly  did  not 
need  us,  and  in  our  sinful  state  there  was  nothing  in  us  to  attract  His  love."  "  I 
may  suppose,"  said  her  pastor,  "  that  it  would  be  no  loss  for  you  to  lose  your 
deformed  little  babe.  You  have  a  large  circle  of  friends,  you  have  other  children, 
and  a  kind  husband.  You  do  not  need  the  deformed  child ;  and  what  use  is  it  ?  " 
"  Oh,  sir,"  said  the  mother,  "  I  could  not  part  with  my  poor  child.  I  do  need  him. 
I  need  his  love.  I  would  rather  die  than  fail  of  receiving  it."  "  Well,"  said  her 
pastor,  "  does  God  love  His  children  less  than  earthly,  sinful  parents  do  ?  " 

Ver.  11.  Beloved,  if  God  bo  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another. — The 

Divine  love  a  pattern  for  the  human  : — "  God  is  Beauty,"  said  the  Greek  ;  "  God  is 
Strength,"  said  the  Eoman ;  "  God  is  Law,"  said  the  Jew ;  "  God  is  Love,"  says 
the  disciple.  "  It  came  to  this  that  the  Son  of  God  had  for  love  to  lay  down  His 
life  for  us,  and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  Uves  for  the  brethren."  St.  John  seems 
to  say,  "  Yes ;  but  you  will  not  be  much  called  on  to  do  that  when  things  are 
settled.  You  wiU  not  be  asked  for  your  life — will  you  then  give  up  something  of 
your  living  ?  There  is  more  call  for  that.  Whoso  hath  the  world's  hvelihood  (f3iog) 
and  looks  on  his  brother  in  want,  and  locks  his  compassions  out  of  his  reach — ^how 
is  God's  love  imminent  in  him?  "  The  barbed  question  is  followed  up  by  a  glowing 
indignation,  called  for  it  would  seem,  even  in  those  days  of  first  love.  Ah !  "  Little 
children  of  mine,  do  not  let  us  be  loving  in  word,  nor  even  in  tongue,  but  in  deed 
and  in  truth."  Not  so  much  theory,  not  so  much  even  of  warm  expression,  but 
reality.  •'  If  God  so  loved  us,  as  now  we  know  He  did,  we  owe  it  to  love  one 
another."  It  is  a  debt.  That  life  was  given,  and  given  to  us.  There  must  be  some 
obligations  growing  out  of  that  utterly  unearned  increment.  Surely  it  is  by  our 
working  that  God  will  cease  to  pemait  the  misery  that  He  has  not  made.  Eepay, 
redress,  rebalance,  we  cannot  by  mere  almsgiving,  however  liberal.  But  "  this 
world's  goods  " — "  the  life  of  this  world  (/3ioc  Koa/iov)  "  of  which  St.  John  asks  us 
to  give  him  some — "  this  world's  life  "  is  more  than  its  spare  monies.  Breath,  light, 
space  to  be  decent,  and  healthful  food ;  order  and  peace  and  rest,  and  beautiful 
sights  and  sounds ;  knowledge  and  the  power  to  care  for  it,  time  to  consider, 
religion,  and  a  belief  that  religion  and  worship  are  for  the  likes  of  them,  and  not  a 
form  of  luxury  ;  these  are  regions  of  "  the  life  of  this  world  "  which  we  inherit,  but 
which  have  been  fenced  and  walled  from  millions.  When  we  with  the  best  intent 
are  building,  broad  and  high,  castles  of  dwellings  for  artisans  we  still  are  not 
working  on  the  lines  of  nature  and  society.  Sanitation  and  accommodation,  with 
even  recreation  added,  are  not  all  that  the  simplest  society  claims.  Society,  to  be 
society,  must  have  society.  It  cannot  be  aU  of  one  grain.  The  simplest  must  have 
some  little  range  of  ranks.  It  must  have  some  elements  of  inspiration  from  without 
it,  and  from  above  it,  in  force  sufficient  to  be  felt.  Some  loving  spirits  must  go  and 
dwell  among  them ;  who  will  not  hear  of  brutality  being  regarded  as  the  natural 
law  even  of  the  lowest ;  who  wiU  begin  by  expecting  of  them,  even  as  of  others, 
soberness  and  honesty  and  care  for  the  family,  and  through  expecting  patiently  will 
create.  There  are  the  apx'/T"'  o^  *  ^^^w  society,  and  there  is  no  form  of  influence 
fuller  of  power,  fuller  it  may  be  of  trial,  but  also  fuller  of  reward,  and  richer  for  the 
future.    What  the  few  bear  who  live  thus,  what  discouragements,  what  broken 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

pledges,  what  fallings  back,  what  mad  sounds  by  night,  what  sights  by  day,  no 
novel  and  no  visitor  can  describe.  None  know  but  they  who  live  there.  And  yet 
there  are  the  elements  of  society.  There  is  duty  constantly  scorning  selfishness, 
Buffering  brutality  rather  than  wrongly  escape  from  it,  working  itself  to  death  for 
the  children  rather  than  take  them  to  the  workhouse.  There  are  sacrifices  as 
strange  as  the  sins  that  impose  them.  Again,  there  are  ears  that  wiU  hear,  men 
and  families  that  wiU  advance  theh"  whole  standard  of  life,  under  the  influence  of 
those  whom  they  have  seen  loving  them  for  nought.  (Abp.  Benson.)  The  Divine 
example  of  love : — I.  Love  should  be  exercised  by  ds  aftek  the  example  of  the 
LOVE  OF  God  (ver.  11).  What,  then,  were  the  features  of  the  Divine  love,  and  what 
ought  to  be  those  of  our  love?  1.  The  love  of  God  was  universal.  He  expressed 
it  to  all,  good  and  bad,  worthy  and  unworthy.  2.  More  than  this,  the  love  of  God 
has  been  conspicuous  toward  His  enemies  (Eom.  v.  6,  8,  9).  In  this  respect  also  we 
are  bound  to  imitate  the  Divine  example.  3.  This  is  farther  demanded,  though  it 
should  be  at  the  cost  of  the  greatest  self-denial.  It  need  not  be  asked  at  what 
expense  did  God  express  His  love  for  sinners  ?  What,  then,  shall  we  refuse  to 
suffer  for  the  benefit  of  others  ?  4.  Nor  let  us  overlook  that  our  love,  like  God's, 
should  be  aggressive.  We  are  not  to  wait  until  we  are  besought.  God  did  not  so 
deal  by  us.  5.  To  complete  all,  love  should  be  constant.  Nothing  should  weary  it 
or  cause  it  to  relax.  II.  In  the  exercise  of  this  love  we  enjoy  communion  with 
God  (ver.  12).  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  It  is  as  if  it  had  been  said, 
although  "  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  yet,  if  we  love  one  another,  God 
dweUeth  in  us."  1.  When  we  engage  in  duties  of  brotherly  love  we  are  conscious 
of  the  Divine  approval.  And  this  applies  to  all  duties  of  brotherly  love,  whether 
those  that  relate  to  our  immediate  connections,  or  the  Church  of  Christ,  or  the 
world.  2.  There  is  a  sustaining  sense  of  the  Divine  co-operation.  God  is  with 
us  in  them.  3.  He  wiU  bless  us  and  our  work !  III.  Thus  also  "  his  love  is 
PERFECTED  IN  US."  This  expressiou  may  be  understood  either  of  the  love  of  God,  as 
it  is  perfected  when  it  produces  love  in  us,  or  of  our  love  when  it  is  perfected  in  the 
exercises  of  brotherly  love.  1.  The  love  of  God  is  perfected  in  us.  From  the  beginning 
He  had  a  design  of  love  toward  every  one  of  His  people.  But  that  design  is  not  carried 
out  into  completion  until  His  grace  secures  the  heart,  and  fills  it  with  His  love.  2.  Or 
the  saying  may  be  understood  of  our  love  when  it  is  perfected  in  the  exercises  of 
brotherly  love.  The  Divine  love  is  perfected  when  it  inflames  our  souls,  and  makes 
us  like  God  in  love.  And  our  love,  thus  kindled  by  the  love  of  God,  is  perfected  in 
the  deeds  of  charity.  IV.  In  our  brotherly  love  we  are  furnished  with  the 
EVIDENCE  OF  OUR  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  GoD,  as  it  is  Seen  to  arise  out  of  the  indwelling  of 
the  Spirit.  "  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  Him,  and  He  in  us,  because  He 
.  hath  given  us  of  His  Spirit."  These  fruits  do  not  grow  on  the  soil  of  nature.  They 
are  the  plants  of  grace  alone,  and  proclaim  their  heavenly  origin.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
The  love  of  the  Father : — I.  The  love  of  the  Father  an  incentive  to  mutual 
liOVE  AMONG  Christians.  1.  On  the  principle  that  like  begets  like — (1)  The  primal 
source  of  real  spiritual  love  is  the  Divine  nature  ;  (2)  The  manifestation  of  Christly 
love  is  an  evidence  of  spiritual  regeneration ;  (3)  The  incentive  to  mutual  love 
among  Christians  thus  becomes  all-inspiring  and  important.  2.  On  the  principle 
of  Christian  professions — (1)  Every  professing  Christian  professes  to  "know"  God; 
(2)  But  "  he  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God"  ;  (3)  Not  to  manifest  the  spirit  of 
love  is  thus  inconsistent  with  the  profession  a  Christian  makes  of  knowing  God. 
II.  The  love  of  the  Father  in  its  marvellous  example.     III.  The  possession  of 

THIS   DrVINE    LOVE    IS   AN    ASSURANCE    OF    RICHEST     SPIRITUAL    BLESSINGS  —  the    DivinO 

indwelling  and  perfection  of  love.  Lessons  :  1.  The  revelation  of  the  Divine  love 
in  Christ  and  in  Christianity  the  highest  truth,  and  its  demonstration  most 
scientific  and  clear.  2.  The  leading  design  of  the  manifestation  of  God's  love  in 
the  new  birth  of  souls  into  the  same  love  the  sublimest  and  most  blessed  of  all 
possible  objects.  3.  The  importance  of  each  Christian  being  an  exemplification  of 
the  reality  of  God's  love  and  of  the  gift  of  His  Son  is  thus  seen  to  be  most  vital,  as 
constituting  one  of  the  leading  features  in  Christian  apologetics — an  unanswerable 
argument  for  the  fundamental  fact  of  Christianity.  4.  As  love  is  the  most  essen- 
tial force  for  elevation  and  regeneration  of  the  human  race,  Christianity  is  the  only 
spiritual  force  yet  discovered  for  that  most-devoutly-to-be-wished-for  consumma- 
tion. (D.  G.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Brotherly  love  : — I.  What  relation  we  stand  in 
TO  God.  n.  The  relation  we  bear  to  one  another.  1.  We  are  all  creatures 
made  of  the  same  ignoble  materials,  and  derived  from  the  same  Hand.  2.  We  all 
agree  in  one  common  nature.    3.  We  have  all  of  as  occasion  for  the  assistance  of 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  335 

one  another.  4.  As  to  the  injuries  we  may  receive,  they  do  not  come  up  to  our 
sinning  against  God.  (1)  Our  sins  against  God  are  more  numerous  than  the 
injuries  one  man  offers  to  another.  (2)  Another  difference  is  the  greatness  as  well 
as  multitude  of  our  sins.  5.  Let  us  consider  the  relation  we  bear  to  one  another 
as  being  united  in  one  common  Christianity,  and  having  embraced  the  same  pro- 
fession of  faith.  A  motive  this,  to  love,  the  most  prevailing  that  can  possibly  be 
urged.  III.  What  benefits  God  hath  conferred  upon  us.  Were  our  minds 
fuUy  possessed  of  a  hearty  sense  of  the  extreme  bounty  of  God,  we  could  not  be  so 
base  as  to  deny  Him  the  only  returns  we  are  capable  of  making,  that  is  love  and 
compassion  for  one  another.  IV.  The  kindness  and  love  we  are  capable  of  showing 
those  of  the  same  frame  and  constitution  with  ourselves,  comes  prodigiously 
short  of  the  marvellous  favours  and  repeated  kindnesses  we  have  received  from 
God.  (R.  Warren,  D.D.)  God's  love  the  pattern  for  our  love  : — "  If  God  so  loved 
us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another."  1.  Because  ignorance  of  what  God  means 
by  love  must  now  be  wilful.  2.  Because  doubt  and  uncertainty  as  to  the  objects  of 
love  are  for  ever  excluded.  3.  Because  the  power  of  love  to  conquer  obstacles  and 
impediments  is,  in  God's  case,  most  gloriously  shown.  4.  Because  the  restoration 
of  love  between  man  and  man  is  one  of  God's  objects  in  that  redemption  which  so 
proves  His  love  for  us.  5.  Because  we  are  required  to  be  followers  of  God  as  dear 
children.  6.  Because  love  on  our  part  must  be  pleasing  to  God.  7.  Because 
"  hereby  we  express  our  love  towards  God."  (S.  Martin.)  The  Divine  prototype 
of  love: — "If  God  so  loved  us."  How?  The  preceding  verse  shows  us  some  of 
the  glorious  traits  of  this  love.  1.  Its  greatness  and  depth.  One  may  dip  out  the 
ocean  with  a  shell  sooner  than  exhaust  the  ocean  of  God's  love  with  the  little 
bucket  of  human  conceptions.  It  is  as  boundless  as  God  Himself,  for  "  God  is 
love  "  (ver.  8).  But  the  apostle  puts  into  our  hand  a  scale  to  measure  even  such 
greatness  (ver.  9).  Is  there  for  a  father  a  greater  offering  than  to  give  up  his  only 
son  ?  "If  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another."  The  greatness  of 
this  Divine  love  ought  also  to  be  the  motive  to  and  the  example  for  our  love  to  our 
neighbour.  (1)  Surely  the  motive.  How  often  are  we  stirred  to  love  by  beauty 
merely,  by  talent,  or  other  excellences,  or  even  sometimes  by  pleasing  weaknesses  ; 
but  not  first  and  foremost  by  the  thought  that  God  the  Lord  in  Christ  went  after 
him  in  love !  (2)  And  our  example.  We  are  by  nature  egoists.  "  For  all  seek 
their  own  "  (Phil.  ii.  21).  The  soul  of  God's  whole  activity,  from  the  creation  to 
the  new  creation,  is  love.  And  now  has  God,  indeed,  opened  "  the  bowels  of  His 
mercy  and  compassion  "  (Luke  i.  78),  and  in  Christ  given  Himself,  His  best.  His 
heart,  to  men  for  their  own ;  so  that  "  whosoever  receiveth  Christ  receiveth  the 
Father  that  sent  Him"  (Luke  ix.  49).  But  we?  Even  when  we  make  our  loving 
sacrifices,  we  keep  back  to  ourselves  the  greater  part  of  ourselves.  Do  thou,  my 
hard,  selfish  heart,  with  thy  scanty,  wretched  love,  which  scarcely  ever  deserves 
the  name,  be  transformed  after  this  great,  Divine  pattern !  But  love  shames  us  yet 
in  many  other  things.  We  are  further  amazed  at — 2.  The  all-embracing  extent  of 
this  love.  God  sent  His  Son  into  the  world.  He  gave  Him  not  to  some  few,  but  to 
all.  How  often  our  love  suffers  from  a  miserable  straitness  of  heart !  Towards 
some,  sometimes  towards  those  who  love  us,  we  are  very  kind  and  pleasing,  but 
towards  others  indifferent.  Some  attract  us,  numberless  others  are  repulsive.  And 
oh !  what  wretched  pettinesses  often  suffice  to  lock  up  our  hearts  so  that  not  the 
least  drop  of  love  can  flow  out !  God's  love  did  not  suffer  itself  to  be  held  back, 
nor  to  set  itself  any  bounds  :  it  embraced  all,  even  its  enemies.  God  finds  people 
enough  to  love  His  beautiful  and  richly-gifted  children  ;  but  few  whose  love  goes 
far  enough  to  receive  the  miserable  ones  also.  If  we  desire  to  do  what  is  pleasing 
to  God's  heart,  let  us  also  love  those  whom  no  one  else  is  likely  to  love  !  And  if 
our  courage  fails  us  for  this — for  such  love  requires  much  courage — let  us  look  up 
to  the  primal  example  of  God's  love,  which  condescended  to  this  miserable  world. 
3.  The  clearness  and  calmness  of  God's  love.  The  greater  and  stronger  the  love 
of  men,  so  much  the  harder  for  it  to  remain  clear  and  calm.  The  bleeding  Lamb 
of  God  on  Calvary  shows  not  only  how  deeply  and  all  inclusively,  but  also  how 
clearly,  and  soberly,  and  holily  God  loves  the  world.  He  will  heal  its  sin  and  guilt, 
and  therefore  He  suffers  the  Lamb  to  bleed.  He  must  judge  while  He  heals,  and 
He  heals  while  thus  judging.  Thus  clear  and  calm,  too,  was  the  love  of  Christ,  in 
all  its  greatness.  How  He  loved  His  disciples,  and  yet  how  soberly  and  calmly  He 
pointed  out  to  them  their  errors  !  "  If  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one 
another."  Do  we  do  it?  Alas,  how  rare  among  us  is  that  great  and  therefore 
sober  love  which  steadilv  seeks  to  make  our  neighbour  better  !     Either  we  continue 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

clear  and  calm,  and  our  love  is,  commonly,  very  lukewarm  ;  or  else  it  is  great  and 
warm,  while  we  are  as  it  were  blind  and  dull.  4.  Its  unselfish  disinterestedness. 
We  love  those  who  please  us,  who  love  us,  or  from  whom  we  expect  love.  Therein 
appears  the  interestedness  of  our  love.  God  loves  those  who  love  Him  not ;  from 
whom,  moreover,  He  can  have  no  great  hopes  of  love.  Just  as  unselfish,  too, 
is  Christ's  love.  In  all  His  life  of  love  He  never  seeks  His  own  gain — not 
His  honour,  not  His  advantage,  not  His  proper  esteem,  but  only  the  honour  of  the 
Father  and  the  salvation  of  the  world.  He  puts  away  aU  self-help  from  His  love 
(Matt.  iv.  3,  &c. ;  xxvi.  53,  <fec.) ;  renounces  the  applause  of  the  great  masses,  especi- 
ally of  the  rulers  ;  and  walks  the  way  of  self-abnegation  and  the  Cross.  "  If  God 
so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another  " — so  unselfishly,  so  disinterestedly. 
How  rare  is  the  love  in  which  one  thinks  not  of  himself,  but  only  of  the  welfare  of 
another ;  which  forgets  one's  self,  seeks  stillness  and  retirement,  lets  not  its  left 
.  hand  know  what  its  right  hand  doeth ;  yes,  even  expects  nothing  for  itself,  because 
(  it  has  its  own  reward  in  itself ;  which  therefore  rewards  evU  with  good,  which 
blesses  them  that  curse  us,  and  does  good  to  them  that  hate  us !  5.  The  stead- 
fastness and  faithfulness  of  the  love  of  God ;  which  is  not  less  worthy  of  imitation. 
Only  the  unselfish  love  "never  faileth."  Selfish  love,  in  its  very  selfishness, 
has  a  worm  in  itself  which  speedily  gnaws  away  its  life.  The  purer  love  is, 
the  less  it  changes.  Because  God's  love  is  without  any  mixture  of  impure 
self-seeking,  therefore  is  it  so  steadfast.  {Prof.  T.  Christlieb.)  Reflected 
love: — Observe  clearly  this  line  of  thought.  "If  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought 
also  so  to  love  Him."  That  is  the  first  plain  inference.  But  how?  There  is 
only  one  way — "  loving  one  another."  To  love  God  as  He  is,  in  Himself,  is  an 
abstract  thing.  This  is  only  a  feeling.  To  "  love  one  another  "  in  Him,  and  Him  in 
"  one  another,"  is  action,  and  love  is  action,  and  action  tests  reality.  "  We  ought " 
— we  are  under  a  debt  to  love  one  another.  God's  love  has  placed  us  under  this 
obhgation.  Whom  are  we  to  "  love  "  ?  "  One  another."  Who  is  "  one  another  "  ? 
All  the  great  brotherhood;  in  the  family  of  God.  And  if  it  be  asked,  What  I  all? 
All  1  The  poorest,  the  meanest,  the  most  wicked,  the  vilest  ?  Find  your  answer  in 
that  "  us  " ;  or  rather,  for  so  each  one  of  us  ought  to  do — in  the  "  me,"  which  goes 
to  make  the  "us."  But  "to  love  one  another" — one  another!  It  is,  by  recipro- 
city, not  only  to  love,  but  to  be  loved.  Now,  am  I  wrong  in  thinking  that  to  some 
of  us  it  is  a  harder  thing  to  consent  to  be  loved  than  it  is  to  love  ?  There  is  a  feeling 
of  superiority  in  being  kind  to  a  person.  It  is  pleasant  to  nature.  It  is  a  sort  of 
patronising.  But  to  receive  kindnesses,  especially  from  some  person's,  is  an  act  of 
great  himiiliation.  But  you  must  love,  and  be  loved,  if  you  would  fulfil  the  duty. 
You  must  so  speak  and  act  as  to  make  yourself  lovable  to  everybody.  But  there 
is  a  httle  word  in  the  text  which  teaches  us  great  lessons.  "  God  so  loved  us." 
How  did  God  love  us?  That  is  our  copy.  1.  I  notice  that  God's  love  was 
originating  love.  He  completely  took  the  initiative.  We  should  do  the  same — not 
wait  to  be  loved.  2.  And  I  notice  that  God's  love  is  a  wise  and  thoughtful  love. 
Our  love  is  often  very  unwise  and  unthoughtful.  There  is  very  Uttle  mind  in  it ; 
no  consideration ;  therefore  our  love  often  does  harm  where  it  is  meant  to  do  good. 
God's  love  is  so  carefuUy,  so  exquisitely  adjusted.  It  is  so  very  wise.  8.  And  God's 
love,  tender  as  it  is,  is  always  faithful.  So  far  as  reproof  is  faithful,  God's  love  is 
faithful.  An  unfaithful  love  is  worse  than  hatred ;  and  I  may  say  very  unlike 
God's  I  4.  And  God's  love  is  self-sacrificing  love.  "  He  spared  not  His  own  Son." 
6.  And  God's  love  is  never  capricious.  It  never  changes,  except  to  deepen.  Is  yoor 
love  so  ?  Concerning  love,  let  me  further  observe  this — God  always  looks  to  the 
reflection  of  Himself  in  all  His  creatures.  He  expects  to  find  the  image  of  one  or 
other  of  His  attributes.  If  He  finds  it  not.  He  passes  unsatisfied.  If  He  finds  it, 
He  "  rests."  There  He  is  content.  Many  different  gifts  and  graces  reflect  different 
parts  of  the  character  of  God  ;  but  God  reflects  all.  Love  gives  back  God  to  Him- 
self, for  "  God  is  love."  6.  And  love  is  the  atmosphere  of  heaven.  We  are  all  to 
love  now,  that  we  may  be  ready  to  go  forward.     (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Yer.  12.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time.  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth 
In  UB,  and  His  love  is  perfected  in  us. — The  nearness  of  God  : — There  is  a  saying  of 
Hazlitt's,  bold,  and  at  first  seeming  to  be  wondrous  true,  "  In  the  days  of  Jacob 
there  was  a  ladder  between  heaven  and  earth ;  but  now  the  heavens  have  gone 
further  off,  and  have  become  astronomical."  This  may  be  taken  as  illustrating  the 
belief  of  a  large  number  of  people  who  imagine  that  somehow  or  other  the  earth  in 
its  youth  was  better  off  and  nearer  God  than  it  possibly  can  be,  with  the  larger. 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  337 

fuller,  and  more  accurate  scientific  knowledge  that  it  has  now ;  a  fancy  that  the 
heavens  have  gone  further  away  because  of  our  knowledge  of  them.  But  no  wise 
man  would  wish  to  go  back  from  the  effect  of  the  scientific  analysis,  or  undo  those 
results  of  it  which  are  the  glory  of  the  age.  Because  by  a  flash  of  lightning  I  can 
speak  to  the  other  side  of  the  world — because  I  live  in  a  generation  in  which  men 
gain  the  strength  of  giants,  and  can  move  mountains— am  I  further  from  God  ?  I 
think  not.  Man's  nearness  to  God,  or  distance  from  Him,  arises  from  no  scientific 
knowledge,  or  from  the  want  of  it.  Man  grows  near  to  God  by  the  likeness  of  his 
own  soul.  StiU,  you  may  say,  that  the  revelation  of  God's  power  made  by  science 
has  removed  the  sense  of  His  immediate  presence.  Then  science  has  done  a  good 
work.  Such  a  sense  of  nearness,  brought  about  by  a  want  of  knowledge  and  a  mean 
apprehension  of  God's  power,  might  belong  to  idiots,  and  is  certainly  unneeded  by 
mankind.  God  is  to  us  a  greater  Being  than  the  ancients  ever  knew.  Though  we 
may  fancy  that  the  heavens  or  whatever  other  material  place  men  may  have  thought 
He  dwelt  in  have  grown  distant.  His  Spirit  has  grown  near.  It  is  the  glory  of  earthly 
love  to  clasp,  to  hold,  to  have  in  near  communion,  to  see,  to  hear,  to  touch.  If  we 
were  speaking  of  mere  humanities,  we  might,  with  Hazlit,  lament  the  time  when 
earth  was  so  near  to  heaven.  But  when  we  come  to  speak  of  Him  whom  no  man 
hath  seen  at  any  time,  we  go  to  the  spirituality  of  things — we  measure  no  longer  by 
earthly  measure.  If  the  God  you  long  to  know  is  the  God  of  the  Spirit  who  comea 
to  the  hearts  of  all  who  seek  for  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  who,  in  every  motion  of 
desire  and  love,  lives  in  the  soul,  who  stirs  men  to  penitence,  draws  them  from  His 
own  sweet  influence — if  this  is  the  God  you  seek  and  long  to  know,  your  God  ia 
always  near  you.  So  long  as  men  can  hold  to  this  spiritual  perception  of  God, 
science  has  done  no  mischief ;  and  whilst  it  has  increased  man's  Imowledge  haa 
increased,  too,  his  belief  in  his  nearness  to  God  ;  has  shown  Him  that  his  knowledge 
of  nature  has  altered  no  canon  of  the  eternal  laws ;  has  cast  no  shade  on  any 
brightness  of  human  mercy  or  human  love  ;  has  made  no  change  in  any  way  in  the 
glorious  relationships  between  the  human  soul  and  God,  by  which  man  alone  can 
rise  to  the  height  of  his  own  marvellous  capacities,  and  which  alone  is  hia 
behef ,  his  pride,  his  hope.  A  religion,  such  as  you  and  I  profess — a  religion  which 
teaches  that  God's  dear  Son  came  down  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  took  upon  Him 
the  form  of  man ;  and  which  teaches,  further,  that  in  the  Spirit  God  is  still  aa 
near  as  when  in  the  person  of  His  Son  He  walked  in  Nazareth,  dignifies  alike 
the  earth  and  man — makes  man  more  lovable,  the  earth  more  glorious — and  the 
presence  of  God  to  such  as  care  to  know  it,  an  eternal  reaUty.     (G.  Dawson,  M.A.) 

Yer.  13.  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  Him  and  He  in  us,  because  He  hath 
given  us  of  His  Spirit. — The  evidences  of  true  religion  in  man : — The  exercises  of 
the  mind,  influenced  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  the  evidences  of  true  religion  in  man. 
The  state  of  the  mind  is  known  only  by  its  exercises ;  and  spiritual  exercises  indi- 
cate the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  I.  Self-abasement  is  a  certain  evidence 
of  true  religion.  It  is  a  gracious  exercise,  the  effect  of  a  saving  work  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  soul.  II.  Entire  dependence  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  certain  evidence 
of  a  state  of  grace.  HI.  Submission  to  the  law  of  Christ  is  an  evidence  of  true 
godliness.  IV.  Jot  in  God,  the  Saviour  of  the  soul,  is  an  evidence  of  piety.  {A. 
Macleod,  D.D.)  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — The  recovery  of  man  to  his  lost 
righteousness  must  be  by  means  of  an  agency  from  above.  The  strong  evil  element 
in  our  nature  must  be  dispossessed  by  a  stronger  element  for  good.  I.  The  natubb 
of  the  agent  spoken  of.  Who  and  what  is  the  Holy  Spirit?  He  is  "a  Divine 
Being,  of  one  substance,  majesty,  and  glory  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  very  and 
eternal  God."  But  what  is  this  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  man,  in  regard  to  hia 
salvation  ?  In  the  text,  it  is  set  forth  as  the  occupation  or  possession  of  the  soul 
by  a  Divine  principle,  designed  so  to  counteract  the  evil  of  our  nature  as  to  admit 
of  our  restored  fellowship  with  God.  The  Spirit  in  us  is  heaven's  witness  and  heaven'a 
interpreter.  Through  Him  Christ  becomes  "  Immanuel,  God  with  us."  It  is  when 
we  are  "  strengthened  with  might  by  His  Spirit  in  the  inner  man,"  and  not  before, 
that  "  Christ  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith."  H.  What  is  the  appointed  medium  and 
METHOD  of  this  Spirit's  operations  ?  and  how  is  this  renovating  influence  brought 
into  effective  contact  wiih  the  human  spirit?  The  result  is  commonly  effected 
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  revealed  Word,  "Being  born  again  not  of 
corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God."  1.  In  these  passages 
the  Word  is  spoken  of  as  an  instrument  only.  It  is  only  when  the  Spirit  takes  the 
veil  away  that  it  can  be  said  of  us,  "  The  entrance  of  Thy  Word  giveth  hght."     2. 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i v. 

But  if  the  Word  does  not  convert  without  the  Spirit,  so  neither,  as  a  rule,  does  the 
Spirit  convert  without  the  Word  ;  that  is,  without  taking  of  the  facts  and  statements 
of  revelation,  and  through  them,  as  a  medium,  operating  upon  the  religious  con- 
science. 3.  In  what  way  does  the  Holy  Spirit  ordinarily  bring  about  in  us  these 
convictions  ?  Is  the  influence  absolutely  miraculous,  or  is  it  bestowed  in  entire 
harmony  with  the  known  laws  of  mind  ?  Plainly  the  latter.  Taking  the  written 
Word  as  the  instrument,  the  Spirit  acts  through  the  natural  conscience — using  that 
term  in  its  broad  theological  acceptation,  as  describing  the  judgment  which  a  man 
passes  upon  the  rightfulness  of  his  own  conduct.  And  this  He  does  by  reviving  its 
impressions ;  by  strengthening  its  empire ;  by  restoring  its  delicacy  of  moral  percep- 
tion, and  then  presenting  to  it  objects  suited  to  its  new  condition  and  worthy  of 
its  awakened  powers.  Conscience,  of  itself,  may  reprove  of  sin ;  but  it  must  be 
conscience  with  the  Spirit  that  turns  the  sinner.  Conscience  may  witness  to  the 
law,  that  it  is  broken  ;  to  God,  that  He  is  offended  ;  to  retribution,  that  it  is  awaiting 
us  ;  but  the  Spirit  only  can  witness  to  the  impiety  of  rejecting  Christ  and  the  guilt 
of  neglecting  so  great  salvation.  And  this  view  of  the  method  of  the  Spirit'a 
working,  through  the  Word  upon  the  conscience,  will  be  found  to  be  entirely  con- 
gruous with  the  principles  of  our  mental  and  moral  constitution.  He  does  not  give 
us  any  new  physical  power  to  turn,  but  He  gives  us  the  inclination  and  the  willing- 
ness. And  the  bias  of  inclination  is  that  which  constrains  to  action.  As  Sir  William 
Hamilton  has  well  expressed  it,  "  The  greatest  spontaneity  is  the  greatest  necessity." 
We  are  not  driven  by  the  Spirit,  but  we  are  "  led."  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  God's  life 
in  man : — It  is  said  that  the  finest  rose-tree  in  the  world  is  one  in  Holland,  which  a 
few  years  ago  had  six  thousand  flowers  in  bloom  at  the  same  time.  The  poor  brier 
in  the  hedgerow  might  weU  despair  of  rivalling  that  wonderful  rose-tree  and 
attaining  world-wide  distinction.  But  if  some  kindly  hand  could  transplant  it  to 
a  choicer  soil,  and  give  it  nurture  of  needful  skill ,  and  if  some  bud  from  that 
wonderful  Dutch  tree  could  be  grafted  into  its  central  fibres,  the  poor  despised 
growth  of  the  hedgerow  might  hope  one  day  to  bear  its  thousand  blooms,  and  be 
the  wonder  of  a  nation.  And  poor  in  all  high  moral  and  spiritual  qualities  as  we 
ourselves  may  be,  grudging  in  sacrifice,  ignoble  in  spirit,  grovelling  in  motive,  yet 
if  God  infix  His  own  life  within  us,  no  limit  can  be  put  to  our  spiritual  development. 
(T.  G.  Selby.) 

Ver.  14.  And  we  have  seen  and  do  testify  that  the  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be 
the  Saviour  of  the  world. — Christianity  a  fact  and  a  power : — I.  Christianity  is 
AN  EXTERNAL  FACT  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  WORLD.  1.  The  Condition  of  the  world 
■was  desperate.  Man  through  sin  had  destroyed  himself.  Nothing  short  of  salvation 
would  have  met  the  case  of  man  as  a  sinner.  The  sinner  can  destroy  himself, 
but  he  cannot  save  himself.  2.  This  salvation  was  of  necessity  a  fact.  It  was 
a  great  act.  Thoughts  and  words  would  not  have  sufliced  to  save  us;  good 
wishes  would  not  have  availed  us.  To  speak  would  not  have  been  enough.  To 
do  was  essential.  Eedemption  was  a  work  of  infinite  greatness  and  difficulty.  And 
it  is  this  that  we  find  in  the  history  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus— the  eternal  thoughts 
and  feelings  of  the  Godhead  realised  in  glorious  works.     H.  Christianity  is  a. 

SPIRITUAL    POWER,    OR    A    SOURCE    OF    PERMANENT   INFLUENCE     ON    THE    WORLD.       1.    The 

Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  was  the  indispensable  condition  of  the  reunion  of 
man  with  God.  This  is  the  highest  greatness  that  any  creature  is  ever  capable  of 
attaining— that  God  should  "  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  God."  This  does  not  mean 
to  be  lost  like  a  wavelet  in  the  ocean  of  Godhead,  as  the  Pantheist  imagines,  but  to 
become  one  with  God  in  the  affinity  of  holiness  and  the  fellowship  of  love,  and  yet 
to  preserve  for  ever  our  personal  individuality  in  the  conscious  enjoyment  of  that 
union.  Man  could  not  Jbave  been  saved  by  ascending — by  the  mere  development  of 
his  natural  powers.  Our  salvation  has  been  wrought  by  a  descent  of  unparalleled 
magnitude.  Descent  is  the  ground  of  ascension.  2.  It  follows  that  the  Incarnation 
and  death  of  the  Son  of  God  form  the  spiritual  power  that  is  to  create  the  world 
anew — the  moral  lever  for  raising  humanity  to  God.  If  we  see  a  Christian  of 
extraordinary  attainments  in  godliness,  we  may  be  sure  that  this  is  the  secret  of  his 
strength — his  thoughts  and  affections  revolve  constantly  around  this  great  centre, 
"God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ";  he  abides  by  faith  and  love  in  Christ,  and  thereby 
God  dwells  in  him,  and  he  in  God.  This  is  the  "  secret  of  godliness."  8.  Hence  the 
facts  of  our  redemption  accomplished  in  Palestine  years  ago  remain  in  the  world 
yet,  as  great  spiritual  forces  operating  on  the  souls  of  men  to  raise  them  to  God. 
Conclusion.     1.  Let  us  appreciate  the  gospel  above  all  things.     2.  Let  us  ever 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  339 

remember  that  godliness,  and  all  progress  in  holiness,  draws  its  strength  from 
Christ  and  His  Cross,  His  life,  death,  and  resurrection.  (G.  Parry.)  The  Saviour's 
mission  and  its  blessed  consequence  : — I.  The  evidence  fob  the  tkuth.  1.  "  We  have 
seen."  The  apostles  and  others  had  sensible  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel.  It  was  impossible  they  could  be  deceived.  The  life  of  Jesus  was  a  fact 
about  which  there  could  be  no  mistake.  It  may  be  supposed  the  early  disciples 
had  an  advantage  over  us  in  the  sensible  evidence  which  they  enjoyed  of  the 
truth  of  the  gospel.  Yet  it  is  doubtful  ,whether  our  privileges  are  not  greater 
than  theirs.  The  benefit  of  their  satisfaction  is  enjoyed  by  us  in  the  record 
of  it  contained  in  their  writings.  We  have  found  the  Saviour  to  be  aU  that 
they  have  declared.  2.  There  is,  however,  the  testimony  as  well  as  the  personal 
observation  of  the  apostles.  "  We  have  seen  and  do  testify,"  they  say.  And  is  not 
theirs  a  credible  testimony  ?  They  were  competent  to  observe  and  report  accurately. 
They  deserve  our  confidence,  and  while  we  give  it  to  them,  we  put  their  testimony  to 
the  proof.  We  have  found  that  the  "  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  power  of  God  and  the 
wisdom  of  God  unto  salvation.  II.  The  truth  so  attested,  "  that  the  Father  sent 
the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  1.  The  origin  of  the  gospel.  "  The  Father 
sent "  the  Saviour.  Redemption  arose  from  the  counsel  of  the  Godhead.  It  could 
have  no  other  origin.  Had  it  been  revealed  to  the  intelligent  creation  that  men  might 
be  saved  by  the  death  and  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  they  would  have  pronounced 
the  sacrifice  to  be  impossible.    But  the  mystery  has  been  solved  by  the  great  fact. 

2.  The  agent  whom  the  Father  employed.  "  He  sent  His  Son."  He  did  so,  because 
no  other  was  sufiicient.     He  was  chosen  because  He  alone  is  equal  to  the  task. 

3.  The  design  of  His  mission.  "  The  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour."  What 
a  precious  name  and  ofiice !     It  is  a  complete  salvation  which  He  has  provided. 

4.  The  universal  efficacy  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  "The  world"  is  the  object  whose 
redemption  is  proposed.  III.  The  view  which  the  text  presents  of  its  reception 
— "  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God."  IV.  The  blessed 
CONSEQUENCE — "God  dweUcth  in  him,  and  he  in  God."  These  terms,  so  often  used 
by  the  apostle,  express  the  endeared  communion,  that  arises  out  of  faith  in  Christ, 
between  the  believer  and  God.  It  supposes  an  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour. 
"  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  supposes  confidence 
in  the  Divine  strength.  Waiting  upon  God  in  prayer,  that  he  may  be  enabled  to  resist 
temptation  and  faithfully  perform  the  duties  required  of  him,  he  is  sustained  by  the 
assurance,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,  for  My  strength  is  made  perfect  in 
weakness."  It  supposes  an  earnest  effort  after  the  Divine  holiness.  Sin  is  more 
and  more  seen  to  be  hateful,  and  holiness  to  be  increasingly  excellent.  It  supposes 
unreserved  devotedness  to  the  Divine  service.  {J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Christ  the 
Saviour  oj  the  world  : — I.  Take  notice  of  some  things  imported  in  this  testimony. 
1.  The  world  needed  a  Saviour ;  otherwise  one  had  not  been  provided  for  them  by 
Him  who  does  nothing  in  vain.  (1)  It  was  a  sick  world  (Matt.  ix.  12).  (2)  It  was 
a  cursed  world,  and  needed  a  Saviour  to  remove  the  curse,  and  bring  in  the  blessing 
(Acts  iii.  26).  (3)  It  was  a  lost  world  (Luke  xix.  10).  2.  None  of  inferior  dignity 
to  the  Son  of  God  could  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  3.  Christ  was  sent  Saviour  of 
the  world  from  heaven's  proper  motion.  The  plot  to  save  man  was  concerted  entirely 
without  him.  4.  Christ  is  f uUy  furnished  for  the  saving  of  a  lost  world.  His  being 
sent  in  that  character  speaks  His  abUity  to  answer  it  (Heb.  vii.  25).  5.  The  salvation 
of  lost  sinners  of  the  world  of  mankind  is  very  acceptable  to  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus,  as  well  as  to  Himself,  otherwise  He  had  not  sent  His  Son  Saviour 
of  the  world  (1  Tim.  ii.  3,  4).  II.  Open  this  character,  Saviour  of  the  world,  in 
WHICH  Christ  was  sent.  1.  In  what  sense  Christ  is  Saviour  of  the  world.  (1)  He 
is  the  actual  and  eventual  Saviour  of  the  elect.  (2)  He  is  the  official  Saviour,  not 
of  the  elect  only,  but  of  the  world  of  mankind  indefinitely.  2,  What  is  the  business 
committed  to  Him  as  Saviour  of  the  world.  (1)  It  is  to  save  sinners  from  their  sin 
^Matt.  i.  21).  (2)  It  is  to  save  sinners  from  misery,  to  free  them  from  destruction 
(Hos.  xiii.  9).  Use  I.  Of  information.  1.  Behold  here,  admire,  and  beUeve  the 
great  love  of  God  to  a  lost  world,  in  providing  a  Saviour,  and  such  a  Saviour,  for 
them,  even  His  own  Son.  2.  Behold  here  a  broad  and  firm  foundation  of  faith  for 
all  and  every  one  of  you ;  that  you  may  come  to  Christ,  whatever  your  case  is,  and 
claim  His  righteousness  and  His  whole  salvation  for  yourselves.  3.  Sinners  living 
in  their  sins,  pining  away,  and  about  to  perish  eternally  in  them,  are  without  excuse. 
4.  Bel  evers  themselves  may  be  ashamed  and  confounded,  for  that  iniquity  prevails 
80  against  them.  Alas  1  it  is  a  sad  sign  the  Saviour  is  little  employed  among  us. 
Use  U,  Foi  trial.    1.  If  Christ  has  really  begun  to  save  you,  ye  will  have  the  saved 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

man's  thoughts  of  sin,  and  of  the  wrath  of  God.  2.  Ye  will  have  a  transcendent 
esteem  of  and  love  to  your  Saviour  (1  Pet.  ii.  7).  3.  Ye  will  be  groaning  under  the 
remains  of  the  disease  of  sin  ye  are  saved  from ;  your  conscience  wiU  witness  ye 
would  fain  be  wholly  rid  of  it  (Eom.  vii.  24).  tjse  III.  Keceive  the  Lord  Jesus, 
then,  0  sinners,  in  that  character  wherein  His  Father  sent  Him,  as  the  Saviour  of 
the  world,  and  your  Saviour.  1.  Consider  you  need  a  Saviour.  Your  disease  of 
sin  will  ruin  you,  if  ye  be  not  saved  from  it.  2.  There  is  no  Saviour  besides  Christ 
(Acts  iv.  12).  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  Saviour  of  the  ivorld  :—I.  The  fact.  U. 
The  authob.  "  The  Son."  1.  Because  He  was  the  most  precious  of  all  God's 
possessions.  2.  Because  He  was  in  sympathy  with  God's  own  heart.  No  one  else 
understood  the  mysteries  of  Divine  love.  3.  Because  no  one  else  was  able  to  effectually 
carry  out  the  work  of  salvation,  or  to  accomplish  redemption.  HI.  The  originator. 
"  The  Father."  1.  This  reminds  us  that  although  the  Father  is  a  God  of  justice,  He 
did  not  desire  to  destroy.  2.  It  shows  us  how  intense  is  His  love.  3.  It  suggests 
the  Divine  purpose  of  elevating  the  lost,  for  none  but  a  Divine  Being  could  set  a 
perfect  example.  IV.  The  proof.  "We  have  seen  and  do  testify."  1.  The  persons 
who  record  their  testimony  are  above  suspicion.  2.  They  saw  Christ's  life,  teaching, 
power,  death.     (Homilist.) 

Yer.  15.  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  God  dwelleth  in 
him,  and  he  in  God. — Confessing  Jesus  as  the  So7i  of  God  : — This  implies — 1.  A  deep 
and  Hving  conviction,  a  true  perception  of  mind  and  heart,  that  "  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  "  and  the  only  Saviour  for  lost  mankind.  2.  A  vital 
belief  in  His  salvation,  in  the  efficacy  of  His  blood,  and  the  power  of  His  grace.  3. 
A  hearty  and  full  acceptance  of  the  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God ;  a  resting  in  aU  the 
doctrines,  a  waiting  for  all  the  promises,  an  observance  of  all  the  ordinances,  an 
obedience  to  all  the  commandments.  4.  A  proclaiming  of  the  Lord  as  our  Divine 
Bedeemer  in  the  face  of  the  world.     {J.  Slade,  M.A.) 

Yer.  16.  And  we  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us. — 
Loving  God  is  but  letting  God  love  us :  —  1.  All  men  living  in  sin  repel  or 
draw  back  from  the  love  of  God,  and  wUl  not  let  it  come  in  upon  them. 
We  do  not  say  "  go  thy  way,"  but  we  go  our  own  way,  and  that  means  just 
the  same  thing.  Doubtless  it  is  good  in  God  to  be  tendering  Himself  in  such 
love,  and  a  certain  sensibUity  is  moved  by  it,  still  there  is  a  revulsion  felt,  and 
no  fit  answer  of  returning  love  is  made  ;  where,  as  we  can  see,  the  true  account  of 
the  matter  is,  that  the  love  is  unwelcome,  because  there  is  no  want  of  it,  or  con- 
sentingness  of  mind  towards  it ;  which  is  the  same  as  to  say  that  the  man  does  not 
let  God  love  him.  As  if  the  artist  at  his  camera  were  to  put  in  nothing  but  a  plate 
of  glass,  prepared  by  no  chemical  susceptibility,  saying  to  the  light,  "  Shine  on  if 
you  will,  and  make  what  picture  you  can."  He  really  does  not  let  the  light  make 
any  picture  at  all,  but  even  disallows  the  opportunity.  2.  Observe  how  constantly 
the  Scripture  word  looks  to  the  love  of  God,  for  the  ingeneration  of  love  in  men, 
and  so  for  their  salvation.  The  radical,  everywhere  present  idea  is,  that  the  new 
love  wanting  in  them  is  to  be  itself  only  a  revealment  of  the  love  of  God  to  them,  or 
upon  them.  Thus  the  new-born  life  is  to  be  "  the  love  of  God,  shed  abroad  in  the 
heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  Love  is  of  God,  for  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of 
God."  "  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  His  love  is  perfected  in  us." 
"  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  "  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of 
God  toward  us."  The  plan  is  to  beget  love  by  love,  and  nothing  is  left  us  to  do  in 
the  matter,  but  simply  to  allow  the  love,  and  offer  ourselves  to  it.  There  is  no  con- 
ception anywhere  that  we  are  to  make  a  new  love  ourselves ;  we  have  only  to  let 
the  love  of  God  be  upon  us,  and  have  its  immortal  working  in  us.  That  will  trans- 
form, that  will  new-create,  in  that  we  shall  live.  3.  What  tremendous  powers  of 
motion  and  commotion,  what  dissolving,  recoinp»sing  forces  come  upon,  or  into  a 
soul,  when  it  suffers  the  love  of  God.  For  it  is  such  kind  of  love  as  ought  to  create, 
and  must,  a  deep,  all-revolutionising  ferment,  in  the  moral  nature.  It  is  the  silent 
artillery  of  God,  a  salvation  that  wins  by  a  dreadful  pungency ;  raising  up  conviction 
of  sin,  to  look  on  Him  whom  it  hath  pierced,  moving  agitations  deep,  stirring  up  all 
mires.  So  that  when  the  love  gets  welcome,  it  has  dissolved  everything,  and  the 
new-born  peace  is  the  man  new  composed  in  God's  living  order.  Letting  Gfd  love 
us  with  such  love,  is  adequate  remedy  therefore  and  complete,  and  is  no  mere  nerve- 
less quietism,  as  some  might  hastily  judge.  Or  if  any  doubt  on  this  poii  t  may 
remain,  I  proceed—  4.  To  ask  what  more  a  sinner  of  mankind,  doing  the  i.tmost 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  341 

possible,  can  be  expected  or  required  to  do.  Can  he  tear  himself  away  from  sin  by 
pulling  at  his  own  shoulder  ?  Can  he  starve  out  his  sins  by  fasting,  or  wear  them 
out  by  a  pilgrimage,  or  whip  them  out  by  penances,  or  give  them  away  in  alms  ? 
No  I  All  that  he  can  do  to  beget  a  new  spirit  in  his  fallen  nature,  is  to  offer  up 
himself  to  the  love  of  God,  and  let  God  love  him.  As  he  can  see  only  by  allowing 
the  daylight  to  stream  into  his  eyes,  so  he  can  expel  the  internal  disorder  and  dark- 
ness of  his  soul,  only  by  letting  the  light  of  God's  love  fall  into  it.  Furthermore,  as 
he  cannot  see  a  whit  more  clearly  than  the  light  enables  him,  by  straining  his  will 
into  his  eyes,  so  he  can  do  no  more  in  the  way  of  clearing  his  bad  mind  than  to 
open  it,  as  perfectly  as  possible,  to  the  love  of  God.  And  now  it  remains  to  say 
— 5.  That  when  we  come  to  accurately  understand  what  is  meant  by  faith,  which 
is  the  universally  accepted  condition  of  salvation,  we  only  give,  in  fact,  another 
version  of  it,  when  we  say  that  the  just  letting  God  love  us,  amounts  to  precisely  the 
same  thing.  For  if  a  man  but  offers  himself  up  trustfully  and  clear  of  all  hindrance 
to  the  love  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  saying,  though  it  be  in  silence,  "  Be  it  upon  me ; 
let  it  come  and  do  its  sweet  will  in  me  "  ;  plainly  that  is  but  letting  God  love  him, 
and  yet  what  is  it  but  faith  ?  In  proposing  it  then  as  a  saving  condition,  that  we 
let  God  love  us  ;  we  do  not  dispense  with  faith.  We  only  say  "  believe  "  with  a 
different  pronunciation.  {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  A  psalm  of  remembrance  : — It  is 
very  pleasant  to  read  descriptions  of  the  Holy  Land  from  observant  travellers,  who 
in  glowing  language  have  depicted  its  interesting  scenes.  How  much  more  delightful 
must  it  be  to  journey  there  one's  self,  to  stand  on  the  very  spot  where  Jesus  preached 
and  prayed,  and  to  kneel  upon  that  blood-stained  garden  of  Gethsemane,  in  which 
He  sweat  that  sacred  sweat  of  blood.  Now,  this  law  of  nature  I  would  transfer  to 
matters  of  grace.  Let  me  tell  you  this  day  what  I  may  concerning  the  acts  of  God's 
goodness  in  the  souls  of  His  people,  my  description  will  be  dulness  itself  compared 
■with  the  glorious  reality.  Let  me  add  another  figure  to  render  this  truth  yet  more 
apparent.  Suppose  an  eloquent  foreigner,  from  a  sunny  clime,  should  endeavour  to 
make  you  appreciate  the  fruits  of  his  nation.  He  depicts  them  to  you.  He  describes 
their  luscious  flavour,  their  cooling  juice,  their  delicious  sweetness ;  but  how  power- 
less will  be  his  oration,  compared  with  your  vivid  remembrance,  if  you  have  yourself 
partaken  of  the  dainties  of  his  land.  It  is  even  so  with  the  good  things  of  God  ; 
describe  them  as  we  may,  we  cannot  awaken  in  you  the  joy  and  delight  that  is  felt 
by  the  man  who  lives  upon  them,  who  makes  them  his  daily  food,  his  manna  from 
heaven,  and  his  water  from  the  rock.  I.  The  abstract  of  Christian  experience. 
1.  Sometimes  the  Christian  knows  the  love  of  God  to  him.  I  will  mention  two  or 
three  particular  ways  in  which  he  knows  it.  Sometimes  he  knows  it  by  seeing  it. 
He  goes  to  his  house  and  he  finds  it  stored  with  plenty — "  his  bread  is  given  him, 
and  his  water  is  sure."  He  is  like  Job  ;  the  Lord  hath  set  a  hedge  about  him,  and 
all  that  he  possesseth.  Now,  truly,  he  can  say,  "  I  know  the  love  of  God  to  me,  for 
I  can  see  it.  I  can  see  a  gracious  providence  pouring  forth  out  of  the  cornucopia  of 
providence — an  abundance  of  all  that  my  soul  can  desire."  This,  however,  might 
not  completely  convince  him  of  God's  love  if  it  were  not  that  he  has  also  a  con- 
sciousness that  these  things  are  not  given  him  as  husks  are  cast  to  swine,  but  they 
are  bestowed  on  him  as  love-tokens  from  a  tender  God.  His  ways  please  the  Lord, 
and  therefore  He  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him.  Another  time 
in  which  he  knows  his  Father's  love  is,  when  he  sees  it  after  coming  out  of  affliction. 
In  the  hour  of  languishing  he  cried  to  the  Lord  for  deliverance ;  and  at  last  he  felt 
the  young  blood  leaping  through  his  veins  anew.  New  health  was  restored  to  him, 
"  The  Lord  hath  heard  my  cry,  like  Hezekiah,  and  has  lengthened  my  days.  Now 
I  know  the  love  which  God  hath  to  me."  There  are  other  ways  in  which  God's 
children  know  their  Father's  love.  Besides  what  they  see  there  is  something  which 
they  feel.  Bitter  though  we  sometimes  think  that  our  lives  have  been,  yet  have 
there  been  periods  in  them  akin  to  heaven,  when  we  could  say,  "  If  this  is  not  glory 
it  is  next  door  to  it.  If  I  am  not  on  the  other  side  Jordan,  at  least  my  master  is  on 
this  side  of  it."  Then  could  he  say,  "  Now  I  know  the  love  that  God  hath  towards 
me."  2.  But  times  there  are  of  thick  darkness,  when  neither  sun  nor  moon  appear 
for  many  days  ;  when  the  tempest  rages  exceedingly,  and  two  seas  meet  in  dread 
collision.  At  such  a  time,  noble  is  the  Christian  who  can  say,  "  Now  it  may  be  I  do 
not  know  the  love  that  God  hath  to  me,  but  I  believe  it."  The  first  position,  that 
of  knowing  God's  love,  is  the  sweetest,  but  that  of  believing  God's  love,  is  the 
grandest.  To  feel  God's  love  is  very  precious,  but  to  believe  it  when  you  do  not  feel 
it,  is  the  noblest.  3.  And  now,  do  not  these  two  states  make  up  a  summary  of 
Christian  experience  ?     "  We  know  and  believe  the  love  that   God  hath  to  us." 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

"  Ah,"  says  one,  "  we  have  somethnes  doubted  it."  No,  I  will  leave  that.  You 
may  insert  it  in  your  confession,  but  I  wiU  not  put  it  into  my  song.  Confess  your 
doubts,  but  write  them  not  in  this  our  psalm  of  praise.  I  am  sure,  in  looking  back, 
you  will  say,  "  Oh,  how  foolish  I  was  ever  to  doubt  a  faithful  and  unchanging  God  I " 
n.  A  SUMMARY  OF  THE  BELIEVER'S  TESTIMONY.  Evcij  Christian  is  to  be  a  testifier. 
He  is  to  be  a  witness  with  heart  and  lips.  All  the  other  creatures  speak  not  with 
words.  They  may  sing  as  they  shine,  but  they  cannot  sing  vocally.  It  is  the 
believer's  part  in  the  great  chorus  to  hft  up  voice  and  heart  at  once,  and  as  an 
intelligent,  living,  loving,  learning  witness,  to  testify  to  God.  1.  In  the  first  place 
we  have  known  that  God's  love  to  us  is  undeserved.  2.  Another  thing  we  can  bear 
testimony  to,  is  this — that  the  love  of  God  is  unconquerable.  We  strove  against 
God's  love,  but  it  conquered  us.  3.  We  can  say  concerning  His  love  that  it  has 
never  been  diminished  by  aU  the  sins  we  have  ever  committed  since  we  believed. 
We  have  often  revolted,  but  we  have  never  found  Him  unwilling  to  forgive.  4.  We 
have  known  and  we  have  believed  the  love  of  God  to  us  to  be  perfectly  immutable. 
5.  I  wiU  make  but  one  other  remark  here,  and  that  is,  we  can  bear  our  willing 
witness  that  the  love  of  God  to  us  has  been  an  unfailing  support  in  all  our  trials. 
HI.  This  great  truth  is  the  groundwork  of  Christian  encouragement.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Love  :■ — Love  is  the  most  essential  and  the  most  characteristic  of 
Christian  virtues.  He  who  lacks  this  scarcely  deserves  the  name  of  Christian  at  all, 
while  he  who  possesses  this  is  on  the  way  to  possess  all.  When  we  ask  why  such 
stress  is  laid  upon  the  importance  of  possessing  this  virtue  above  all  others,  more 
than  one  answer  suggests  itself  to  our  minds.  First,  we  may  observe  that  some 
explanation  is  given  in  the  words  of  this  text.  A  loveless  soul  can  never  be  a  God- 
like soul ;  for  "  God  is  love."  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  dweU  in  love,  when  it 
is,  as  it  were,  the  element  in  which  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  we  cannot 
remain  altogether  dissimilar  to  God,  just  because  God  is  love.  For  love  is  one, 
whether  it  exists  in  Him  or  in  us ;  and  wherever  it  reigns  it  must  needs  produce 
similarity  to  Him  who  is  its  Divine  Source.  Yet  another  explanation  of  the  im- 
portance assigned  to  love  in  the  Christian  economy  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that 
love  is  designed  to  supply  the  motive-power  in  aU  truly  Christian  conduct  and 
experience.  For  Christ  looks  at  the  quality  even  more  than  at  the  quantity  of  the 
work  that  we  do  for  Him.  A  little  offered  as  a  love-off ering  to  Him  is  worth  a  great 
deal  done  merely  because  we  think  we  ought  to  do  it,  or  just  because  it  is  expected 
of  us.  Nay,  we  may  go  further.  We  may  be  moved  by  a  feeling  of  interest  in  the 
work  for  its  own  sake  ;  and  yet  there  shall  be  little  or  no  pleasure  occasioned  to  the 
heart  of  God,  just  because  the  true  motive  has  been  wanting.  When  we  ask  why 
faith,  not  love,  should  be  the  condition  of  salvation,  it  is  not  diflScult  to  give  a 
reasonable  answer,  as  we  contemplate  the  two  side  by  side,  and  notice  the  differ- 
ence between  them.  Love,  we  observe,  is  a  condition  of  our  emotional  nature,  a 
state  of  passive  consciousness,  or  a  moral  habit  formed  within  the  soul.  Faith,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  a  definite  moral  attitude,  voluntarily  assumed  towards  a  definite 
object  as  the  result  of  our  intellectual  apprehension  of  the  characteristics  of  that 
object.  It  follows  from  this  that  love  cannot  be  directly  induced  by  an  act  of  our 
will,  and  that  we  are  therefore  only  indirectly  responsible  for  its  possession.  But  it 
may  occur  to  some  to  object :  if  we  cannot  directly  produce  love,  how  can  we  be 
responsible  for  having  it  ?  and  how  can  God  find  fault  with  us,  as  He  seems  to  do, 
if  we  have  it  not  ?  If  we  cannot  make  ourselves  love  our  fellow-man  by  trying,  how 
can  we  force  ourselves  to  love  God  ?  To  this  it  may  be  replied,  love  is  not  so 
capricious  as  at  first  sight  it  might  appear  to  be.  It  springs  from  a  combination  of 
causes,  which,  however,  it  frequently  happens  that  we  never  think  of  stopping  to 
analyse.  When,  however,  we  carefully  look  into  the  matter,  we  soon  find  that  our 
love  has  owed  its  existence  either  to  some  definite  cause,  or,  as  is  more  frequently 
the  case,  to  some  combination  of  causes.  Now  these  causes  may  be,  to  a  consider- 
able extent,  under  our  control ;  we  may  either  avoid  their  influence,  or  put  ourselves 
in  the  way  of  being  influenced  by  them  ;  and  here,  of  course,  moral  responsibility 
comes  in.  Admiration  either  of  appearances,  or  of  physical  or  intellectual  or  moral 
qualities,  frequently  has  much  to  do  with  the  genesis  of  love,  and  this  admiration 
may  extend  to  the  smallest  things ;  indeed,  I  believe  that  it  is  more  frequently  by 
little  things  than  by  great  that  it  is  usually  elicited.  Intimacy  again  may  have 
much  to  do  with  the  genesis  of  love.  Gratitude,  too,  frequently  induces  affection. 
We  love  because  we  owe  so  much,  and  love  seems  the  only  way  of  repaying  what  we 
owe.  There  are,  no  doubt,  many  other  causes  which  may  contribute  to  produce  love ; 
8uch  as  sympathy,  affinity  of  tastes,  or  disposition,  or  unity  of  interest ;  but,  after 


CHAP.  IV.]  J.  JOHN.  343 

all,  nothing  is  so  likely  to  cause  love  as  love  itself  discovered  to  be  pre-existent  on 
the  part  of  another.    How  often  do  we  love  because  we  find  we  are  loved !     How 
often  does  love,  already  supreme  in  our  human  heart,  exert  a  species  of  irresistible 
fascination  on  the  heart  of  another  !     Now  it  is  clear  that  most  of  these  various 
causes  of  love  as  existing  amongst  us  men  in  our  relations  with  each  other,  and  as 
contributing  to  the  genesis  of  a  reciprocal  affection,  either  exist  in  a  much  greater 
degree  in  the  Divine  Object  than  in  any  human  being,  or  may  be  brought  into 
existence  as  between  us  and  Him.    If  we  desire  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  upon  us 
efficiently  in  this  respect,  our  wisdom  lies  in  surrendering  ourselves  to  His  influence  ; 
and  when  we  do  He  will  always  lead  us  up  to  the  contemplation  of  those  facts  about 
the  Divine  Object  and  His  relation  to  us,  or  to  the  apprehension  of  those  experiences 
which  tend  to  generate  love.     No  gardener  in  the  world  can  produce  fruit ;  only  the 
life  within  does  that ;  yet  how  much  does  the  fruit-tree  depend  for  its  fruitfulness 
upon  himaan  skill !     Man  must  see  to  it  that  the  tree  shall  be  planted  where  the  sun- 
shine can  f  aU  upon  it,  and  the  dew  and  the  rain  can  water  it.  He  must  take  care  that 
it  is  not  exposed  to  unduly  trying  conditions.    And  even  so  love,  being  a  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  can  only  be  produced  by  His  presence  and  mighty  operations 
within  our  nature  ;  but  though  we  cannot  produce  or  manufacture  it,  still  we  are 
indirectly  responsible  for  its  production.     The  tree  cannot  cultivate  itself,  and  here 
the  figure  fails  us.     Man,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  free  agent,  and  therefore  respon- 
sible for  his  own  culture.    It  is  not  for  us  to  attempt  directly  to  induce  this  all- 
important  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  but  it  is  for  us  to  see  to  it  that  we  comply  with  the 
conditions  of  fruitfulness.     Let  us  expose  ourselves  to  the  spiritual  sunshine ;  let  us 
live  in  the  presence  of  God ;  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  strike  our  roots  down 
into  earth,  lest  the  cold  clay  of  worldly-mindedness  check  all  our  higher  aspirations ; 
let  us  guard  against  self-seeking  and  self-assertion  ;  let  us  avoid  exposing  ourselves 
voluntarily  to  unfavourable  influences  as  some  Christians  do,  thinking  more  of 
worldly  profit  than  of  their  spiritual  interests ;  and  let  us  cleanse  off  carefully  the 
blight  of  impure  thoughts  and  unholy  desires,  and  then  the  Spirit  of  Love  wUl  be 
able  to  induce  the  fruit  of  love  within  our  hearts.      {W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.) 
God  is  love ;  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  hint — True 
love  : — How  then  did  Christ  love  us  ?     1.  It  is,  as  opposed  to  mere  natural  love,  an 
aU-embracing  love,  not  swayed  by  feelings  or  emotions  or  preferences,  but  loving  all 
who  can  be  loved,  all  who  may  become  such  as  can  be  loved,  or  in  order  that  they 
may  be  loved.     2.  True  love  must  be  a  self-denying  love.     3.  True  love,  like  the 
love  of  God,  "  seeks  not  its  own."     4.  True  love,  like  the  love  of  God,  must  be 
ceaseless.     That  passing,  capricious  love,  love  and  unlove,  ebbing  and  flowing,  laid 
dry  because  it  has  just  seemed  full,  loving  one  and  not  another,  grudging  fresh  acts 
of  love  because  it  has  just  shown  what  it  thinks  such,  soon  "  wearied  of  well-doing," 
such  is  not  the  love  which  reflects  the  love  of  God.     {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)        The 
love  of  God,  as  displayed  in  the  economies  of  providence  and  grace  : — I.  In  the  cahes 
OF  His  univeesaij  pkovidknce.    In  the  exercise  of  the  love  of  benevolence  He  has 
not  only  conferred  existence  on  a  great  variety  and  nvmaber  of  creatures,  but  He  has 
bestowed  on  them  countless  properties  and  advantages,  to  minister  to  their  utility 
and  their  welfare.     For  us,  the  sun  shines,  the  rain  falls,  the  air  breathes,  the 
seasons  change,  the  harvests  ripen,  and  all  nature   seems  put  in  requisition  to 
minister  to  our  well-being.     This  love  is  impartial ;  for  our  heavenly  Father  makes 
His  sun  to  rise  on  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  the  rain  to  descend  on  the  just  and 
unjust,  and  is  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  the  evil.    It  is  constant.     "  His  mercies 
are  new  every  morning  and  every  evening,"  and  He  crowns  successive  years  with 
His  goodness.     It  is  universal.     The  bounties  which  flow  from  its  exercise  are  dis- 
pensed to  the  beasts  of  the  field,  the  fowls  of  the  air,  the  fishes  which  pass  through 
the  paths  of  the  seas,  and  to  the  smallest  insect  which  floats  in  the  breeze,  and  the 
meanest  reptile  which  creeps  on  the  face  of  the  earth.     It  will  be  perpetual.    For 
we  are  assured  that  the  ordinances  of  heaven  and  earth  shall  stand  fast  so  long  as 
the  earth  continues.     "  While  the  earth  remaineth,  seed-time  and  harvest."    II.  In 
THE  MEKCiFUL  PRO\^SION8  OF  His  GRACE.    And  this  is  the  love  of  compassion.    Look 
at  this  "  love  "  in  the  gradual  preparatives  for  the  full  development  of  its  displays. 
See  it  in  the  first  promise,  which  raised  the  prostrated  hopes  of  our  sinful  pro- 
genitors ;  in  the  numerous  and  expressive  types  which  were  to  usher  in  the  bright  day 
of  discovery ;  in  the  accurate  and  splendid  predictions  of  that  long  line  of  holy  men 
"  who  testified  beforehand  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  which  should 
follow."    At  length  the  predicted  time  arrived  for  the  full  disclosures  of  the  love  of 
God  to  man.    Does  this  close  the  exhibition  of  this  scene  of  love  ?    Did  God  give 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

His  Son  to  die  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  restore  to  us  the  favour  which  we  had 
lost?  Are  we  left  to  shift  for  ourselves  as  we  passed  through  the  wilderness  of  this 
world?  "  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how 
shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  What  innumerable  bless- 
ings flow  down  to  us,  from  the  exaltation  and  the  advocacy  of  the  Saviour !  How 
rich  are  the  results  of  the  communication  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  with  His  gifts  and 
graces  !  And  what  shall  we  say  of  Divine  ordinances,  which  are  the  mediums,  the 
organs  of  conveyance  of  all  spiritual  good,  to  the  souls  of  men  ?  HI.  In  the  pro- 
cesses OF  His  AFFLICTIVE  DISCIPLINE.  1.  The  most  paiuful  trials  of  life  have  often 
proved  the  means  of  conversion.  2.  The  procedures  of  His  disciplinary  providence 
have  contributed  to  sanctification.  They  have  proved  the  means  of  repressing  or  of 
extirpating  corruption  from  the  heart.  They  have  quickened  in  your  bosom  the 
spirit  of  prayer.     IV.  In  that  home  of  rest  and  joy,  which  He  has  prepared  foe 

THE     reception     OF     THE     FAMILY    OF     HiS     REDEEMED     (EcclcS.    xii.    3-5).        Happy, 

thrice    happy    they,    who    faU    asleep    in    Jesus!      {John  Clayton.)  General 

and  particular  vianifestation  of  the  love  of  God  : — I.  The  declaration  madk 
CONCERNING  GoD  HiMSELF,  "  God  is  love."  The  Greek  philosopher  Aristotle 
defines  love  in  this  way,  "  The  desire  of  any  one  for  whatsoever  things  a  person 
supposes  to  be  good  for  his  friend's  sake,  but  not  for  his  own,  and  the  procuring  of 
those  things  for  the  person  beloved  according  to  one's  power."  This  he  conceives 
to  be  love.  The  theory  is  fine,  as  unquestionably  were  many  of  the  notions  found 
in  the  schools  of  philosophers,  and  in  the  shades  of  academical  retirement ;  but  a 
grand  question  meets  us  at  the  threshold  of  the  inquiry.  Where  is  to  be  found  the 
individual  who  is  the  subject  of  this  love  ?  It  is  easy  to  give  the  definition,  but 
where,  in  our  fallen  race,  shall  we  discover  an  individual  with  his  heart  thus 
disinterestedly  aiJectionate  ?  But  that  which  is  not  in  man  by  nature,  is  found  in 
God — "  God  is  love."  He  is  the  fountain  from  which  love  must  have  flowed 
wheresoever  it  is  found.  The  very  imposition  of  labour  is  a  proof  that  God  is 
love.  A  world  of  men  and  women  unemployed,  and  with  hearts  so  depraved,  and 
characters  altogether  so  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  as  ours  naturally  are,  would 
really  be  a  hell  upon  earth,  since  men  would  have  nothing  to  do  except  to  torment 
one  another.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  the  mystery  of  redemption — eternal 
redemption?      11.  The  peculiar   cause   why   the   redeemed   of   the   earth,  in 

PARTICULAR,  CAN  BEAR  WITNESS  TO  THIS  TRUTH,  THAT  GOD  IS  LOVE.     What  ICaSOn  have 

we  to  believe,  that  instead  of  perishing  with  the  majority,  we  shall  be  in  the 
minority  of  those  who  are  saved  ?  No  general  declaration  of  God's  love  will 
answer  this  purpose.  We  have  known  the  love  which  God  hath  to  us — it  is  not 
a  matter  of  conjecture,  but  of  demonstration  :  "  We  have  known,  we  have  believed 
the  love  that  God  hath  to  us."  IH.  The  specimen  introduced  of  the  character 
OF  those  who  have  found  God  to  be  love.  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in 
God,  and  God  in  him."  And  what  do  we  behold  in  this  declaration?  First  of  all, 
the  certain  continuance  of  that  spirit  of  love,  whereby  the  Lord's  people  are  called. 
There  is  no  fear  of  this  love  waxing  cold  and  being  dried  up  in  the  redeemed,  when 
we  know  that  they  live  in  God  by  a  life  of  faith,  and  that  God  by  His  Spirit  lives 
in  them.  But  farther,  what  do  we  behold  in  this  declaration,  "  He  that  dwelleth 
in  love,  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him  "  ?  Why,  the  security  of  those  souls 
who  are  thus  distinguished  by  the  love  of  God,  and  by  being  the  temples  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  They  dwell  in  God,  and  God  dwells  in  them.  (W.  Burrows,  M.A.) 
God  embodied  and  manife>^ted  in  infinite  love  to  man  : — Did  we  only  give  credit  to 
the  text — did  we  but  view  God  as  "  love  "^there  would  be  the  translation  into  another 
character — there  would  instantly  emerge  a  new  heart  and  a  new  nature.  For  let 
us  attend,  in  the  first  place,  to  the  original  conception  of  humanity,  constituted 
and  placed,  as  it  now  is,  in  reference  to  that  great  and  invisible  Being  revealed 
unto  us  in  the  Scriptures.  There  are  two  reasons  why  we  should  conceive  God  to 
be  so  actuated  as  to  inspire  us  with  terror,  or  at  least  with  distrust,  instead  of  con- 
ceiving Him  to  be  actuated  by  that  love  which  the  text  ascribes  to  Him,  and  which 
were  no  sooner  believed  than  it  would  set  us  at  ease,  and  inspire  us  with  delightful 
confidence  in  Him.  The  first  of  these  reasons  may  be  shortly  stated  thus :  When- 
ever we  are  placed  within  the  reach  of  any  being  of  imagined  power,  but  withal 
of  unknown  purposes,  that  being  is  an  object  of  dismay  to  us.  If  such,  then,  be 
the  effect  on  human  feelings  of  a  power  that  is  known,  associated  with  purposes 
that  are  unknown,  we  are  not  to  wonder  that  the  great  and  invisible  God  is  invested, 
in  our  eyes,  with  the  imagery  of  terror.  It  is  verily  because  He  is  great  and  at  the 
same  time  invisible,  that  we  so  invest  Him.     It  is  precisely  because  the  Being  who 


CHAP.  IT.]  I.  JOHN,  345 

has  all  the  energies  of  nature  at  command  is  at  the  same  time  shrouded  in  mystery 
impenetrable,  that  we  view  Him  as  tremendous.  But  in  what  way  could  more 
palpable  exhibition  have  been  made  of  Him,  than  when  the  eternal  Son,  enshrined 
in  humanity,  stepped  forth  on  the  platform  of  visible  things  on  the  proclaimed 
errand  "  to  seek  and  to  save"  us?  But  there  is  still  another  reason,  and  many 
may  think,  perhaps,  a  more  substantial  reason  than  the  former,  why,  instead  of 
viewing  God  as  love,  we  should  apprehend  Him  to  be  a  God  of  severity  and  dis- 
pleasure. It  is  not  conjured  up  by  fancy  from  a  distant  land  of  shadows,  but 
drawn  from  the  inferences  of  man's  own  consciousness.  The  truth  is,  that  by  the 
constitution  of  humanity  there  is  a  law  of  right  and  wrong  in  every  heart,  which 
each  possessor  of  that  heart  knows  himself  to  have  habitually  violated.  But  more 
than  this,  along  with  the  felt  certainty  of  such  a  law  there  is  the  resistless 
apprehension  of  a  lawgiver — of  a  God  offended  by  the  disobedience  of  His  creatures, 
and  because  of  which  we  are  disquieted  with  the  thought  of  a  reckoning  and  a 
vengeance  yet  to  come.  Now  as,  in  counteraction  to  our  first  reason  for  viewing 
God  with  apprehension,  and  thus,  losing  sight  of  Him  as  a  God  of  love,  we  adduced 
one  particular  doctrine  of  Christianity,  so,  in  counteraction  to  our  second  reason, 
we  now  adduce  another  peculiar  doctrine  of  Christianity,  and  that  by  far  the  noblest 
and  most  precious  of  its  articles.  The  one  was  the  doctrine  of  the  incarnation ; 
the  other  is  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  By  the  former — the  doctrine  of  the 
incarnation — a  conquest  has  been  made  over  the  imaginations  of  ignorance ;  by 
the  latter — the  doctrine  of  the  atonement — a  conquest  has  been  made  over,  not  the 
imaginations,  but  the  solid  and  well-grounded  fears  of  guilt.  By  the  one,  or 
through  the  means  of  a  Divine  incarnation,  we  are  told  of  Deity  embodied,  and 
thus  the  love  of  God  has  been  made  the  subject,  as  it  were,  of  ocular  demonstra- 
tion ;  by  the  other,  or  through  the  means  of  a  Divine  sacrifice,  we  are  told  of  the 
Deity  propitiated ;  and  thus  the  love  of  God  has  been  made  to  shine  forth  in  the 
midst  of  the  law's  sustained  and  vindicated  honours.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  a  halo  of  all  the  attributes  of  God,  and  yet  the  pre-eminent  manifestation  there 
is  of  God  as  love  ;  for  it  is  love,  not  only  rejoicing  over  all  His  works,  but  enshiined 
in  full  concentration,  when  shedding  enhanced  lustre  over  all,  and  amidst  aU,  the 
perfections  of  the  Divine  nature.  Before  I  leave  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  should 
like,  in  as  plain  a  way  as  possible,  to  meet  a  question  which  I  consider  of  very 
great  practical  importance  in  Christianity.  You  may  make  out  the  demonstration 
that  "  God  is  love  ; "  you  may  make  that  out  as  a  general  attribute  ;  but  then  the 
question,  in  which  each  of  us  is  personally  interested,  is  to  be  asked  still — How 
are  we  to  be  satisfied  that  this  love  of  God  is  directed  personally  and  individually 
to  ourselves?  Christ  is  set  forth  as  "  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  world!" 
and  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  as  to  send  His  Son  into  it."  Let  me,  therefore,  who, 
beyond  all  doubt,  am  in  "the  world,"  take  the  comfort  of  these  gracious  pro- 
mulgations :  for  it  is  only  if  out  of  the  world,  or  away  from  the  world,  thart  they 
do  not  belong  to  me.  The  blessings  of  the  gospel  are  as  accessible  to  all  who  will, 
as  the  water,  or  the  air,  or  any  of  the  cheap  and  common  bounties  of  nature.  The 
element  of  heavenly  love  is  in  as  universal  diffusion  among  the  dwellings  of  men 
as  the  atmosphere  which  they  breathe,  and  which  solicits  admittance  at  every  door. 
This  brings  me  to  the  third  head  of  discourse.  If  we  could  only  work  this  appre- 
hension of  God  into  your  minds — if  we  could  only  prevail  on  you  to  believe  that 
"  God  is  love,"  then  it  would  have  this  effect  on  your  feelings  towards  Him — the 
effect,  in  fact,  of  giving  you  altogether  a  different  feeling  with  regard  to  God. 
It  would  be  the  instrument  of  completely  regenerating  you  :  by  its  giving  you  a 
different  view  of  God  you  would  acquire  a  different  feeling  with  regard  to  Him ; 
and  it  would,  in  fact,  throw  within  the  constitution  of  your  soul  the  great  master- 
principle  of  all  morality  ;  and  thus  it  is  that  it  would  be  the  elemental  principle  of 
what  is  called  in  the  Bible  regeneration.  Faith  would  work  by  love.  You  would 
love  the  God  who  first  loved  you,  and  this  love  would  yield  all  manner  of  obedience. 
In  the  first  place,  the  way  to  call  into  your  heart  the  love  of  God,  and  to  keep  it 
there,  is  to  think  on  the  love  of  God  as  manifested  in  the  gospel,  and  to  dwell  upon 
the  thought.  It  is  only  by  thinking  rightly,  or  believing  rightly,  that  you  can  be 
made  to  feel  rightly ;  and  could  we  only  prevail  on  you  to  dwell  habitually,  and 
with  confidence,  on  God's  love  to  you,  then  should  we  feel  ourselves  on  the  sure 
highway  to  the  result  of  your  habitually  loving  Him  back  again.  But,  secondly 
and  lastly,  you  will  perceive  from  this  the  mighty  importance  of  a  free  gospel,  and 
of  your  so  understanding  it  that  you  may  embark  upon  it,  each  individual  for 
himself,  all  your  hopes  and  all  your  dependence.     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)        Divine 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

beneficence  defended  : — Apart  from  revelation  there  are,  I  conceive,  two  main 
evidences  of  the  goodness  of  God.  The  one  is  to  be  found  in  the  material  universe, 
the  other  in  the  nature  and  capabilities  of  man.  When  man  first  begins  to  observe 
and  reflect  on  the  vast  universe  of  which  he  forms  a  part,  he  can  hardly  fail  to  be 
struck  with  its  order,  its  beauty,  and  its  sublimity.  But  hardly  has  man  formed  to 
himseK  this  grand  conception  of  the  unbounded  power  and  the  universal  goodness 
of  his  Creator,  before  another  aspect  of  the  phenomena  forces  itself  upon  his 
attention.  If  on  one  side  there  is  the  fertile  field  or  the  smiling  valley,  on  the 
other  there  is  the  howling  wilderness  or  the  raging  sea.  If  here  we  find  a  man 
rejoicing  in  health  and  strength  and  prosperity,  the  happy  peasant  who  has  no 
wants  which  he  catmot  satisfy,  the  successful  warrior,  the  gifted  statesman,  or  the 
powerful  monarch ;  there  we  find  a  man  bowed  down  with  disease,  or  sunk  in  mis- 
fortune, the  captive  in  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  the  father  bereft  of  his  children, 
the  beggar  seeking  his  bread.  How  to  account  for  this  double  aspect  of  nature  and 
of  human  hfe  has  ever  been  one  of  the  great  problems  which  the  curious  intellect 
of  man  has  set  itseK  to  solve.  Is  God  really  good,  or  is  He  a  capricious  Being,  at 
one  time  dealing  good  and  at  another  evil,  selecting  arbitrarily  His  friends  and 
enemies,  while  He  showers  blessings  on  the  one  and  inflicts  vengeance  on  the  other  ? 
"The  wilder  Bedouins,"  says  an  Eastern  traveller,  "  will  inquire  where  Allah  is  to 
be  found."  When  asked  the  object  of  the  question  they  will  reply,  "  If  the  Eesa 
could  but  catch  Him  they  would  spear  Him  upon  the  spot, — who  but  He  lays 
waste  their  houses,  and  kills  their  cattle  and  wives  ?  "  Others,  in  order  to  solve 
the  difiiculty,  have  imagined  a  co-ordinate,  or  almost  co-ordinate  Being,  the 
author  of  evil,  as  God  is  the  author  of  good ;  others,  like  the  Platonists,  believe 
that  there  are  material  obstacles  which  God  can  only  partially  overcome ;  whilst 
others,  again,  have  supposed  that  God  permits  the  existence  of  a  subordinate  but 
powerful  spirit,  who  is  engaged  in  marring  the  work  which,  as  being  of  Divine 
origin,  would  otherwise  be  absolutely  perfect.  It  may  be  of  service  to  those  who, 
amidst  all  the  perplexities  of  modern  speculation,  would  fain  retain  their  hold  on 
this  fundamental  principle  of  religious  faith,  the  supreme  goodness  of  God,  if  I 
attempt  to  point  out  certain  considerations  suggested  to  us  by  the  study  of  nature 
and  of  human  life  which,  amidst  all  our  darkness  and  ignorance,  may  be  regarded 
as,  at  least,  indications  of  its  truth.  The  question,  then,  is  not  whether  evil  is  to 
be  found  in  this  world,  for  we  cannot  even  conceive  its  absence,  but  whether,  on  a 
general  survey  of  nature  and  life,  good  would  seem  to  be,  as  it  were,  the  rule,  and 
evil  the  exception,  or  evil  the  rule  and  good  the  exception.  Suppose,  for  a  moment, 
the  present  constitution  of  things  to  be  fixed,  and  let  it  be  granted  that  the  world 
proceeds  from  an  omnipotent  and  intelligent  Creator  ;  the  argument,  as  stated  by 
Paley  and  others,  that  this  omnipotent  and  intelligent  Being  is  also  a  Being  of 
infinite  goodness,  if  not  absolutely  convincing,  is,  at  least,  one  of  very  considerable 
force.  There  is  much  evil  in  the  world.  Granted  ;  but  good  can  only  be  under- 
stood by  contrast  with  evil,  and  the  good  in  the  world,  so  far  as  we  can  make  out, 
far  counterbalances  the  evil.  Those  who,  to  the  outside  observer,  seem  to  be  sub- 
jected to  the  most  cheerless  and  most  sordid  conditions,  without,  apparently,  a  ray 
of  hope  or  of  comfort,  often,  it  is  a  matter  of  common  remark,  appear  to  cling  to 
life  with  greater  tenacity  than  those  whom  we  deem  the  most  prosperous.  Even 
for  them,  therefore,  life  has  its  charms,  and,  whether  they  believe  in  a  future  world 
or  not,  at  all  events  they  are  unwilling  to  quit  this.  Truly  man  has  a  marvellous 
power  of  adapting  himself  to  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed.  Transport 
yourseK,  if  it  were  possible,  for  a  few  hours,  into  the  most  unpromising  position 
in  human  life,  and  you  would  probably  find  that  it  has  its  compensating  advantages. 
A  certain  amount  of  happiness,  in  fact,  seems  invariably  to  result  from  the  adapta- 
tion of  the  organism  to  the  medium,  whatever  the  organism  and  whatever  the 
medium  may  be.  Not  only,  therefore,  do  we  probably  vastly  overestimate  the 
amount  of  misery  which  there  is  in  the  world,  but  we  are  apt  altogether  to  overlook 
the  educating  influences  of  pain.  Let  any  one  think  within  himself  of  what  a 
■vast  amount  of  enjoyment  he  would  be  deprived  if  his  pleasures  came  unsought, 
if  they  supervened  on  no  previous  desire,  want,  or  pain.  Let  him  think,  too, 
what  he  would  have  been  in  character  and  attainments  if  he  had  never  had  any 
obstacles  to  overcome,  any  diflSculties  to  grapple  with,  or  wants  to  gratify.  Self- 
denial,  temperance,  patience,  industry — where  would  these  be  if  we  had  been 
created  beings  without  wants,  without  the  capacity  of  pain,  without  the  necessity  of 
effort  ?  Sympathy,  compassion,  forgiveness,  tenderness,  all  these  finer  traits  of 
our  nature,  where  would  they  be  if  there  were  no  sufferings  to  be  compassionated, 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  347 

no  pains  to  be  alleviated  ?  Morality  and  intelligence  alike,  at  least  as  they  exist 
in  man,  seem  to  be  the  result  of  a  long  struggle  with  the  powers  of  nature,  of  an 
unceasing  effort  to  accommodate  himself  to  the  exigencies  of  his  condition.  But 
after  all,  it  may  be  said,  this  is  only  a  roseate  view  of  human  life  and  of  the  causes 
which  determine  it,  a  theory  which  prosperous  men  have  not  unnaturally  framed 
in  order  to  account  for  their  own  prosperity.  Go  into  the  stifling  alleys  of  a 
crowded  city,  pass  through  the  sordid  dwellings,  look  at  the  haggard  forma 
famishing  for  want  of  food,  and  then  say  whether  you  can  believe  in  a  moral 
goverimient  of  the  universe,  in  the  existence  of  a  God  of  love  from  whom  all  these 
men  and  women  have  their  being,  from  whose  original  disposition  of  events  the 
circumstances  in  which  they  are  now  placed  have  proceeded  I  Is  it  not  a  cruel 
mockery  to  tell  such  as  these  of  the  love  of  their  Creator  ?  If  they  believe  in  a 
God,  will  they  not  turn  round  and  curse  Him?  No!  Amongst  the  oppressed, 
the  suffering,  and  the  afflicted  are  often  found  those  who  have  the  most  intense 
faith  in  the  love  of  God.  It  is  in  their  prosperity  rather  than  their  adversity 
that  men  forget  their  Maker.  And  do  these  men,  as  I  have  said  before,  cling  to 
life  with  less  tenacity  than  we  do?  For  them  too,  then,  life  has  some  secret 
charm ;  they,  too,  have  a  power  of  adapting  themselves  to  circumstances,  and 
their  existence  is  not  aU  that  dreary,  cheerless  waste  which  to  us  it  seems  to  be. 
But,  before  we  blame  God  for  this  mass  of  human  suffering,  and  consider  it  an 
argument  against  His  beneficence  and  love,  shall  we  not  do  well  to  look  more 
closely  into  its  causes,  to  ask  how  far  it  is  unavoidable  and  how  far  avoidable,  how 
far  it  is  due  to  the  actions  of  laws  of  nature,  whose  effects  we  cannot  escape,  and 
how  far  to  the  wickedness,  the  carelessness,  or  the  ignorance  of  man  ?  That  man 
should  be  able  to  determine  his  own  actions  and  to  influence  his  fellows  is  surely 
not  a  defect  but  an  excellence  in  the  constitution  of  human  nature.  But  we,  at 
least,  in  the  present  constitution  of  our  faculties,  cannot  see  how  we  can  have  this 
power  without  the  possibiUty  of  exercising  it  for  evil  as  well  as  for  good.  Here, 
then,  we  encounter  the  same  difficulty  as  before.  As  in  the  individual  it  would 
seem  as  if  there  must  be  alternations  of  pleasure  and  pain,  so  in  society  it  will 
seem  as  if  there  must  be  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil,  of  suffering  and  enjoyment, 
of  prosperity  and  adversity.  But  part  of  this  evil  and  suffering  we  have  said  is 
avoidable,  and  part  unavoidable — that  is  to  say,  part  is  due  to  man  himself,  and 
part  to  the  inexorable  forces  of  nature.  Now,  so  far  as  man's  lot  admits  of  being 
modified  by  himself,  we  find,  if  we  take  a  sufficiently  wide  retrospect,  that  the 
improvement  in  his  condition  has  been  almost  incalculable ;  in  comfort  and 
security,  even  in  refinement  and  intelligence.  The  laws  which  govern  the 
evolution  of  society  seem,  with  some  few  exceptions  not  difficult  to  be  accounted 
for,  to  have  an  invariable  tendency  to  improve  man's  condition.  And  if  this  has 
been  the  effect  of  advancing  civilisation  in  the  past,  is  there  any  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  process  wiU  be  arrested  in  the  future  ?  May  we  not  hope  that,  as  the 
sympathies  of  men  expand  and  their  knowledge  increases,  many  of  the  more 
glaring  inequalities  which  now  exist  between  man  and  man  wiU  be  gradually 
removed  ?  Of  all  the  characters  which  God  has "  stamped  upon  His  creation, 
physical  and  human,  none  is  more  patent  to  our  observation  than  the  capacity  of 
progress.  Man  has  undoubtedly  even  still  much  evil  to  contend  with,  but  this 
evil  he  has  an  almost  indefinite  power  of  diminishing,  and  by  struggling  with  it 
his  faculties  are  enlarged,  his  character  is  strengthened,  and  he  is  being  gradually 
prepared  (so  by  an  irrepressible  instinct  we  divine)  for  a  sphere  far  transcending  this 
in  dignity,  in  freedom,  in  knowledge,  and  in  love.  (Prof.  T.  Fowler.)  God  is 
love : — God's  world  might  teach  us  hope — God's  Word  alone  can  give  us  the 
immoveable  certainty  that  He  is  love.  I.  *'  God  is  love  " — a  tbuth  unknown  to 
THE  wisdom  of  THE  woKLD.  1.  Ouc  cause  of  the  failure  must  be  sought  for  in  the 
spirituahty  and  elevation  of  the  idea  itself.  2.  In  the  scale  of  reason  the  question 
of  God's  love  must  often  seem  a  balanced  one.  Whatever  love  in  God  is,  it  is  not  a 
love  which  cannot  both  do  and  look  upon  things  which  are  very  terrible  ;  it  is  not 
a  love  which  is  regardless  of  law ;  it  is  not  a  love  which  cannot  punish.  3.  The 
workings  of  an  evU  conscience.  H.  God  is  love — a  truth  revealed  and  certified 
IN  Christ.  1.  It  is  a  love  not  out  of  harmony  with  the  sterner  aspects  of  God's 
government,  as  seen  in  the  world  around  us.  There  was  a  certain  granitic  stern- 
ness in  the  character  of  Christ,  as  well  as  soft  and  gentle  words  and  smUes.  And 
as  for  pain,  think  of  the  bitter  Cross,  and  of  God  not  sparing  His  own  Son  there. 
2.  The  place  to  which  the  gospel  raises  love  in  the  character  of  God.  It  identifies 
love  with  God's  essence,  with  the  very  root  of  His  character  and  life.    A  pagan 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

said,  "  When  God  was  about  to  make  the  world  He  transformed  Himself  into  love." 
But  the  Christian  gospel  goes  beyond  this,  and  declares  that  God  eternally  is  love. 
3.  The  gospel  is  pre-eminently  a  revelation  of  God's  love  to  sinners.  (J.  Orr,  B.D.) 
God  is  love  : — "  The  idea  which  men  have  of  God,"  said  a  thoughtful  writer, "  is  the 
most  important  of  all  influences  on  their  religious  character  and  tone  of  mind.  They 
become  as  what  they  worship.  If  justice,  Jews  ;  if  goodness.  Christians.  When  men 
think  of  God  chiefly  as  the  Supreme  Mind,  they  are  philosophic ;  when  chiefly  as  the 
Supreme  Will,  they  are  superstitious  ;  regarding  Him  as  a  Sovereign,  they  strive  to 
be  His  servants  ;  as  a  Father,  His  sons."   We  can  feel  the  truth  of  this  view.    I.  It 

IS  INEVITABLE  THAT  OUR  MAIN  THOUGHT  OF  GOD  SHOULD  COLOUR  OUR  RELIGIOUS  LIFE,  AND 

THEOUGH  IT  OUR  ORDINARY  LIFE  AMONG  MEN.  The  quality  of  our  servicc  will  differ  with 
the  relationship  we  bear  to  those  we  serve.  If  we  are  afraid  of  them,  we  shall  be 
timid,  scrupulous  in  all  work  which  comes  under  their  eye,  and  along  with  our  dread 
we  shall  cherish  a  subtle  dislike.  If  we  expect  to  win  something  from  them,  we 
shall  be  ostentatious  in  little  acts  of  exaggerated  service,  and  we  shall  catch  ourselves 
acting  as  though  we  were  challenging  attention  to  the  quality  or  quantity  of  our 
service.  If  we  love  them,  all  timidity  and  artifice  will  pass  away.  Simplicity  of 
feeling  will  help  forward  single-mindedness  of  conduct.  We  shall  serve  with  zeal, 
completeness,  and  trustworthiness  because  we  love.  It  is  true  that  love  exercises  a 
purifying  influence  over  service.  It  is,  therefore,  no  small  influence  for  good  upon 
the  human  character  when  the  relationship  between  God  and  man  is  that  of  love. 
We  do  not  render  service  to  a  taskmaster.  We  do  not  seek  to  be  good  out  of  fear, 
which  means  that  we  have  no  real  love  for  good.  We  do  not  seek  to  be  good  for  the 
sake  of  reward,  for  love's  service  is  given  for  love's  sake,  and  not  for  fee  or  gain. 
To  know,  therefore,  that  God  is  Love  is  to  have  in  possession  a  thought  and  truth 
which,  if  we  give  it  full  play,  tends  to  purify  the  dispositions,  desires,  and  motives  of 
our  nature.  The  same  thought  may  reach  us  in  another  way.  God  is  love.  God 
therefore  desires  for  e.  the  very  best  that  can  be.  "  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  its 
neighbour,"  said  St.  1  oJal.  And  Love  worketh  no  iU  to  its  children.  Therefore  God 
can  only  seek  man's  highest  good,  and  man's  highest  good  is  in  character.  Wealth 
is  only  good  in  seeming,  knowledge  is  only  good  in  transition  ;  but  character  abides. 
And  this  abiding  good,  called  character,  is  the  good  which  God  desires  for  His 
children.  Thus  we  reach  the  same  thought — God  v  ho  is  Love  seeks  the  purifying 
and  elevation  of  our  characters.  To  understand  that  God  is  Love,  and  to  realise 
that  His  love  seeks  and  must  seek  our  highest  good,  and  that  this  good  is  in  our 
spiritual  resemblance  to  God  our  Father,  is  to  take  hold  of  a  principle  which 
enlightens  our  eyes  as  we  look  out  on  life.  II.  The  enlightenment  of  life  through 
liOVE.  It  need  not  be  denied  that  there  are  many  enigmas  in  life.  There  are  dark 
vicissitudes  whose  meaning  we  seek  to  penetrate.  Who  can  understand  why  pain 
falls  on  the  innocent,  and,  as  it  sometimes  seems,  the  heaviest  penalty  on  those  who 
have  not  sinned  the  most?  Who  can  explain  why  disease  should  descend  from 
generation  to  generation  ?  Two  things  need  to  be  remembered,  which,  if  they  do  not 
give  answers  to  these  hard  questions,  yet  lift  somewhat  their  burden.  1.  Love  must 
seek  the  highest  good.  The  highest  good  is  greatness,  purity,  goodness  of  character. 
The  highest  good  is  therefore  spiritual,  not  physical,  not  intellectual.  Now,  the  bulk 
of  the  difficult  questions  touch  physical  or  intellectual  problems.  The  iUs  that  flesh 
is  heir  to  and  the  mental  perplexities  awakened  by  strange  questions  press  heaviest 
upon  us.  But  meanwhile  the  opportunities  of  goodness,  kindness,  and  truth  lie  at 
our  door.  It  is  not  possible  to  escape  the  boundaries  of  the  flesh  or  to  break  the 
bars  of  thought ;  but  it  is  possible  to  cherish  good  and  loving  thoughts.  Body  and 
mind  may  complain  that  their  scope  is  limited,  but  love's  hour  is  always  present. 
Now,  love's  scope  is  best  seen  in  hours  of  trial  and  pain.  Then  the  capricious  and 
wayward  woman  becomes  a  ministering  angel.  Similarly  the  nobler  qualities  of 
character  reveal  themselves  in  hours  of  emergency  and  danger.  Courage  asserts 
itself  in  the  hour  of  peril — on  the  battlefield  and  on  the  sinking  deck  ;  humanity  and 
presence  of  mind  in  the  midst  of  panic  and  risk — in  the  outbreaking  of  the  fire  or  in 
the  hospital  ward.  Does  it  not  seem  as  though  the  finer  aspects  of  character  would 
have  had  little  scope  except  in  a  world  whei'e  pain  and  peril  existed  ?  Now  these 
finer  qualities  do  not  appear  only  in  moments  of  sudden  heroism.  They  are  some- 
times and  more  often  seen  in  the  quiet  fidelity  and  prolonged  patience  of  love,  in  the 
ministry  of  devoted  and  self-denying  lives.  Lifelong  tests  are  more  severe,  though 
perhaps  not  so  brilliant,  as  momentary  tests.  And  it  is  on  fields  like  these  that 
tenderness  and  pity  and  such  high  qualities  have  shown  themselves.  As  stars  on 
the  background  of  the  midnight  sky,  the  higher  qualities  of  human  nature  have  been 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  849 

seen  among  the  dark  mysteries  of  life.  When  we  remember,  then,  that  dark  things 
not  only  reveal  but  call  forth  the  better  and  higher  dispositions  of  man,  may  we  not 
see  that  the  burden  of  some  perplexing  problems  is  somewhat  lightened  ?  Love  seeks 
the  highest  good,  and  therefore  love  sets  out  the  field  of  life  in  such  a  sort  that  the 
best  qualities  of  life  may  be  called  forth.  2.  Love  seeks  the  freest  good.  God,  who 
loves  freely,  wants  our  love  as  freely  in  return.  He  therefore  will  not  enforce  our 
love  or  compel  our  faith.  The  possession  of  freedom  is  a  responsibility  which  plays 
a  part  in  human  education.  But  freedom  is  not  the  same  as  immunity  from 
conditions.  When  we  play  the  game,  we  are  free  to  play  our  own  game,  but 
according  to  the  rules.  Life  is  like  a  game  of  chess.  We  may  move  our  pieces 
where  we  please,  but  each  piece  has  its  assigned,  move.  Out  of  the  combination  of 
our  freedom  and  the  fixed  powers  of  the  men  come  our  discipline  and  skill  in  playing 
the  game.  The  laws  of  life  are  Uke  the  rules  of  the  game.  Break  the  chess  rules 
and  we  only  provoke  disappointment.  Break  the  laws  of  life  and  we  only  meet  grief. 
It  is  no  part  of  true  love,  therefore,  to  relax  laws  or  alter  rules  in  order  to  please  our 
fancy.  The  character  could  not  ripen  save  under  clear  and  well-defined  conditions 
which  gave  scope  to  freedom  and  yet  checked  caprice.  Love  which  is  weak  and 
foolish  tries  to  spare  its  children  pain.  Love  which  is  wise  and  strong  knows  that 
experience  must  play  a  large,  perhaps  the  largest,  share  in  education.  To  check  the 
education  by  experience  is  often  to  tamper  with  the  freedom.  The  fulness  of  life's 
lesson  is  not  otherwise  learned.  And  God,  who  is  Love,  leaves  His  children  to  learn 
through  experience.  His  laws  safeguard  much  and  yet  provide  the  sphere  of  educa- 
tion. It  needs,  however,  an  eye  akin  with  God's  to  perceive  His  will  and  His 
way.  Then,  when  we  perceive  how  love  is  at  the  back  of  all  life's  discipline  and 
pain,  we  are  like  those  who  have  hold  of  the  silver  thread  which  leads  through 
the  labyrinth.  We  may  not  understand  all,  but  we  know  that  the  thread  of 
which  we  have  hold  will  lead  us  to  the  heart  of  the  mystery.  We  know  that  all 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God.  ell  Bp-  Boyd  Carpenter.) 
God  is  love : — I.  By  what  right  of  reason  do  we  say  "  G6i>  is  love  "  ?  One  only 
caution  we  must  bear  in  mind,  that  in  the  very  necessity  of  the  case  the  terms  we 
use  are  inadequate ;  they  convey  considerably  less  than  the  reality  for  which  they 
stand.  When  we  speak  of  the  mind,  will,  or  heart  of  God,  we  know  all  the  while 
that  the  terms  "  mind,'  "  will,"  and  "  heart "  are  to  be  understood  in  a  sense 
infinitely  higher  than  that  in  which  we  speak  of  the  mind,  will,  and  heart  of  man. 
With  this  caution,  let  us  proceed  at  once  to  the  consideration  of  the  question.  By 
what  right  of  reason  do  we  say  that  God  is  love  ?  This  is  the  last  step  of  a  climax 
of  sound  reasoning  of  which  the  following  is  an  outline.  Having  granted  the 
existence  of  a  God,  we  infer  some  of  His  attributes  from  objects  which  we  perceive, 
and  which  we  call  His  "works."  These,  for  convenience,  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes — the  phenomena  of  the  outer  world  and  the  phenomena  of  human  nature. 
Both  must  be  observed  in  order  to  form  any  approximately  true  conception  of  Him 
who  is  the  cause  of  both.  The  observation  of  the  outer  world  by  itself,  e.g.,  would 
furnish  little  if  any  conception  of  the  moral  attributes  of  God.  All  it  teaches  is 
the  presence  and  activity  of  vast  forces  acting  not  in  an  irregular  and  chaotic,  but 
in  an  orderly  and  steadfast  manner  according  to  fixed  principles  or  laws.  The 
recognition  of  these  laws  compels  us  to  call  their  author  intelligent,  and  to 
attribute  to  Him  mind  or  reason.  But  how  do  we  know  anything  about  mind  or 
reason  except  through  the  previous  observation  of  a  part  of  our  own  human 
nature  ?  We  first  feel  and  know  what  reason,  mind,  or  intelligence  is  in  ourselves, 
and  then  we  recognise  it  on  a  grander  scale  in  the  production,  preservation,  and 
control  of  the  outer  world.  Thus  we  get  hold  of  the  first  attribute  of  God — 
intelligence.  Next  we  find  in  ourselves  what  we  call  the  moral  sense.  This  must 
not  be  confounded,  as  it  too  often  is,  with  the  list  of  duties  to  be  done  and  of  evil 
things  to  be  not  done.  The  conscience  is  the  sense  of  being  bound  to  do  what  we  know 
or  believe  to  be  right,  and  not  to  do  what  we  know  to  be  wrong.  This  moral  sense 
has  been  universally  associated  with  the  idea  that  our  Creator  or  Divine  Euler  is 
on  the  side  of  our  consciences.  Thus  we  arrive  at  once  at  the  second  attribute  of 
God,  viz..  His  righteousness.  But  here  again  we  no  more  dream  of  limiting  His 
righteousness  to  our  small  conceptions  and  experience  of  it  than  of  limiting  His 
intelligence  to  our  small  conceptions  and  experience  of  mind.  If  man  is  intelligent 
and  moTsl,  a  fortiori  God  must  be  intelligent.  The  foregoing  argument  leads  at 
once  to  the  consideration  of  another  and  nobler  feature  in  man's  nature,  viz.,  his 
love.  That  this  is  a  higher  and  nobler  faculty  than  the  reason,  and  even  higher  than 
the  conscience,  is  universally  admitted.     Love  is  conscience  in  an  ecstacy ;  it  is  a 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

perfect  enthusiasm  of  goodness,  because  it  does  not  stop  to  reason  with  itself  and 
to  balance  the  pros  and  cons  of  right  and  wrong,  but  with  eager  bound  rushes  to  ita 
goal — the  slave  of  inspiration.  Conscience  says,  "Do  this  because  it  is  right"; 
love  says,  "  I  vdll  do  this  for  you."  Among  the  faculties  of  man  lovo  holds  the 
highest  place.  It  is  the  instinct  of  dohig  the  best  possible  good.  While  reason  is 
our  guide  to  what  our  duty  is,  and  conscience  is  our  authority  for  doing  it,  love 
leaps  into  the  act  without  needing  any  sanction  at  all.  I  have,  then,  only  to  urge 
that  as  man  is  the  noblest  product  known  to  us  in  the  universe,  and  as  love  is  the 
noblest  part  of  man,  so  we  must  infer  that  God  must  be  at  least  as  loving  as  the 
most  loving  of  men.  Thus  we  reach  a  third  attribute  and  say  "  God  is  love."  He 
may  be,  and  to  our  adoring  eyes  of  faith  He  surely  is,  far  and  high  exalted  above 
His  noblest  creature :  but  less  than  that  He  cannot  be.     11.  On  what  geodnd  op 

EXPERIENCE    HAVE   WE   ANY  EIGHT  TO  ASSUME  THAT  THERE  IS  ANY  COMMUNITY  OF  NATURE 

BETWEEN  OUK  HIGHEST  SELVES  AND  GoD?  The  first  and  most  obvious  ground  is  the 
knowledge  gained  by  experience  that  we  are  possessed  of  a  twofold  nature,  one  the 
material,  and  the  other,  which,  for  want  of  a  better  term,  we  call  the  spiritual. 
Under  the  spiritual  are  of  course  included  thought,  conscience,  and  emotion. 
Possessing  this  spiritual  nature  as  human  beings  we  naturally  believe  in  its  likeness 
to,  if  not  identity  with,  the  nature  of  Him  who  is  the  Author  and  cause  of  all. 
The  highest  outcome  of  theological  speculation  is  "  God  is  a  Spirit,"  by  which  we 
mean  emphatically  to  deny  that  He  is  matter  and  has  dimensions  and  can  be 
located  in  space  ;  and  emphatically  to  affirm  that,  like  thought  itself,  He  is  distinct 
from  matter  and  does  not  share  its  properties  or  limitations.  God  is  Spirit  and 
we  are  spirit  too.  But  our  ground  of  experience  is  wider  and  deeper  still  when  we 
view  the  obvious  purpose  for  which  the  spiritual  part  of  our  natm'e  is  given.  That 
purpose  includes  the  attainments  of  all  kinds  of  knowledge — knowledge  of  the 
world  outside  of  us,  and  knowledge  of  ourselves,  and  as  a  fruit  of  our  honest 
search,  a  knowledge  of  God.  We  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the  faculty  by 
which  it  is  possible  to  perceive  and  understand  a  given  law  must  be  similar  to  the 
faculty  by  which  the  law  was  ordained.  So  by  experience  of  scientific  knowledge 
we  prove  some  degree  of  community  of  nature  between  ourselves  and  the  Author 
of  the  world  around  us.  Much  more  do  we  discern  this,  when  we  go  higher  still 
in  the  range  of  our  spiritual  nature.  I  wUl  not  expatiate  on  the  functions  of 
conscience  and  of  love  which  are  spiritual  faculties  bestowed  for  the  moral 
government  of  ourselves  and  of  the  race  and  for  the  supreme  and  noblest  kind 
of  happiness  attainable  on  earth.  In  these  regions  of  experience  we  discern  the 
moral  nature  of  Him  who  endowed  us  with  a  moral  nature ;  and  stiU  more  clearly 
and  blissfully  do  we  discern  the  Divine  love,  f uU  of  compassion  and  mercy,  in  the 
human  love  wherewith  He  has  blest  our  own  hearts.  If  we  may  with  any  reason 
ascribe  to  Him  the  faculty  of  knowledge,  with  much  greater  reason  may  we 
assure  ourselves  that  He  is  infinite  goodness  and  infinite  love.  (C  Voysey.) 
The  revealed  Deity  : — There  is  a  manner  of  Divinity  in  such  a  saying  as  this  1  It 
prepossesses  the  mind  in  favour  of  its  supernal  origin.  And  happy  is  it  for 
us  if  such  a  statement  as  this — the  very  identification  of  the  Godhead — fully 
agrees  with  our  most  fixed  sentiments  and  easily  coalesces  with  our  most  inti- 
mate feelings.  For  it  is  averse  from  aU  that  man,  left  to  his  mere  reason  and 
arguing  upon  his  naked  information,  ever  entertained.  Enter  the  Pagan  temple, 
olden  or  extant.  How  merciless,  how  vindictive,  how  greedy  of  victims,  how 
defiled  with  blood-stains,  are  the  idols  of  alll  These  are  but  the  speculations  we 
have  formed  of  the  Almighty  Being  who  has  made  us.  Our  mind  hates  its  own 
creations,  but  cannot  paint  them  in  any  fairer  hues.  In  opposition  to  these  con- 
jectures of  an  unconscious  negligence  and  of  a  sanguinary  malignity,  God  is  love. 
And  do  you  not  feel  the  tender  distinctiveness  of  this  designation  ?  It  is  not  an 
appellative,  it  is  not  an  epithet,  it  is  not  a  quality.  It  is  not  only  His  name  and 
His  memorial.    It  is  His  nature  1     It  is  His  being  1     It  is  Himself  1     I.  Love  may 

BB   CONSIDERED    TO    SUBSIST    IN    THE    DiVINE    NATURE    UNDER   THE    FOLLOWING    MODIfl- 

CATI0N8.  1.  Goodness.  This  is  the  disposition  to  communicate  happiness.  It 
displays  its  earliest  effect  in  creating  objects  for  itself.  It  caUs  into  existence  all 
whom  it  wills  to  bless.  It  adapts  them  to  the  means  of  enjoyment  provided  for 
them.  2.  Complacency.  This  is  the  disposition  which  dwells  in  the  mind  of  the 
Framer  of  all  things  to  delight  in  whatever  He  has  done.  His  works  are  great, 
and  reflect  back  upon  Him,  in  proportion  to  their  kind  and  purpose,  all  Hia 
different  perfections.  3.  This  Love  not  only  includes  goodness  and  complacency, 
but,  as  it  now  exists,  and  is  now  revealed,  it  takes  the  form  of  "  the  kindness  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN,  351 

philanthropy  of  God  our  Saviour."  This  supposes  certain  dispositions  of  favour 
towards  sinful  men.  (1)  Forbearance.  This  is  not  security  from  punishment — it 
still  is  imminent  and  due — but  such  delay  that,  if  it  be  improved,  the  punishment 
may  be  wholly  averted.  (2)  Grace.  This  opposes  every  idea  of  claim  or  worth  in 
them  to  whom  it  is  extended,  regarding  only  their  total  demerit.  (3)  Mercy.  This 
contemplates  simply  moral  obnoxiousness  and  liability,  or  guilt,  meeting  it  with 
acts  which  may  remove  it,  as  also  by  influences  that  may  subdue  the  depravity 
from  which  that  exposure  to  punishment  or  that  guilt  could  alone  arise. 
(4)  Compassion.  This  concerns  itself  with  the  misery  and  ruin  which  sin  entails, 
and  furnishes,  in  the  room  of  these  evil  consequences,  peace  and  joy  and  hope, 
everlasting  consolation  and  eternal  life.     II.  In  dwelling  upon  Divine  love  in  this 

OKDER  OF  ITS  PARTICULAK  AFFECTIONS  AND  OPERATIONS,  SOME  IMPORTANT  DOCTRINES  OF 

Scripture  MUST  BE  MAINTAINED.  1.  God  is  love,  contemplated  in  Trinity.  "Behold, 
what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us!"  "Ye  know  the  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  The  love  of  the  Spirit."  "  He  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne."  "The  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne."  "The  seven-fold  Spirit 
before  the  throne."  2.  God  is  love,  regarded  in  Covenant.  A  purpose  is  revealed 
as  reigning  in  the  Uncreated  Mind  which  supposes  engagements  and  stipulations. 
The  Father  seals  the  Mediator.  Jesus  is  sent.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given.  There 
is  inauguration  into  office.  There  is  subordination  of  trust.  3.  God  is  love, 
engaged  in  special  redeeming  acts.  To  save  the  sinner  He  has  not  only  to  will. 
An  immense  arrangement  must  be  contrived  and  established  to  give  that  will 
efficiency.  The  redemption  of  the  soul  is  most  precious  and  most  difficult.  It  can 
be  saved,  but  merely  because  with  God  all  things  are  possible.  He  only  can  save  it 
by  means  absolutely  infinite.  III.  A  necessary  conception  of  Divine  love  is, 
THAT  it  is  the  LOVE  OF  GoD  PRIMARILY  TO  HiMSELF.  1.  The  Original  law  illus- 
trates this  truth  by  presuming  that  He  is  love.  For  if  this  be  "  the  first  and  great 
commandment,  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,"  then  those 
qualities  are  to  be  found  in  Him  which  should  be  thus  esteemed.  2.  All  the  Divine 
perfections  resolve  themselves  into  love.  If  God  were  not  faithful,  righteous,  holy, 
He  could  not  be  love :  for  that  cannot  be  love  which  must  only  provoke  whatever 
is  contrary  to  itself.  We,  therefore,  knowing  that  God  is  love  because  He  is  most 
holy,  cry  to  Him,  "  How  excellent  is  Thy  loving-kindness  !  "  "  How  great  is  His 
goodness,  and  how  great  is  His  beauty  !  "  3.  If  God  be  love,  He  cannot  introduce, 
nor  act  upon,  any  opposite  principle.  He  is  love  in  being  the  adversary  of  aU  that 
interrupts  its  exercise  and  diffusion.  4.  The  love  of  God  cannot,  therefore,  be 
justly  disputed  if  He  leave  unremitted  the  consequences  of  sin.  To  carry  out  a 
benevolent  plan  must  be  as  benevolent  as  the  plan  itself.  Any  act  of  mercy,  being 
extra-judicial,  being  of  a  different  order  from  the  case  supposed,  cannot  enter  into 
our  present  vindication   of  essential  love.     IV.  Let  us  now  attempt  to  refute 

CERTAIN    objections   WHICH   ARE    COMMONLY   RAISED  AGAINST    THE    THEME    OF  THE  TEXT. 

1.  God  was  pleased  to  create  man  an  intelligent  and  reasonable  being.  2.  God 
could  not  endow  a  creature  with  such  mental  gifts  without  including  in  them  a 
natural  liberty.  3.  God  must,  in  the  event  of  such  a  creation,  hold  the  subject  of 
it  responsible  for  the  exercise  of  his  liberty.  4.  God  must,  in  rendering  the 
creature  accountable,  promulgate  a  law.  5.  God  has  so  constituted  us  that  we 
must  always  feel  that  we  are  free.  6.  God  can  only  treat  the  individual  creature 
in  agreement  with  the  general  welfare.  7.  God  has  intimated  to  us  that  our 
planet-dwelling  does  not  include  all  His  intelligent  family,  and  that  His  system 
towards  us  is  very  imperfectly  developed.  8.  God  may  not  be  blamed  for  the  con- 
sequences which  He  has  forewarned,  which  are  wilfully  incurred,  and  which  He 
has  given  His  creatures  the  fullest  liberty,  and  urged  them  by  the  strongest  remon- 
strance, to  avoid.  V.  Let  us  now  exhibit  the  monuments  and  demonstrations  of 
THIS  LOVE.  The  love  of  God  in  the  gift,  the  humanity,  and  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ,  stands  not  apart  from  efficient  results.  There  is  no  scheme  of  good  but  it 
avails  to  uphold  and  operates  to  secure.  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  heart  of 
God  : — The  nearest  approach  to  a  definition  of  the  Deity  is  found  in  the  sayings, 
"  God  is  Spirit,"  "  God  is  Light,"  "  God  is  Love."  The  last  saying  declares  to  us 
that,  considered  in  relation  to  moral  beings,  God's  essential  nature  is  love — that 
the  Eternal  has  a  heart,  and  is  not  without  sensibilities  and  emotions.  Thus  God 
meets  the  deep  yearnings  of  our  hearts  for  a  personal  love  to  respond  to  our  own. 
We  must  have  "something  to  love,  to  clasp  affection's  tendrils  round."  If  there 
were  nothing  in  God  to  which  our  hearts  could  appeal,  we  should  retire  within  our- 
selves and  become  encased  in  icy  selfishness.    A  biting  frost  would  wither  our 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

affections,  and  each  soul  would  become  like  a  barren  tree,  having  but  a  starved 
existence  in  solitude  and  shade.  Now,  that  we  may  know  that  in  this  case  the  wish 
is  not  father  to  the  thought,  let  us  listen  while  reason,  Scripture,  and  experience 
utter  their  joint  protest  against  the  notion  that  God  is  without  feeling.  Eeason 
compels  us  to  conclude  that  all  the  love  in  the  universe  is  Divine  in  its  origin,  and 
that  He  who  is  the  source  of  love  must  Himself  possess  it.  We  are  forced  to  think 
that,  as  the  sap  in  branch  and  leaf  has  all  flowed  up  from  the  roots,  so  all  those 
streams  of  beautiful  affection  which  redeem  human  life  from  barrenness  have 
gushed  warm  from  the  heart  of  God.  As  the  sea  is  the  source  from  which  every 
blade  of  grass  gets  its  own  drop  of  dew,  and  the  thirsty  earth  gets  refreshment 
through  gentle  rains,  so  all  kindliness,  generous  impulses,  beneficent  ministries 
that  gladden  the  parched  and  weary  hearts  of  men,  have  their  origin  in  that  "  ocean 
of  love  without  bottom  or  shore,"  which  lies  in  the  depths  of  the  nature  of  God. 
As  every  ray  of  Ught  that  warms  the  atmosphere  and  makes  the  day  beams  from 
the  face  of  the  sun,  so  aU  the  glow  and  beauty  that  are  felt  and  seen  in  fiUal 
affection  and  the  amenity  of  family  life,  in  leal-hearted  friendship  and  goodwill 
amongst  men,  are  the  reflection  of  the  light  of  love  that  streams  from  our  God  in 
the  sky.  Some  may,  however,  object  that  it  is  profane  to  speak  of  God's  love  as  a 
passion.  But  the  text  loses  its  charm  if  the  word  "  love "  does  not  mean  in  it 
what  it  means  when  applied  to  ourselves.  Besides,  let  it  be  remembered  that  the 
passions  are  not  in  themselves  sinful ;  it  is  the  use  they  are  put  to,  and  the  objects 
upon  which  they  are  expended,  that  determines  whether  or  not  they  should  be 
called  sinful.  Scripture  shows  that  in  God  is  a  love  which  not  only  lives  while  it  is 
reciprocated,  but  survives  rebuffs,  and  it  is  not  quenched  by  ingratitude.  His  is  a 
love  that  "  suffereth  long  and  is  kind,  is  not  easily  provoked,  beareth  all  things,  and 
never  faileth."  Experience  unites  with  reason  and  Scripture  to  emphasise  the 
text.  We  have  had  many  proofs  that  God  is  interested  in  our  welfare,  and  feels 
intensely  for  us.  There  have  been  times  when  we  have  felt  the  rapture  of  living, 
and  there  were  lyric  poems  within  us  struggling  for  expression.  In  such  seasons 
the  truth  has  been  borne  in  upon  us  that  our  creation  was  an  act  of  pure  benevo- 
lence— an  expression  of  the  Creator's  love.  And  when  the  sunshine  gave  place  to 
shade,  and  rapture  to  pain,  our  God  caused  us  to  nestle  in  His  arms,  and  charmed 
our  griefs  to  rest.  (Jas.  T.  East.)  The  love  of  God  revealed  by  Jesus  Christ : — 
There  was  a  day  in  history  when  a  man  of  genius  discovered  the  law  of  attraction 
which  Goimects  the  worlds.  Through  the  unlimited  course  of  ages  that  law  had 
always  existed,  ever  the  same,  ever  unaltered,  ever  acting,  before  men  had  learned 
to  spell  its  familiar  formula.  What  attraction  is  in  the  physical  world,  such  is  the 
love  of  God  in  the  moral  world.  God  is  immutable.  God  is  love.  He  has  ever 
been  so.  But  there  was  a  day  when  that  love  of  God  was  revealed  to  mankind  by 
Jesus  Christ,  and  it  is  through  Him  alone  that  the  world  has  known  it.  I.  The  first 
feature  of  the  love  of  Christ  for  man  is  its  disinterestkdness.  It  is  not  for  Himself, 
but  for  them  that  He  loves  them.  II.  I  remark  next  that  the  love  of  Christ  for  man- 
kind is  VOID  OF  ILLUSION.  He  knew  what  the  disciples  were;  nevertheless,  such  as  they 
were.  He  loved  them.  IH.  A  third  feature  of  the  love  of  Christ  for  His  own  is 
FAITHFULNESS.  IV.  The  lovc  of  Jesus  for  His  own  is  a  sanctiftino  love.  There  are 
affections  which  weaken,  enervate,  and  degrade  the  soul.  Love  is  the  most  energetic 
auxiliary  of  the  will.  V.  The  love  of  Christ  is  universal.  The  heart  that  beats 
in  His  breast  is  that  of  the  High-priest  of  mankind.  VI.  And  nevertheless,  that 
universal  love  is  at  the  same  time  an  individual  love.  (E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The 
love  of  God  : — All  men  believe  in  the  existence  of  God.  But  what  is  God  or  what 
God  is,  is  a  question  differently  answered.  As  many  words  are  substituted  for  the 
predicate  as  there  are  systems,  if  not  men.  I.  An  explanation  of  the  text.  "  God 
is  love,"  says  John.  John  does  not  mean  that  love  is  the  essence  of  Deity — the 
substratum  of  all  His  moral  character  ;  or  that  aU  the  attributes  of  God  are  simply 
modifications  of  His  love,  as  the  different  colours  of  the  rainbow  are  simply  modifi- 
cations of  the  pure  sunray,  or  as  light  itself  and  heat  and  sound  are  simply 
modifications  of  the  same  material  element.  He  does  not  mean  that  God  is  love, 
to  the  exclusion  of  justice,  holiness,  or  truth.  I  take  the  text  to  mean  that  the 
love  of  God  is  manifested  in  a  most  striking  manner  in  the  history  of  our  world; 
but  most  of  all  in  the  subject  which  the  apostle  has  been  discussing — the  salvation 
of  the  lost  and  sinful  through  the  mediation  of  Christ.  II.  A  demonstration  op 
ITS  truth.  The  first  development  of  individual  character  is  thought.  Thought 
ever  precedes  action,  or  a  mental  act  is  prior  to  a  physical  one.  To  understand, 
then,  the  Divine  character,  we  are  led  first  to  the  Divine  thoughts  or  plans,  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  353 

then  to  the  Divine  actions  or  the  development  of  those  plans.  God's  actions  may 
be  momentary  or  continuous.  The  momentary  is  seen  in  creation,  and  the  con- 
tinuous in  the  government  of  the  world  or  Providence.  In  aU  these  various 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  character,  we  find  evidence  of  the  text,  "  God  is  love." 
Consider,  then — First :  The  plans  or  thoughts  of  God.  God's  works  were  known 
to  Him  from  eternity.  He  never  had  any  need  to  plan  or  contrive.  He  ever 
knew  what  was  best,  how  He  should  act,  and  what  He  should  do,  without  any 
previous  meditation  or  thought.  We  cannot  see  these  thoughts  or  plans  in  the 
Divine  mind ;  we  see  them  as  they  are  developed,  in  time.  Secondly  :  The  actions 
or  works  of  God.  What  could  have  been  the  primary  object  which  the  Creator 
had  in  view  in  the  works  of  creation  ?     The  replies  to  these  questions  are  three — 

(1)  That  God's  chief  end  in  creation  was  the  securing  of  His  own  glory.  The 
great  objection  to  this  solution  of  the  question  is,  that  it  exhibits  the  Divine  Being 
as  more  selfish  than  many  human  creatures.  Besides,  this  supposition  exhibits 
God  in  a  way  in  which  He  was  not  exhibited  by  Jesus.  Oui-  Saviour  never  did,  or 
said,  anything  to  show  His  own  greatness  as  a  purpose.  But,  granting  that  this 
■was  the  chief  purpose  of  creation,  the  showing  of  God's  glory,  and  the  securing  of 
His  praise,  it  still  follows  that  the  works  of  nature  must  be  a  manifestation  of  His 
love.  The  glory  of  God  is  inseparably  connected  with  His  love.  Take  away  the 
love  of  God,  His  disposition  to  make  His  creatures  happy,  and  what  does  He 
become  ?  Could  any  moral  creature  give  Him  praise  ?  If  the  Divine  Being  had  no 
love  He  could  not  care  whether  they  were  happy  or  miserable.  He  would  thus 
regard  pain  and  pleasure,  happiness  and  misery,  with  indifference  at  least ;  or, 
maybe,  identical.  So  that  if  the  Governor  of  the  universe  be  devoid  of  the  attri- 
bute of  love.  He  cannot  be  depended  upon  for  the  execution  of  justice ;  and  a 
character  in  which  justice  and  love  form  no  essential  elements  caimot  be  esteemed 
glorious   by  any   intelligent  being.     Glory   and  love   are  inseparably  connected. 

(2)  Take  the  next  view  of  the  chief  purpose  of  creation,  viz.,  that  it  was  to  secure 
the  exhibition  of  moral  good,  or  the  development  of  genuine  virtue.  The  question 
then  is,  What  is  moral  good — genuine  virtue  ?  It  is  justice,  truth,  holiness,  love. 
Take  away  any,  and  you  have  destroyed  the  symmetry  and  beauty  of  the  whole. 
Take  away  love,  and  a  body  without  a  soul  is  left  behind.  The  glory  has  departed, 
and  the  very  life  is  gone.  (3)  The  next  supposition  is  that  the  chief  end  of 
creation  was  the  production  and  supply  of  creature  happiness.  The  Divine  Being 
was  so  happy  in  Himself  that  He  made  this  vast  universe.  A  miserly,  yet  happy, 
being  is  an  impossibility.  A  happy  soul  is  necessarily  communicative.  But 
creation  generally  shows  the  love  of  God.  It  shines  on  every  gleaming  page. 
But  the  body,  with  all  its  senses,  is  only  a  means  to  an  end.  It  is  only  the  medium 
of  conveying  impressions  to  the  mind  within,  and  thus  secure  the  development  of 
the  soul  and  the  gradual  expansion  of  its  dormant  powers.  But  as  an  instrument 
it  is  without  its  equal.  Every  change  in  the  external  world  is  faithfully  conveyed 
to  the  mind  within,  and  body  and  soul  can  participate  in  the  joys  and  sorrows  of 
each  other.  Every  pleasure  is  thus  doubled  to  man.  He  enjoys  it  first  as  to  his. 
body,  his  animal  nature,  and  then  as  to  his  soul.  Light  and  colour  are  pleasant  to 
the  eye,  as  sound  is  to  the  ear,  as  mere  sensations  in  reference  to  the  organisms 
which  they  affect,  and  apart  from  the  perception  of  them  by  the  intellect  and  the 
feeling  of  them  by  the  heart.  It  is  thus  that  the  freshness  of  the  gale  and  the 
fragrance  of  the  flower  can  be  enjoyed  by  the  soul  as  perceptions  as  weU  as  by 
the  body  as  sensations.  But  look  at  the  mind  as  an  entity  apart  from  its  special 
relation  to  a  material  form.  Mind!  Is  not  this  the  glory  of  the  universe,  the 
image  of  God  ?  The  mind  can  study  the  material  and  the  spiritual,  the  creature 
and  the  uncreated.  Creation  without  mind  is  a  body  without  soul,  a  dead  form 
■without  vitality.  Matter  cannot  think  or  study.  One  nebula  cannot  see  the  glory 
of  another  as  it  is  resolved  to  its  constituent  stars.  But  mind  can  study  all,  and 
in  aU  find  pleasure  and  enjoyment.  We  are  often  told  of  the  "  verdant  earth,"  the 
"  azure  sky,"  the  thundering  crash  of  the  Niagara's  falls,  the  beautiful  plains  of 
Italy.  Is  this  true  information  ?  The  beast  of  the  field  sees  not  the  beauty  of  the 
flower.  Where  is  the  difference  ?  nature  is  the  same  to  all.  The  beauty  and  the 
glory  of  all  are  in  the  soul  that  looks  and  feels  and  is  enraptured.  The  mind  of 
man  has  been  so  wonderfully  constructed,  too,  that  he  can  fiiid  true  enjoyment  in 
the  moral  and  the  religious,  in  holy  living  and  in  praising  God,  and  that,  too,  when 
his  day  of  earthly  toil  is  ended,  and  the  fraU  body  which  was  so  useful  to  him  is 
mouldering  in  the  dust.  Government  in  every  case  impUes  two  things — punishment 
and  reward.     God  planned  the  world ;  He  also  made  it  and  governs  it.    Let  us 

23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

consider  them  in  order.     First :  That  the  love  of  God  is  manifested  in  the  exercise 
of  justice,  or  in  the  punishment  of  sin.     It  has  been  proved  that  where  there  is  no 
love  there  can  be  no  justice.     Is  it  equally  true  that  where  there  is  no  justice  there 
cannot  be  love  in  its  highest  form  ?     Partiality  or  favouritism,  without  reference  to 
personal   merit,  is  a  mark  of  weakness,  which  is  common   in   the   human,   but 
impossible  in  the  Divine.     True  love,  or  love  in  its  highest  or  Divine  form,  excludes 
all  partiality.     Men  must  be  treated  according  to  their  actions.    If  the  thief  and  the 
honest  man,  the  murderer  and  the  philanthropist,  were  all  treated  alike,  I  ask  what 
would  be  the  impression  made  upon  the  mind  of  any  rational  being  ?     Would  not 
every  man  look  upon  such  a  ruler  with  contempt,  and  turn  from  him  with  disgust  ? 
Apart  from  justice,  goodness  is  impossible.     If,  therefore,  the  Supreme  Euler  of 
the  universe  is  to  be  respected  by  intelligent  beings,  and  loved  for  His  wisdom  and 
moral  excellence.  He  must  vindicate  the  right  and  banish  the  evil-doer.     The  con- 
clusion is  evident,  viz.,  that  the  love  of  God  is  as  truly  seen  in  the  punishment  of 
the  wicked  as  in  the  salvation  of  the  good,  as  truly  in  the  pains  of  hell  as  in  the 
joys  of  heaven.     Secondly :  That  the  love  of  God  is  manifested  in  the  exercise  of 
His  mercy,   or  in  the  salvation  of   the  godly.     [Evan  Leicis,  B.A.)         He  that 
dwelleth  in  love   dwelleth  in  God. — Dwelling  in  love : — It  is  a  very  strong  and 
eloquent  term,  "  to  dwell  in  love " — a  home  of  love.     And  the  promise  of  that 
home  of  love  is  more  wonderful  still — that  God  shall  be  our  home.     And  then 
more  stupendous  beyond  it — and  we  shall  be  God's  home.     What  is  it  to  "  dwell  in 
love "  ?     The  first  thing,  it  is  quite  clear,  is  that  it  must  not  be  a  mere  negative 
state.    It  is  not  only  that  there  be  no  dislikes,  no  variance.    Love  is  a  positive 
thing,   showing  itself  in  positive  feelings,  positive  words,  positive  acts,  without 
which  a  person  cannot  be  said  to  "  dwell  in  love."    Another  eminent  first  principle 
is  that  the  love  which  is  here  spoken  of  must  include  the  love  of  souls.    And, 
again,  all  love  is  one  love,  just  as  all  light  is  one  light.    It  is  not  love  in  God's 
sense  unless  it  be  a  reflection  of  God's  love  to  us.    You  must  begin  by  being  sure 
that  there  is  no  exception.    We  are  not  called  to  love  all  equally— our  Lord  Himself 
made  distinctions  in  His  love — but  there  should  be  no  one  who  does  not  feel  you 
friendly.     The  next  thing  to  which  the  very  language  of  the  text  leads  us  on  is 
home.     Our  home  should  be  a  home  of  love.     You  must  carry  a  word,  a  thought,  a 
look  of  gentleness  and  cheerfulness  and  tenderness  wherever  you  go.     This  may 
bring  love  into  every  room.     All  will  feel  it,  consciously  or  unconsciously.    It  will 
create  its  own  atmosphere.     The  Christ  in  you  may  make  everything  lovely.    But 
there  are  other  circumstances  of  life  which  every  man  has  to  occupy.     There  is  the 
Church,  and  in  the  Church  a  communion— a  blessed  communion  of  hearts,  visible 
and  invisible ;  and  to  "  dwell  in  love  "  is  to  go  up  and  down  continually  conversant 
with  that  union  of  saints.    And  the  world — the  world  about  us — is  a  world  which 
sadly  needs  our  love.    And  you  are  called,  and  your  privilege  is  to  go  about  in  the 
world  an  element  of  comfort.  Therefore  has  God  kindled  a  heavenly  fire  in  your  breast, 
that  He  may  warm  the  world  you  Uve  in !  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)         The  soul  dwelling  in 
God : — The  words  embody  one  of  the  manifold  aspects  of  the  Christian  ideal.    They 
suggest  the  inwardness  and  exaltation  of  Christian  life.     1.  The  love,  dwelling  in 
which  is  one  with  dwelling  in  God,  is  not  any  love  ;  it  is  not  all  that  passes  by  the 
name  of  love :  it  is  that  love  only  which  has  been  poured  forth  in  Christ  for  the 
salvation  of  the  world.     Our  readiest  entrance  into  the  experience  of  a  soul  medi- 
tating on  that  love  will  be  to  think  of  the  soul  as  a  disciple  bending  himself  to  the 
study  of  it,  brooding  over  it  as  a  vision  from  God,  and  telling  his  thoughts  and 
admirations  forth  upon  it  daily.    A  young  soul's  first  admiration  of  a  great  book, 
a  beautiful  picture,  or  a  heroic  deed,  draws  all  its  thoughts  towards  that  object. 
Far  more  is  this  the  case  with  a  mature  soul's  admiration  of  some  far-reaching 
principle  in  nature  or  art.    It  is  a  fascination.    A  great  principle  rises  like  an  Alp 
to  the  clear  heavens,  and  spreads  itself  in  countless  heights  and  hollows  over  the 
world  of  thought.    It  seems  to  become  more  and  more  fertile,  more  filled  with 
springs  and  streams  of  new  thought,  more  glorious  with  dawns  and  sunsets  of 
vision  and  human  hope,  the  oftener  it  is  visited.    Just  in  that  way  rises  overhead 
and  around  the  Christian  soul  the  vision,  the  thought  and  memory  of  the  love  of 
God  in  Christ.    It  is  a  real  home  for  the  spirit,  a  real  dwelling-place  for  thought. 
It  is  joy,  strength,  and  new  life  to  let  the  feelings  of  the  heart  flock  to  it.     The 
better  it  is  known  the  more  it  is  frequented  by  the  meditating  spirit.     It  is  the 
spirit's  promised  land,  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  where  the  King  of  the 
spirit  is  to  be  seen  in  His  beauty.     2.  But  the  love  in  which  in  this  way  the  soul 
finds  a  home  is  much  more  than  an  object  of  thought;  it  is  Ufe,  power,  law  as  well; 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  355 

it  is  the  life  that  stirs  at  the  heart  of  Providence,  the  power  that  causes  all  things  to 
work  together  for  good,  the  unseen  law  behind  events,  which  Christian  faith 
searches  for,  and  in  which  at  last,  in  sunshine  or  cloud,  it  rests.  In  this  very  way 
the  Divine  love  reveals  itself  to  us.  It  is  a  shelter  within  which  the  soul  finds 
safety.  In  this  sacred  enclosure  all  things  work  together  for  good :  even  things 
evil  do  not  come  to  us  with  power  to  hurt.  Nothing  can  hurt  or  destroy  in  the 
fastnesses  where  love  dwells,  not  even  sin  itself.  3.  But  now  we  have  come  to  that 
step  in  the  ascent  of  our  inquiry  at  which  we  are  face  to  face  with  the  wonder  we 
have  been  preparing  from  the  outset  to  understand.  It  is  not  enough  to  know  that 
a  soul,  by  meditation  and  trust,  can  dwell  in  love :  how  should  its  dwelling  in  love 
be  at  the  same  time  a  dwelling  in  God  ?  And  in  what  practical  sense  are  we  to 
receive  the  statement  that  a  soul  dwells  in  God  ?  The  love  of  God  in  which  the 
Christian  sph-it  dwells  is  not  an  impersonal  thing.  It  is  the  very  life  of  God,  the 
very  outflow  of  His  personahty.  Love  is  the  life  of  God  ia  the  same  sense  that  a 
mother's  love  is  the  outflow  of  a  mother's  life.  And  it  depends  as  much  on  its 
being  the  outflow  of  a  living  person  as  a  mother's  love  does.  Love  is  not  only  the 
element  in  which  God  works,  but  what  works  in  that  element  is  love.  The  motives, 
acts,  and  purposes  of  the  Divine  life  are  love.  Wherever  love  is,  God  is ;  wherever 
God  is,  He  manifests  Himself  by  love.  The  world  we  think  of  and  enter  when  we 
take  refuge  in  the  love  of  God  is  a  world  in  which  everything  is  of  God,  a  world 
whose  inhabitants  live  and  move  and  have  their  being  in  God.  What  breathes  in 
the  government,  what  pulses  in  its  acts,  what  is  expressed  in  its  laws,  is  the  very  life 
of  God.  It  is  this  which  makes  the  Divine  love  so  fitting  a  home  for  spiritual 
thought  and  a  refuge  for  spiritual  anxiety.  The  beauty  we  behold  in  the  love  is 
the  very  beauty  of  God :  the  strong  fortress  we  flee  to  is  God  Himself.  The  ever- 
lasting arms  to  which  the  soul  confides  itself  are  the  arms  of  God.  4.  But  now, 
having  ascended  this  third  step,  and  being  face  to  face  with  the  fact  that  our  life  is 
a  life  in  God,  that,  in  the  most  vital  sense,  we  are  encompassed  by  God,  we  are  like 
timid  people  who  find  themselves  for  the  fiirst  time  on  the  ridge  of  a  mighty 
mountain ;  we  tremble,  we  are  afraid  to  remain  in  the  position,  we  shrink  from  the 
transcendent  vision.  Is  it  an  ideal  from  every-day  life — for  life's  duties,  burdens, 
sorrows  ?  Or  is  it  a  dream  far  above  us — a  cloudland,  mocking  us  with  its  gorgeous 
colours?  I  can  best  reply  to  these  questions  by  recalling  two  or  three  facts 
familiar  to  our  Christian  life.  And  first  of  all  this,  that  the  life  we  are  called 
to  imitate  was  the  fulfilment  of  this  very  ideal.  Christ  dwelt  in  God.  I  will  take 
two  quahties  of  His  human  life — the  quahties  of  insight  and  power — and  I  will 
show  you  in  their  exercise  the  contact  and  influence  of  the  life  of  God.  Christ's 
insight  is  a  great  manifestation  of  a  human  life  dwelling  in  God.  He  not  only 
saw  as  God  sees,  but  what  He  saw  was  God.  He  saw  the  possibilities  of  better  life, 
the  gleams  of  the  buried  image  of  God,  the  ruins  of  the  once  glorious  temple  of  the 
soul,  the  witnesses  at  once  of  the  glory  from  which  the  souls  He  had  to  address 
had  fallen  and  of  the  Ufe  to  which  they  might  yet  be  brought  back.  The  same 
manifestation  of  a  human  life  dwelling  in  God  is  to  be  discovered  in  Christ's 
exercise  of  power.  It  was  to  foreshadow  the  great  future  awaiting  our  race,  as 
much  as  to  reveal  God,  that  His  miracles  were  wrought.  In  the  hght  of  this  fact 
we  see  at  once  how  the  life  from  which  they  proceeded  must  have  been  first  of  all 
a  human  life,  and  next  a  human  life  in  God.  The  hand  which  touched  the  blind 
to  sight  was  human,  but  it  would  have  been  powerless  if  it  had  not  moved  in  the 
stream  of  the  power  of  God.  The  words  of  tenderness  spoken  to  the  healed  were 
from  human  hps  ;  but  the  love  which  informed  them,  and  the  life  by  which  they 
had  power  to  heal,  were  Divine.  5.  I  observe  next  that  the  elements  in  Christ's 
life  which  reveal  this  dwelling  of  the  soul  in  God  are  present,  however  dimly,  in  all 
Christian  life.  Let  us  take  the  element  of  insight  first.  A  Christian  eye,  Uke  the 
Master's,  sees  possibilities  of  penitence,  of  well-doing,  and  salvation  in  outcasts, 
heathen  people,  and  embruted  slaves,  in  whom  other  eyes  see  nothing  but  material 
for  wrath  and  scorn.  Better  still,  this  eye  sees  Christ  in  every  human  being.  Aa 
with  insight  so  with  power.  We  are  set  to  subdue  the  evil  which  is  in  the  world. 
In  what  way,  other  than  by  the  descent  of  Divine  power  through  the  life  which 
God's  people  live,  can  this  evil  be  subdued,  and  the  wide  kingdom  it  usurps  be 
reclaimed  to  God  ?  In  this  work  our  action  at  every  step  must  be  miraculous,  for 
it  is  the  going  forth  from  us  of  an  influence  absolutely  invisible  and  spiritual, 
whose  force  to  be  effective  must  be  the  force  of  God.  6.  The  soul  who  is  dwelling 
in  love  is,  up  to  the  measure  of  his  indwelling,  already  in  possession  of  the  future. 
The  blessedness  which  awaits  us  in  the  future  is  but  the  unfolding  of  the  present 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

life  of  the  soul.     It  will  be  happiness  then  to  dwell  in  the  memory  of  Christ's  love, 

to  think  of  its  sacrifices,  its  beautiful  unfoldings,  and  its  mighty  victories.     But 

just  that  is  our  happiness,  as  redeemed  creatures,  now.     The  gladness  of  a  Ufe 

redeemed  is  the  first-fruits  of  the  fuller  gladness  of  heaven.     The  spiritual  insights 

to  which  dwelling  in  love  admits  us  are  foregleams  of  the  vision  we  shall  behold  in 

heaven.     The  Christian  activities,  tendernesses,  and  mercies  to  which  love  impels 

us,  are  earnests  of  the  as  yet  unimaginable  activities  and  tendernesses  of  the  world 

to  come.     The  very  form  of  our  earthly  experience  is  a  suggestion  and  type  of  the 

experience  of  the  future.     It  is  a  dwelling  in  God  here :  it  will  be  a  dwelling  in 

God  there.     I  must  not  conclude  without  saying  that  it  is  only  one  half  of  a 

twofold  mystery  I  have  attempted  to  set  before  you.     The  other  and  still  greater 

half  I  do  not  attempt  to  describe.     Who,  indeed,  is  sufficient  to  tell  how  God  enters 

into  us  and  dwells  in  us  ?    But  this  much  ought  to  be  said,  that  the  two  parts  of 

the  mystery  are  but  one  in  experience.     No  soul  can  dwell  in  love  into  whom  first 

the  Holy  Spirit  has  not  descended  bringing  the  love.     {A.  Macleod,  D.D.)        At 

home  in  God's  love  : — To  "  dwell "  in  love — what  is  this  ?    What  but  to  make  it 

our  element,  to  reside  in  it,  to  make  it  our  permanent  resting-place,  to  make  it  our 

home.     Home  is  the  place  where  we  dwell,  where  we  abide,  where  our  joys  nestle 

and  sing,  where  the  springs  of  our  comfort  are.     There  is  the  place.  No.  48  in  such 

a  street.     To  another  man  who  passes  by,  it  is  simply  a  house  ;  to  us  it  is  home. 

We  make  many  journeys  from  it,  north,  south,  east,  west ;  but  we  always  return 

home.     We  hurry  thither  when  the  cold  storm  beats  on  us,  and  we  run  with  as 

quick  steps  when  we  have  some  joy  to  tell  of.     How  well  we  know  that  iron  gate, 

that  step,  that  door ! — it  is  our  home.     Now  let  us  grasp  a  great  truth.     You, 

Christians,  are  to  make  your  home  in  the  love  of  God,  to  live  in  it  as  your  element, 

to  abide  in  it  as  your  rest,  to  dwell  in  it  as  the  home  of  your  soul.     Mark,  "  in 

the  love  of  God  "  :  not  the  dread — you  have  done  with  that  now  you  are  His 

children  ;  not  the  fear,  though  God  is  greatly  to  be  feared,  and  that  fear  of  God  is 

to  be  ever  before  your  eyes ;  not  the  favour,  though  that  is  your  glorious  heritage 

now;  but  the  love,  the  love.     (I.  E.  Page.)        Fellowship  loith  God  begets  love  : — 

We  must  be  like  God — all  love — love  to  those  who  have  hurt  us — love  even  to  our 

enemies.     How  can  we  grow  like  God  ?    By  thinking  of  Him,  and  keeping  near 

Him,  and  listening  to  Him,  and  talking  to  Him.     Why  does  the  sea  shine  in  the 

Bun  ?    Because  it  is  shone  upon.     The  little  hare  turns  white  when  it  is  taken  to 

the  arctic  regions  and  lives  in  the  snow.     We  must  live  in  God's  love.     Love 

is  the  reflection  of  God.     {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)        Living  in  love: — It  is   said 

that  all  organic  germs  cease  a  few  miles  out  at  sea.    Air  taken  from  the  streets 

or  the  warehouse  of   the  city  yields  large  numbers  of   these  germs.     The  air 

circulating  through  the  ship  in  dock  is  charged  with  them.     After  the  shore  has 

been  left  behind,  the  air  taken  from  the  deck  is  pure ;  but  they  are  still  found  in 

air  taken  from  the  hold.    After  a  few  days  at  sea  the  air  on  deck  and  in  the  hold 

alike  yields  no  trace  of  these  microscopic  spores  that  are  closely  connected  with 

disease.    Let  us  be  ever  breathing  the  spirit  of  God's  love.     Let  us  get  away  from 

the  din  and  dust  and  turmoil  of  life,  out  upon  that  infinite  sea  of  love  that  is 

•without  length  or  breadth  or  depth,  and  our  worst  faults  will  vanish  away,  and  we 

shall  by  and  by  stand  without  offence  in  the  presence  of  God's  glory.     (T.  G.  Selhy.) 

God  in  us  and  we  in  Him  : — How,  it  may  be  asked,  can  Christ  be  in  us,  and  we,  at 

the  same  time,  be  in  Him  ?    An  infidel  once  attempted  to  embarrass  an  unlettered 

but  very  intelligent  coloured  man  by  putting  to  him  this  very  question.     The  reply 

of  the  coloured  man  was  amusing,  but  very  impressive  and  pertinent.     "  Well,  dat 

are,"  he  replied,  "  don't  trouble  me.     You  take  dat  are  poker  and  put  it  in  de  fire. 

In  a  little  while  de  fire  will  be  in  de  poker,  and  de  poker  in  de  fire."  {Asa  Mahan,  D.D.) 

Dwelling  in  love : — I  could  not  tell  what  was  the  matter  with  my  beautiful  fern  that 

had  hung  on  my  window  and  grown  so  beautifully  all  the  season.    The  leaves  were 

drying  and  turning  white.    I  took  it  down,  and  to  my  great  surprise  found  that  the 

Boil  had  been  all  washed  from  the  roots.     It  had  actually  nothing  to  grow  in.    I 

immediately  procured  fresh  soil,  and  while  pressing  it  to  the  bare  roots  I  thought 

how  easily  the  soil  may  get  washed  away  from  the  roots  of  our  spiritual  being. 

A  human  heart  must  have  soil  to  grow  in,  and  that  soil  is  love.     Paul  prayed  that 

he  might  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  love.     Now,  life  may  have  washed  from  you 

that  which  you  felt  you  needed — human  love — and  you  may  feel  that  you  are  bare ; 

but  there  is  abundance  of  soil  in  the  love  of  God  for  you  to  grow  in.     Some  of  the 

grandest  plants  in  God's  conservatory  have  no  other  soil.    And  nothing  can  wash 

God's  love  away.     (Mrs.  M.  Bottome.) 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  357 

Ver.  17.  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the 
day  of  Judgment. — The  perfection  of  love  : — I.  "  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect." 
Love  is  like  every  other  grace  in  the  Christian  bosom,  susceptible  of  various  degrees 
of  intensity.  It  is  our  duty  to  aim  at  perfection  in  all  things,  and  eminently  in 
love.  Our  happiness  is  bound  up  in  our  attainment  of  it.  Just  as  we  advance  in 
this  grace  we  secure  our  growing  peace  and  prosperity.  II.  A  blessed  effect 
OR  EVIDENCE  OF  SUCH  LOVE.  "  That  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment." What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  day  of  judgment  ?  We  are  certainly 
not  to  exclude  from  our  thoughts  days  of  trial,  such  as  may  come  upon  us  in  the 
course  of  life,  or  at  death.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  the  perfection  of  love  would 
greatly  contribute  to  our  boldness  at  such  times.  But  the  mind  of  the  apostle  is 
manifestly  directed  to  the  final  judgment.  In  that  dread  hour  they  who  have 
cultivated  the  grace  of  love  shall  be  enabled  to  meet  it  with  boldness.  How  so?  This 
boldness  cannot  be  said  to  arise  out  of  love,  as  the  reason  or  ground  of  it.  Were  it 
so  viewed,  its  deficiencies  would  fill  us  with  terror  and  cover  us  with  confusion. 
Neither  our  love  nor  any  other  grace  can  be  pleaded  for  our  acceptance  at  the  bar 
of  God.  Yet  there  is  an  important  sense  in  which  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment 
is  dependent  on  the  cultivation  of  love.  As  love  is  cultivated,  the  evidence  of  our 
union  with  Christ  is  manifested.  III.  How  mat  love  be  so  exercised  and  advanced 
AS  TO  lead  us  into  THIS  HOLY  AND  HAPPY  BOLDNESS  ?  "  Bccausc  as  He  is,  SO  are  we  in 
this  world."  It  is  by  studying  conformity  to  Christ  our  love  is  strengthened,  and 
the  evidence  of  our  union  with  Him  is  made  clear.  IV.  The  argument  by  which 
THE  apostle  confirms  AND  ILLUSTRATES  HIS  VIEWS  (ver.  18).  1.  The  nature  of  love 
— "  There  is  no  fear  in  love."  2.  More  strongly  tne  same  view  is  presented  in  the 
operation  of  love — "perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."  3.  This  view  is  farther  con- 
firmed by  the  very  nature  of  fear.  "  Fear  hath  torment."  We  avoid  the  person 
whom  we  fear.  4.  Finally,  the  operation  of  fear  is  to  destroy  love.  "  He  that 
feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in  love."  How  powerful,  then,  is  this  argument  for  the 
cultivation  of  love.  Would  we  be  happy  in  God  now,  and  would  we  meet  Him  at 
last  with  joy  ?  Then  let  us  love  Him.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Perfect  love  : — 1. 
Love  is  capable  of  many  degrees  ;  it  is  the  same  principle  in  its  commencement  as 
in  its  termination,  the  difference  being  not  in  the  quality,  but  in  the  amount ;  and 
this  must  be  ever  borne  in  mind  in  our  dealing  with  inquiring  and  awakened  souls. 
The  weak  and  just  commencing  child  of  God  should  not  be  cast  down  and  believe 
that  because  he  is  imperfect  in  love  he  therefore  has  no  love.  In  estimating  of  the 
condition  of  men's  minds  with  regard  to  the  degree  of  love  which  they  possess,  we 
take  many  things  into  account.  There  are  some  upon  whom  the  consciousness  of 
Christ's  sacrifice  comes  with  such  tremendous  power  that  they  are  melted  and 
subdued  at  once,  and  withal  attracted  to  the  One  who  displayed  such  wondrous  love 
toward  them.  There  are  others  who  have  attained  this  consciousness  by  slow 
degrees,  and  so  gradually  become  acquainted  with  their  Lord  that  from  the  very 
gentleness  of  the  way  in  which  they  have  been  led  on,  they  themselves  realise  more 
the  simple  fact  that  they  love  than  that  they  are  made  to  love.  There  are  some 
who  have  naturally  unloving  hearts  to  be  changed,  and  some  who  have  loving 
hearts  to  be  consecrated  ;  and  the  processes  of  God's  actings  are  so  different,  and 
hearts  are  so  varied  in  their  constitution  that  we  can  scarce  expect  to  find  any  two 
exactly  alike.  Be  encouraged,  but  be  not  satisfied,  ye  who  find  some  love  within 
yourselves ;  pray  and  strive  for  an  increase.  2.  Love,  then,  may  exist  in  different 
degrees ;  it  is  further  capable  of  high  attainment.  Can  any  one  amongst  us  produce 
a  reason  why  he  should  not  be  enabled  to  love  as  much  as  Peter,  Paul,  or  John  ? 
Can  any  one  show  us  anything  so  supremely  bad  in  his  own  natural  disposition,  or 
so  supremely  good  in  that  of  these  apostles,  that  it  is  a  moral  impossibility  that  he 
can  ever  do  as  they  did  ?  or  can  any  prove  that  the  actings  of  the  Spirit  are  more 
limited  in  our  case  than  they  were  in  theirs,  and  that  assistances  were  given  to 
them  which  by  God's  decrees  are  withheld  from  us?  There  lies  before  you  a 
glorious  course,  if  only  you  will  run  upon  it ;  a  magnificent  possession,  if  only  you 
will  lay  hold  of  it ;  an  exquisite  state,  if  only  you  will  enter  on  it.  Allow  yourselves 
to  be  carried  on  by  the  Spirit.  3.  Thus  we  see  that  love  may  be  of  different 
degrees,  and  also  that  it  is  capable  of  high  attainment ;  we  would  observe  further 
that  it  is  able  to  produce  a  great  result.  The  songs  of  poets,  the  tales  of  real  life, 
the  stern  records  of  history,  are  all  full  of  the  triumphs  of  love ;  and  fallen  though 
we  be,  love  has  won  more  victories  than  all  else  beside.  When  love  is  true,  it  is 
impregnable  by  assault,  it  is  irresistible  in  attack,  it  is  indestructible  by  time  ;  it  is 
not  spent  by  its  efforts,  it  is  not  wearied  out  by  its  vigils ;  firm  in  its  grasp,  yet 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

tender  in  its  touch,  that  which  it  lays  hold  of  escapes  not  from  it,  that  which  it 
caresses  is  not  injured  by  it.  Love  is  a  watcher  and  love  is  a  warrior — love  is  a 
servant  and  love  is  a  king.  True  love  in  things  spiritual  as  well  as  in  things 
temporal  is  omnipotent ;  he  who  loves  most  will  believe  most,  and  in  his  faith  and 
love  will  win  the  highest  goal.  (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.)  The  triumph  of  Christ-like 
love :  I.  The  desciuption  of  spiritual  attainment.  "  Herein  is  our  love  made 
perfect."  None  can  doubt  that  being  as  the  Son  of  God  is  in  this  world  is  the  only 
possible  perfection,  and  the  only  ground  of  "  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment." 
The  text  shows — First.  An  attainment  of  affection  to  God.  God  wins  our  hearts 
by  His  love  ;  we  then  love  Him  more  and  more.  Secondly.  An  attainment  of  com- 
plete affection  to  God.  In  this  asserted  perfection  of  our  love  there  is  clearly  a 
recognition  of  the  supremacy  of  our  affection.  II.  The  adduced  evidence  of  that 
attainment.  "  Because,"  &c.  This  clause  seems  to  belong  both  to  our  being  made 
perfect  in  love  and  our  having  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment.  First.  The  meek- 
ness of  Christ  is  reproduced  in  His  followers.  Secondly.  The  endurance  of  Christ 
characterises  Christians.  "Who  endureth  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
Himself."  Thirdly.  The  truth-witnessing  of  Christ  is  seen  in  His  disciples.  "  I 
am  the  truth."  III.  The  Divine  design  in  our  evidenced  attainment  in  Cheist- 
LiKE  LOVE.  "  That  we  may  have  boldness,"  &c.  First :  This  is  not  an  evil  bold- 
ness, or  a  boldness  in  evil  (Eccles.  viii.  1).  It  is  not — (1)  the  boldness  of  ignorance ; 
(2)  the  boldness  of  self-sufficiency;  (3)  the  boldness  of  iniquity;  (4)  the  boldness 
of  presumption.  Secondly.  This  is  a  holy  boldness  (Heb.  x.  19).  It  is — (1)  The 
boldness  of  fearlessness.  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."  (2)  The  boldness  of 
approving  conscience.  "It  is  God  that  justifieth."  St.  Paul  was  bold  in  chains, 
because  the  Divine  Judge  approved  him.  (3)  The  boldness  of  perfect  sympathy 
and  unity  with  the  Judge.  "  He  that  confesseth  Me,"  &c.  {Homilist.)  Boldness 
in  the  day  of  judgment : — I.  Examine  the  general  conception  of  "the  day  of  the 
JUDGMENT,"  as  giveu  in  the  New  Testament.  But  against  one  somewhat  widely- 
spread  way  of  blotting  the  day  of  judgment  from  the  calendar  of  the  future — so 
far  as  believers  are  concerned^we  should  be  on  our  guard.  Some  good  men  think 
themselves  entitled  to  reason  thus  :  "  I  am  a  Christian.  I  shall  be  an  assessor  in 
the  judgment.  For  me  there  is  therefore  no  judgment  day."  The  only  appeal  to 
Scripture  which  such  persons  make,  with  any  show  of  plausibility,  is  contained  in 
an  exposition  of  our  Lord's  teaching  in  John  v.  21,  29.  But  clearly  there  are  three 
resurrection  scenes  which  may  be  discriminated  in  those  words.  The  first  is 
spiritual,  a  present  awakening  of  dead  souls,  in  those  with  whom  the  Son  of  Man 
is  brought  into  contact  in  His  earthly  ministry.  The  second  is  a  department  of 
the  same  spiritual  resurrection.  The  Son  of  God,  with  that  mysterious  gift  of  Ufe 
in  Himself,  has  within  Him  a  perpetual  spring  of  rejuvenescence  for  a  faded  and 
dying  world.  A  renewal  of  hearts  is  in  process  during  aU  the  days  of  time,  a 
passage  for  soul  after  soul  out  of  death  into  life.  The  third  scene  is  the  general 
resurrection  and  general  judgment.  The  first  was  the  resurrection  of  comparatively 
few ;  the  second  of  many  ;  the  third  of  aU.  1.  General  history  points  to  a  general 
judgment.  If  there  is  no  such  judgment  to  come,  then  there  is  no  one  definite 
moral  purpose  in  human  society.  Progress  would  be  a  melancholy  word,  a 
deceptive  appearance,  a  stream  that  has  no  issue,  a  road  that  leads  nowhere.  2. 
If  there  is  to  be  no  day  of  the  general  judgment,  then  the  million  prophecies  of 
conscience  will  be  belied,  and  our  nature  prove  to  be  mendacious  to  its  very  roots. 
II.  The  removal  of  that  terror  which  accompanies  the  conception  of  the  day  op 
JUDGMENT,  and  of  the  sole  means  of  that  emancipation  which  St.  John  recognises. 
For  terror  there  is  in  every  point  of  the  repeated  descriptions  of  Scripture — in  the 
surroundings,  in  the  summons,  in  the  tribunal,  in  the  trial,  in  one  of  the  two 
sentences.  "  Boldness  !  "  It  is  the  splendid  word  which  denotes  the  citizen's  right 
of  free  speech,  the  masculine  privilege  of  courageous  liberty.  It  is  the  tender  word 
which  expresses  the  child's  unhesitating  confidence,  in  "saying  all  out"  to  the 
parent.  The  ground  of  the  boldness  is  conformity  to  Christ.  Because  "as  He  is," 
with  that  vivid  idealising  sense,  frequent  in  St.  John  when  he  uses  it  of  our  Lord 
— "  as  He  is,"  delineated  in  the  fourth  Gospel,  seen  by  "  the  eye  of  the  heart"  with 
constant  reverence  in  the  soul,  with  adoring  wonder  in  heaven,  perfectly  true,  pure, 
and  righteous — "  even  so  "  (not,  of  course,  with  any  equality  in  degree  to  that  con- 
Bummate  idea,  but  with  a  likeness  ever  growing,  an  aspiration  ever  advancing) — 
"  so  are  we  in  this  world,"  purifying  ourselves  as  He  is  pure.  (Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.) 
Because  as  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world. — Christ's  poverty  in  relation  to  our 
teljishncss  and  luxury : — It  is  too  common  to  fix  our  thoughts  almost  exclusively  on 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  359 

the  Eedeemer's  death,  and  to  leave  out  of  sight  the  nature  and  tenor  of  the  life 
preceding.  St.  John  gives  us  a  corrective  of  this  view.  He  says  that  in  those  who 
will  not  be  afraid  to  meet  Christ  when  He  appears  on  His  judgment  throne,  the 
spirit,  character,  and  habit  that  belong  to  Jesus  now  in  glory,  as  they  belonged  to 
Him  when  on  earth,  shall  be  in  them.  The  outward  manner  of  His  life,  the  kind 
of  circumstance  which  clothed  Him  here  cannot,  of  course,  be  reproduced,  but  the 
way  in  which  He  behaved  under  those  circumstances,  the  disposition  with  which  He 
met  them,  must  mark  every  one  of  His  disciples — "  as  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this 
world."  Now,  Christ's  earthly  life  was  distinctly  one  of  poverty.  House  or  pro- 
perty of  His  own  He  had  none.  Now,  if  our  Lord's  poverty  encourage  the  poor 
and  the  poor  family  to  struggle  against  the  lowering  influence  of  their  lot,  to  keep 
themselves  respectable  and  orderly,  consider  with  what  earnest  pleadings  it  seems 
to  address  all  richer  folk,  especially  in  an  age  like  our  own.  Society  is  fastidious 
and  extravagant.  Entertainments  are  reckoned,  not  by  the  pleasure  which  they  are 
calculated  to  give,  but  by  their  variety  and  costliness.  Turn  upon  these  aspects 
of  our  modern  civilisation  the  light  of  Jesus'  life  in  that  noble  endurance  of 
poverty,  that  abiding  sense  of  the  real  value  of  Mfe,  which  consisteth  not  in  the 
abundance  of  the  goods  which  a  man  possesseth,  that  unswerving  devotion  to  His 
Father's  will  which  constituted  His  very  meat.  His  example  may  yet  prove  our 
safety,  if  we  will  follow  it.  (D.  Trinder,  M.A.)  The  servant  as  his  Lord  : 
— The  connection  of  my  text  is  quite  as  striking  as  its  substance.  John  has  been 
dwelling  upon  his  favourite  thought  that  to  abide  in  love  is  abiding  in  God,  and 
God  in  us.  And  then  he  goes  on  to  say  that  "  Herein  " — that  is,  in  such  mutual 
abiding  in  love — "  is  love  made  perfect  with  us."  I.  A  Cheistian  is  Chbist's 
LIVING  LIKENESS.  It  is  the  Christ  as  He  is,  and  not  only — true  as  that  is — the  Christ 
as  He  was,  who  is  the  original  of  which  Christian  men  are  copies.  Is  there  any- 
thing, then,  within  the  glory  to  which  I,  in  my  poor,  struggling,  imperfect  life  here 
on  earth,  can  feel  that  my  character  is  being  shaped  ?  Surely  there  is.  I  have  no 
doubt  that,  in  the  words  of  my  text,  the  apostle  is  remembering  the  solemn  words 
of  our  Lord's  high-priestly  prayer,  "  I  in  Thee,  and  Thou  in  Me,  that  they  also 
may  be  in  us."  Or,  to  put  the  whole  thing  into  plainer  words,  it  is  the  religious 
and  the  moral  aspects  of  Christ's  being,  and  not  any  one  particular  detail  thereof. 
And  these,  as  they  live  and  reign  on  the  throne,  just  as  truly  as  these,  as  they 
Buffered  and  wept  upon  earth,  it  is  these  to  which  it  is  our  destiny  to  be  conformed. 
We  are  like  Him,  if  we  are  His,  in  this,  that  we  are  joined  to  God,  that  we  hold 
fellowship  with  Him,  that  our  lives  are  all  permeated  with  the  Divine.  And  thus 
*'  we,"  even  here,  "  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly,  as  we  have  borne  the  images 
of  the  earthly."    But,  then,  I  have  another  point  that  I  desire  to  refer  to.     I  have 

fut  an  emphasis  upon  the  "  is  "  instead  of  the  "  was,"  as  it  applies  to  Jesus  Christ, 
would  further  put  an  emphasis  upon  the  "  are,"  as  it  applies  to  us — "  so  are  we." 
John  is  not  exhorting,  he  is  affirming.  He  is  not  saying  what  Christian  men  ought 
to  strive  to  be,  but  he  is  saying  what  all  Christian  men,  by  virtue  of  their  Christian 
character,  are.  Or,  to  put  it  into  other  words,  likeness  to  the  Master  is  certain.  It 
is  inevitably  involved  in  the  relation  which  a  Christian  man  bears  to  the  Lord.  My 
text  suggests  that  to  us  by  its  addition,  "  So  are  we,  in  this  world."  The  "  world" — 
or  to  use  the  modem  phraseology,  "the  environment " — conditions  the  resemblance. 
As  far  as  it  is  possible  for  a  thing  encompassed  with  dust  and  ashes  to  resemble  the 
radiant  sun  in  the  heavens,  so  far  is  the  resemblance  carried  here.  Now,  you 
Christian  people,  does  that  plain  statement  touch  you  anywhere  ?  "  So  are  we." 
Well  I  you  would  be  quite  easy  if  John  had  said,  *  So  may  we  be ;  so  should  we 
be  ;  so  shall  we  be."  But  what  about  the  "  so  are  we  "  ?  What  a  ghastly  contra- 
diction the  lives  of  multitudes  of  professing  Christians  are  to  that  plain  statement ! 
The  world  has  for  the  illustrations  of  the  gospel  the  lives  of  us  Christian  people. 
In  the  Book  there  are  principles  and  facts,  and  readers  should  be  able  to  turn  the 
page  and  see  all  pictured  in  us.  That  is  what  you  have  got  to  do  in  this  world. 
♦•  As  the  Father  sent  Me,  even  so  I  send  you."  '♦  As  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world." 
It  may  be  our  antagonist,  but  it  is  our  sphere,  and  its  presence  is  necessary  to 
evoke  our  characters.     Christ  has  entrusted  His  reputation,  His  honour,  to  us. 

n.    StrCH   LIKENESS   TO    JeSUS    ChRIST   IS   THE    ONLY   THING   THAT   WILL   ENABLE    A    MAN 

TO  LIFT  XTP  HIS  HEAD  IN  THE  DAT  OF  JUDGMENT.  "  We  have  bolduess,"  says 
John,  because  "  as  He  is,  so  are  we."  Now,  that  is  a  very  strong  statement 
of  a  truth  that  popular  evangelical  theology  has  far  too  much  obscured.  People 
talk  about  being,  at  the  last,  accepted  in  the  beloved.  It  is  true !  But  do  not  let 
OB  forget  the  other  side,  that  the  question  put  to  every  man  will  be,  not  what 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

you  believe,  but  what  did  you  do,  and  what  are  you  ?  And  I  want  to  lay  that  upon 
your  hearts,  because  many  of  us  are  too  apt  to  forget  it,  that  whilst  unques- 
tionably the  beginning  of  the  salvation,  and  the  condition  of  forgiveness  here, 
and  of  acceptance  hereafter,  is  laid  in  trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  trust  is  sure 
to  work  out  a  character  which  is  in  conformity  with  His  requirements  and  moulded 
after  the  likeness  of  Himself.  The  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  the  truth,  and 
what  a  man  is  determines  where  a  man  shall  be,  and  what  he  shall  receive  through 
all  eternity.  IH.  The  process  by  which  this  likeness  is  secured.  Our  love  is 
made  perfect  by  dwelling  in  God,  and  God  in  us  ;  in  order  that  we  may  be  thus 
conformed  to  Christ's  likeness,  and  so  have  boldness  in  that  great  day.  To  be  like 
Jesus  Christ,  what  is  needed  is  that  we  love  Him,  and  that  we  keep  in  touch  with 
Him.  But  remember  such  abiding  is  no  idle  waiting,  no  passive  confidence.  It  is 
full  of  energy,  full  of  suppression,  when  necessary,  of  what  is  contrary  to  your  truest 
self ;  and  full  of  strenuous  cultivation  of  that  which  is  in  accord  with  the  will  of 
the  Father.  Lie  in  the  light,  and  you  will  become  light.  Abide  in  Christ,  and 
you  will  get  like  Christ.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  There  is  no  fear  in  love ;  but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear :  because 
fear  hath  torment. — The  place  of  fear  in  the  gospel : — Some  readers  of  the  Bible, 
some  preachers  of  the  gospel,  have  thought  that  fear  was  a  dangerous,  was  even  a 
forbidden  principle,  under  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times.  This  is  a  hasty 
inference.  Our  Lord  says,  "  Fear  Him  which,  after  He  hath  killed,  hath  power  to 
cast  into  hell."  St.  Paul  says,  "  Work  out  their  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling  "  ;  and  St.  Peter  commends  a  "  chaste  conversation  coupled  with  fear"; 
and  even  St.  John,  who  speaks  of  "  perfect  love  casting  out  fear,"  yet  uses  this,  in 
the  Eevelation,  as  a  description  of  the  faithful — "  them  that  fear  Thy  name."  Fear 
has  a  place  in  the  gospel,  may  we  but  find  it.  Indeed  it  is  an  old  remark,  that  every 
natural  principle  of  our  mind  has  an  object  assigned  to  it — is  not  to  be  crushed,  only 
to  be  re-directed.  Fear  is  not  the  whole  of  religion.  Some  Christian  people  have 
made  it  so,  and  suffered  greatly  in  consequence.  But  in  these  cases  we  may  hope 
that  there  is  a  blessed  surprise  of  love  in  store  for  souls  which  here  lived  too  much 
in  the  darkness  of  mistrust  and  self-suspicion.  As  they  emerge  out  of  that  thick 
gloom  which  we  call  life  into  a  world  where  there  is  neither  puzzle  of  intellect,  nor 
oppression  of  the  world,  nor  assault  of  the  devil,  they  learn,  as  in  a  moment,  how 
much  better  God  was  to  them  than  they  felt  or  saw.  How  shall  it  be  with  another 
class — with  those  who  have  banished  fear  altogether  from  their  religion,  not  by  that 
perfecting  of  love  which  St.  John  speaks  of,  but  by  a  refusal  to  read  anything  in  their 
gospel  but  that  which  was  instantly  bright,  indiscriminately  alluring  ?  If  now  we  try 
to  grapple  closely  with  the  very  question  itself.  What  is  the  place  of  fear  in  the 
gospel?  we  must  begin  by  guarding  ourselves  against  one  great  confusion.  The 
object  of  fear  may  be  either  a  thing  or  a  person.  1.  We  fear  a  thing  which,  being 
possible,  is  also  undesirable  or  dreadful.  Our  own  Prayer-Book,  commenting  in  the 
catechism  upon  the  Lord's  Prayer,  bids  us  call  three  things  evil :  (1)  Sin  and 
wickedness ;  (2)  Our  ghostly  enemy ;  (3)  Everlasting  death.  2.  There  is  a  fear 
also  of  persons.  In  some  respects  nearly  allied  to  the  other — as  where  we  dread 
the  arrival  of  a  judge  who  is  to  try  us,  and  whose  sentence  must  certainly  bring 
after  it  imprisonment  or  execution.  There  it  is  scarcely  the  person — it  is  simply 
the  instrument  of  the  thing — which  is  really  the  object  of  the  fear.  The  fear  of 
God  as  a  Person  is  essentially  of  a  higher  order.  To  feel  that  there  is  One  above 
me,  to  whom  I  am  accountable,  if  it  be  but  as  my  Judge,  there  is  something 
elevating  in  the  very  conception.  But  this,  if  it  stop  here,  is  the  religion  of  fallen 
nature  ;  it  is  scarcely  the  religion  even  of  law — for  the  law  itself  gave  many 
glimpses  of  a  Divine  heart  that  could  feel  and  a  Divine  grace  that  could  comfort. 
This  mere  dread,  though  it  is  a  higher  thing  than  indifference,  is  no  part  of  the 
gospel.  From  this  kind  of  fear  the  convinced  man,  if  he  yields  himself  to  Christ's 
teaching,  will  pass  on  into  a  higher.  And  it  is  in  reference  to  this  step  that  there 
is  the  greatest  need  of  Christian  guidance.  We  do  not  speak  of  a  spirit  of  bondage, 
making  a  man  crouch  before  God  as  his  stern  taskmaster.  Not  of  a  life  of  toilsome, 
unloving  labour,  which  hopes  in  the  end  to  make  God  its  debtor.  There  is  no  trace 
of  gospel  fear  in  all  this.  But  that  humble,  filial  reverence,  which  never  forgets  or 
slights  the  distance  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature  which  exercises  itself  day  by 
day  "to  have  always  a  conscience *oid  of  offence  both  toward  God  and  toward  man  " 
— this  is  a  Christian  grace :  if  there  be  yet  one  higher,  it  must  be  sought,  not  in  the 
abandonment,  but  in  the  strengthening  of  this.     When  a  man  has  lived  for  long 


CHAP.  IV,]  I.  JOHN.  361 

years  in  the  pursuit  of  God — when  he  has  brought  his  life  by  daily  self -discipline  into 
a  condition  of  habitual  watchfulness — then,  as  the  fear  of  falling  away  becomes  less 
predominant,  there  takes  its  place,  by  little  and  little,  that  absolute  oneness  of  will 
with  the  will  of  God,  of  which  it  has  been  boldly  yet  beautifully  written  that  then, 
then  at  length,  self-indulgence  itseK  may  become  a  virtue.  In  that  man  fear  has 
indeed  been  cast  out,  not  by  carelessness,  but  by  love  ;  in  him,  at  last,  as  God's  free 
gift  to  a  life  of  godly  reverence,  "  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected." 
(Dean  Vaughan.)  Love  and  fear : — I.  The  apostle  here  contemplates  a  universaii 
DOMINION  OF  FEAK,  wherevcr  there  is  not  the  presence  of  active  love.  Of  course,  he 
is  speaking  about  the  emotions  which  men  cherish  with  regard  to  God.  All  men 
everywhere  have  some  more  or  less  faint  or  clear  conviction  of  the  existence  of  a  God. 
All  men  everywhere  have  some  more  or  less  active  or  torpid  working  of  conscience. 
Blend  together  these  two  things,  and  take  into  account  that  the  fact  of  sin  necessarily 
brings  about  much  ignorance  of  the  true  character  of  Him  whom  the  consciousness 
of  sin  arrays  in  awful  attributes  of  holiness  and  justice  ;  and  there  follows  inevit- 
ably, universally,  though  not  always  with  equal  strength  and  prominence,  this 
feeling  towards  God,  I  knew  Thee  that  thou  wert  austere,  and  I  was  afraid.  The 
truth  of  this  representation  of  the  universal  dominion  of  fear  is  not  made  in  the 
least  degree  doubtful  by  the  fact  that  the  ordinary  condition  of  men  is  not  one  of 
active  dread  of  God.  There  is  nothing  more  striking  than  that  strange  power  that 
a  man  has  of  refusing  to  think  of  a  subject  because  he  knows  that  to  think  of  it 
would  be  torture  and  terror.  Heathenism  is,  to  a  large  extent,  the  offspring  of  fear. 
All  thoughts  of  sacrifice  as  propitiating  an  offended  God  come  from  that  dark  and 
coiling  fear  which  lurks  in  the  heart.  And  it  affects  so-called  Christianity  too. 
There  are  plenty  of  people  who  call  themselves  Christians  whose  whole  religion 
consists  in  deprecating  the  wrath  of  God,  whom  they  dimly  think  of  as  angry  with 
them,  and  who,  their  consciences  teU  them,  might  well  be  so  !  Sometimes,  again, 
this  same  fear  takes  the  understanding  into  its  pay,  and  appears  as  enlightened 
disbelief  in  God  and  immortality.  The  brain  is  often  bribed  by  the  conscience,  and 
the  wish  becomes  the  father  of  the  thought.  Sometimes  it  takes  the  shape  of 
vehement  efforts  to  get  rid  of  unwelcome  thought  by  fierce  plunging  into  business, 
or  into  wild  riot.  II.  The  fearlessness  of  love — how  "perfect  love"  casts  out 
fear.  Love  is  no  weak  thing,  no  mere  sentiment.  It  is  the  harvest  of  all  human 
emotions.  It  makes  heroes  as  its  natural  work.  The  love  of  God  is  declared  in 
this  text  to  be  the  victorious  antagonist  of  that  fear  of  sin  which  has  torment  in  it. 
In  general  we  can  see,  I  think,  without  difficulty,  how  the  two,  love  and  fear,  do 
exclude  one  another.  Fear  is  entirely  based  on  a  consideration  of  some  possible 
personal  evil  consequence  coming  down  upon  me  from  that  clear  sky  above  me. 
Love  is  based  upon  the  forgetfulness  of  self  altogether.  The  very  essence  of  love  is, 
that  it  looks  away  from  itseK,  and  to  another.  Fill  the  heart  with  love,  and  there 
is  an  end  to  the  dominion  of  fear !  1.  But,  more  specifically,  the  love  of  God 
entering  into  a  man's  heart  destroys  all  fear  of  Him  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking.  All  the  attributes  of  God  come  to  be  on  our  side.  He  that  loves  has  the 
whole  Godhead  for  him.  "  We  love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us."  There  is  no 
foundation  for  my  love  to  God  except  only  the  old  one,  "  God  loves  me."  There  is 
no  way  of  building  on  that  foundation  except  only  the  old  one,  We  believe  and  are 
sure  that  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world  !  The  love  which  casts  out 
fear  is  not  a  vague  emotion  setting  towards  an  unknown  God  ;  nor  is  it  the  result  of 
a  man's  willing  that  he  will  put  away  from  himself  his  hatred  and  his  indifference, 
and  will  set  himself  in  a  new  position  towards  God  and  His  mercy ;  but  it  rises  in 
the  heart  as  a  consequence  of  knowing  and  believing  the  love  which  God  hath  to  us. 
Hence,  again,  it  is  the  conqueror  of  fear.  Whatever  betide,  nothing  can  separate 
us  from  the  love  of  God.  We  are  bound  to  Him  by  that  everlasting  loving-kindness 
with  which  He  has  drawn  us.  There  is  lifted  off  the  heart  the  whole  burden  of 
'•fearful  looking-for  of  judgment,"  the  whole  burden  arising  from  the  dark  thought, 
God  is  mighty,  God  must  be  righteous,  God  may  strike  ! — because  we  know  "  He 
hath  borne  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows."  2.  The  love  of  God  casts  out  all 
other  fear  !  Every  affection  makes  him  who  cherishes  it,  in  some  degree,  braver 
than  he  would  have  been  without  it.  It  is  not  degrading  to  this  subject  to  remind 
you  of  what  we  see  away  far  down  in  the  scale  of  living  beings.  Look  at  that 
strange  maternal  instinct  that  in  the  lowest  animals — out  of  weakness  makes  them 
strong,  and  causes  them  to  forget  all  terror  of  the  most  terrible  at  the  bidding  of 
the  mighty  and  conquering  affection.  Look  at  the  same  thing  on  the  higher  level 
of  our  own  human  life.     It  is  not  self-reliance  that  makes  the  hero.   It  is  having  the 


862  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

heart  filled  with  passionate  enthusiasm  born  of  love  for  some  person  or  for  some 
thmg.  Love  is  gentle,  but  it  is  omnipotent,  victor  over  aU.  And  when  we  rise  to 
the  highest  form  of  it,  namely,  the  love  which  is  fixed  upon  God — oh !  how  that 
should,  and  if  it  be  right,  will,  strengthen  and  brace,  and  make  every  man  in  whom 
it  dwells,  frank,  fearless,  careless  of  personal  consequences  !  Cowardice  and  anxiety, 
perplexity  about  life,  trembling  about  the  future,  the  bowed  head  and  the  burdened 
heart — these  are  not  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit."  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear," 
Bets  our  faces  as  flints,  if  need  be,  before  human  opposition,  lifts  us  up  above  being 
at  the  mercy  of  events  and  circumstances,  rises  coping  with  and  mastering  the  fear 
of  death,  soars  on  lofty  wing  high  above  the  darkness  of  the  grave,  and,  as  the  apostle 
in  the  context  tells  us,  is  made  perfect  herein,  that  we  have  the  boldness  in  the  day 
of  judgment.  III.  Love,  which  destroys  fear,  heightens  reverence,  and  deepens 
BELT-DISTRUST.  1.  A  man  who  is  trembling  about  personal  consequences  has  nx)  eye 
to  appreciate  the  thing  of  which  he  is  afraid.  There  is  no  reverence  where  there  is 
desperate  fear.  He  that  is  trembling  lest  the  lightning  should  strike  him,  has  no 
heart  to  feel  the  grandeur  and  to  be  moved  by  the  solemn  awfulness  of  the  storm 
above  his  head.  And  a  man  to  whom  the  whole  thought,  or  the  predominant 
thought,  when  God  rises  before  him,  is,  How  awful  will  be  the  incidence  of  His  per- 
fections on  my  head !  does  not  and  durst  not  think  about  them,  and  reverence  Him. 
Perfect  love  takes  out  of  the  heart  aU  that  bitter  sense  of  possible  evU  coming  on  me 
and  leaves  me  at  liberty,  with  thankful,  humble  heart,  and  clear  eye,  to  look  into 
the  centre  of  the  brightness  and  see  there  the  light  of  His  infinite  mercy.  2.  Love 
destroys  fear,  and  perfects  seK-distrust.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation,"  is  the 
apostle's  teaching,  "with  fear  and  trembling."  If  you  call  Him  "Father"  (the 
name  that  breathes  frcm  the  loving  heart),  "  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here 
in  fear."  What  sort  of  fear  ?  The  fear  that  is  timid  about  seK,  because  it  is,  and 
in  order  that  it  may  be,  confident  of  God ;  fear  which  means,  I  know  I  shall  fall, 
nnless  Thou  hold  me  up,  and  which  then  changes,  by  quick  transition,  into,  I  shall 
not  fall,  for  the  Lord  is  able  to  make  me  stand.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Love  and 
fear : — Love  is  pure  ;  love  is  kind  and  tender  ;  love  is  bold  and  confident.  There 
is  no  fear  in  perfect  love.  Much  of  the  would-be  unbelief  of  the  day  springs  from 
terror.  No  doubt  there  is  real  honest  unbelief — a  failing  to  believe — inability  to  find 
truth.  These  deserve  our  tenderest  pity.  You  should  pity  and  pray  for  those  out 
in  the  godless,  hopeless  gloom,  as  you  pity  and  pray  for  the  sailors  at  sea  when  the 
wind  howls  round  your  house,  and  you  hear  the  loud  boom  of  the  storm-driven 
waves  on  the  shore.  Much  of  the  f  everishness  with  which  men  plunge  into  business, 
and  whirl  in  the  eddies  of  pleasure,  arises  from  their  dread  of  God.  But,  worse 
still,  many  so-called  religious  people  never  get  beyond  this  state  of  dread.  They 
only  know  God  as  the  Terrible  One.  James  Mill  taught  his  son  John  Stuart  to 
think  of  God  as  "  the  Almighty  Author  of  Hell,"  and  to  hate  the  idea  of  Him 
therefor.  Of  all  that  the  New  Testament  says  of  God,  James  Mill  chose  to  seize 
only  on  that.  He  said  nothing  of  heaven,  nor  of  God's  efforts  to  keep  men  from 
hell.  And  many  people  follow  his  example ;  they  seem  to  know  nothing  of  God'a 
love ;  they  spend  their  lives  deprecating  God's  wrath.  Now,  if  you  live  in  this 
state,  your  reUgion  is  of  the  poorest,  lowest  possible  description.  Fear  paralyses 
all  the  powers  of  the  soul,  and  must  be  got  rid  of  before  progress  can  take  place. 
The  bird  newly  caught  is  afraid  of  everything  and  everybody — of  the  hand  that 
feeds  and  caresses  it :  and  you  get  no  song  while  that  fear  lasts.  A  fresh  boy  in 
school,  on  the  first  day,  is  afraid  of  everything,  and  while  that  fear  lasts  he  leama 
nothing.  He  cannot  read  or  write,  he  can  neither  draw  nor  reckon,  till  the  fear  is 
gone.  Now  so  has  it  ever  been  with  men.  As  long  as  men  dreaded  nature  they 
made  no  progress  in  knowledge  or  power.  As  long  as  men  throughout  the  length 
and  breadth  of  Europe  believed  that  God  the  Father,  and  even  Christ  the  Saviour, 
were  so  awful  and  implacable  to  men,  that  Mary,  the  gentle  Virgin,  must  intercede 
with  them  for  the  sinful  and  the  needy,  so  long  could  the  priests  make  them  beheve 
whatever  they  chose  to  tell  them,  and  make  them  do  whatever  they  pleased  to  bid 
them.  For  fear  is  credulous.  Everything  startles  it.  Now  those  times,  though 
called  the  ages  of  faith,  were  very  barren  [of  religion.  Fear  demoralised  men. 
There  was  no  joy  in  religion  and  no  love.  Now  what  is  true  of  others  is  true  of  us. 
If  you  dread  God,  then  you  do  not  love  Him — you  cannot.  In  time,  you  are  bound 
to  hate  what  you  dread.  This  fear  must  be  got  rid  of.  It  is  the  work  of  perfect 
love  to  cast  it  out  of  the  soul.  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."  You  must  not  be 
afraid  to  accept  the  broad  statement  that  "  God  is  love."     (J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The 

epirit  of  fear  (with  2  Tim.  i.  7  ;  Eom.  viii.  15  ;  John  xiv.  27) : — I  have   brought 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  363 

together  several  passages  to  show  that  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  is  not  a  spirit  of  fear, 
and  that  Jesus  came  to  deliver  us  from  all  fear.  There  are  some  objections  to  be 
first  considered.  If  life  is  fuU  of  danger  and  evil,  ought  we  not  to  be  afraid?  it  may 
be  asked.  And  if  the  Bible  contains  passages  which  teach  us  not  to  fear,  does  it 
not  contain  other  passages  which  teach  that  we  ought  to  fear  ?  (Matt.  x.  28 ; 
Phil.  ii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  i.  17  ;  Prov.  iii.  7).  How  are  these  facts  and  statements  to  be 
reconciled  with  the  assertion  that  it  is  the  duty  of  Christians  not  to  fear  ?  First, 
we  may  say  that  a  distinction  can  be  taken  between  fear  as  a  subordinate  motive 
and  fear  as  a  ruling  motive  of  human  action.  Fear  as  the  ruling  motive  of  conduct 
is  degrading,  because  it  is  essentially  selfish.  But  fear,  when  controlled  by  reason, 
subordinate  to  hope,  joined  with  courage,  becomes  caution,  watchfulness,  modesty. 
The  Christian  fears,  but  is  never  governed  by  his  fears.  But,  again,  how  much  we 
need  to  fear  and  ought  to  fear  depends  upon  the  progress  of  our  inward  life  and 
Christian  experience.  The  work  of  Christ  is  to  deliver  us  from  aU  excessive  fear, 
and  to  leave  in  its  place  calmness  and  sober  watchfulness  and  a  profound  peace.  But 
this  work  is  not  done  suddenly  ;  it  is  a  progressive  work.  And  how  this  is  let  us  now  i 
consider.  First,  consider  fear  of  sin  and  of  its  consequences.  The  main  purpose  of 
Christianity  is  to  save  usfrom  sin,  and  thereby  to  save  us  from  its  consequences,  which 
are  moral  and  spiritual  death.  And  it  saves  us,  not  by  inspiring  fear,  but  by 
inspiring  faith  and  courage.  It  assures  us  that "  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  "  over  us. 
The  law  of  God  shows  us  what  our  duty  is,  but  gives  us  no  power  to  do  it.  The  purer 
and  higher  the  standard,  the  less  ability  we  feel  to  reach  it.  And  discouragement  is 
moral  death.  What  we  need  is  the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  may  cry,  "  Abba, 
Father !  "  Then  there  wiU  be  no  more  fear,  neither  fear  of  man  nor  fear  of  God, 
nor  fear  of  sin,  nor  fear  of  death,  nor  fear  of  what  follows  death.  But  in  order  to 
be  freed  from  fear,  it  is  not  enough  to  be  told  not  to  fear.  In  the  midst  of  a  battle 
tell  the  coward  not  to  be  afraid  ;  in  the  midst  of  a  thunderstorm  teU  the  person  who 
shrinks  from  the  vivid  flash  and  the  astounding  peal  that  he  need  not  fear.  What 
good  will  it  do  ?  The  source  of  fear  is  within,  and  that  must  be  removed.  So 
preach  as  much  as  we  may  the  mercy  of  God,  I  teU  you  that  men  wiU  still  fear, 
will  fear  death,  will  fear  heU,  as  long  as  unreconciled,  unrepented  sin  is  in  their 
hearts.  To  cure  our  souls  of  fear,  to  fill  them  with  hope  and  trust,  there  is  but  one 
way,  and  that  is  to  look  our  sins  in  the  face,  to  look  God's  law  in  the  face,  to  see  the 
eternal  connection  between  right  and  good,  death  and  evil ;  and  then,  when  we 
have  had  an  experience  of  duty,  of  responsibility,  of  sin,  of  danger,  we  are  ready 
to  enter  into  the  deeper  experience  of  pardon,  of  hope,  of  entire,  present  joyous 
salvation.  Thus  delivered  from  the  fear  of  sia  by  the  power  of  the  gospel,  we  are 
also  delivered  from  the  fear  of  God.  This  statement  also  requires  some  considera- 
tion. There  is  a  fear  of  God  which  is  always  right,  and  which  we  shall  always 
need  to  cherish.  Heathenism  is  a  rehgion  of  fear ;  Judaism  is  the  religion  of  con- 
science ;  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  grateful  affection.  Where  God  is  regarded 
essentially  as  an  Almighty  Ruler,  the  chief  duty  of  man  is  implicit,  unquestioning 
obedience.  Where  God  is  regarded  chiefly  as  a  judge,  the  principal  duty  of  man  is 
righteous  conduct.  Where  He  is  regarded  as  a  father,  the  chief  duty  of  man  is 
childlike  trust  and  love.  So  that  there  is  a  gradual  progress  in  the  conception 
which  men  have  had  of  the  Deity.  Beginning  with  power,  they  ascend  to  justice, 
and  terminate  in  love.  And  when  perfect  love  is  attained,  it  casts  out  aU  fear. 
{Jas.  Freeman  Clarke.)  Perfect  love  : — ^I.  Its  properties.  1.  Supreme.  Love 
to  God  cannot  exist  as  a  subordinate  principle.  2.  Pure.  Before  love  can  reign 
sole  monarch  in  the  soul,  the  "  old  man  "  must  be  destroyed.  3.  Entire.  It  mil 
not  only  admit  of  no  rival,  allowing  neither  the  allurements  of  the  world  nor  the 
charms  of  the  creature  to  alienate  it  from  the  object  that  has  engrossed  it ;  but  it 
admits  of  no  comparison.  4.  Constant.  It  is  not  a  spark  emitted  from  the  blaze 
of  worldly  prosperity  and  fanned  by  the  softness  of  worldly  pleasure,  but  a  flame 
enkindled  by  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  like  the  fire  on  the  altar  it  never  goes 
out.  5.  Practical.  6.  Progressive.  For  though  perfect,  it  does  not  preclude  the 
possibihty  of  increase  or  enlargement.  U.  Its  operation — "  casteth  out  fear." 
1.  What  kind  of  fear  ?  (1)  Not — (a)  A  reverential  fear  of  God.  {b)  A  cautionary 
fear  of  the  holiness,  justice,  and  power  of  God.  (c)  Natural  fear,  which  is  necessary 
to  the  preservation  of  life.  (2)  But — (a)  Servile  fear.  (6)  Fear  of  meeting  the 
necessaries  of  life,  (c)  The  fear  of  man,  which  bringeth  a  snare,  (d)  The  fear  of 
the  last  enemy,  (e)  The  fear  of  the  judgment.  (/)  The  fear  of  hell.  2.  How 
does  it  do  this  ?  (1)  By  removing  sin.  (2)  By  transforming  us  into  God's  image. 
(8)  By  perfecting   aU  the   other  graces   of   Christianity.     Faith  is  perfected  by 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

love.  Distrust  is  the  offspring  of  suspicion,  and  want  of  confidence  is  want 
of  love.  Where  there  is  perfect  love  there  is  true  tranquillity,  the  sweetest 
harmony :  all  is  peace — perfect,  perpetual,  eternal  peace.  (Samuel  Dunn.)  Love 
and  fear  .-—John  has  been  speaking  of  boldness,  and  that  naturally  suggests  its 
opposite— fear.  He  has  been  saying  that  perfect  love  produces  courage  in  the 
day  of  judgment,  because  it  produces  likeness  to  Christ,  who  is  the  judge.  In  my 
■  text  he  explains  and  enlarges  that  statement.  For  there  is  another  way  in  which 
love  produces  boldness,  and  that  is  by  its  casting  out  fear.  These  two  are  mutually 
exclusive.  I.  The  empike  of  feab.  Fear  is  a  shrinking  apprehension  of  evil  as 
befalhng  us,  from  the  person  or  thing  which  we  dread.  God  is  righteous ;  God 
righteously  administers  His  universe.  God  enters  into  relations  of  approval  or  dis- 
approval with  His  responsible  creature.  Therefore  there  lies,  dormant  for  the  most 
part,  but  present  in  every  heart,  and  active  in  the  measure  in  which  that  heart  is 
informed  as  to  itself,  the  slumbering  cold  dread  that  between  it  and  God  things  are 
not  as  they  ought  to  be.  I  believe,  for  my  part,  that  such  a  dumb,  dim  conscious- 
ness of  discord  attaches  to  all  men,  though  it  is  often  smothered,  often  ignored,  and 
often  denied.  But  there  it  is ;  the  snake  hybernates,  but  it  is  coiled  in  the  heart  all 
the  same,  and  warmth  will  awake  it.  Arising  from  that  discomforting  conscious- 
ness of  discord  there  come,  likewise,  other  forms  and  objects  of  dread.  For  if  I 
am  out  of  harmony  with  Him,  what  will  be  my  fate  in  the  midst  of  a  universe 
administered  by  Him,  and  in  which  all  are  His  servants  ?  Whilst  all  things  serve 
the  soul  that  serves  Him,  all  are  embattled  against  the  man  that  is  against,  or  not 
for,  God  and  His  will.  Then  there  rises  up  another  object  of  dread,  which,  in  like 
manner,  derives  all  its  power  to  ten-ify  and  to  hurt  from  the  fact  of  our  discord- 
ance with  God,  and  that  is,  the  "  shadow  feared  of  man,"  that  stands  shrouded 
by  the  path,  and  waits  for  each  of  us.  God ;  God's  universe ;  God's  messenger, 
Death — these  are  facts  w'th  which  we  stand  in  relation,  and  if  our  relations 
with  Him  are  out  of  gear,  then  He  and  all  of  these  are  legitimate  objects  of 
dread  to  us.  But  now  there  is  something  else  that  casts  out  fear  than  perfect 
love,  and  that  is — perfect  levity.  For  it  is  the  explanation  of  the  fact  that  so 
many  of  us  know  nothing  about  what  I  am  talking  about,  and  fancy  that  I  am 
exaggerating  or  putting  forward  false  views.  II.  That  brings  me  to  the  second  point 
— viz.,  THE  MISSION  OF  FEAK.  Johu  uscs  a  rare  word  in  my  text  when  he  says, 
"  fear  hath  torment."  "  Torment "  does  not  convey  the  whole  idea  of  the  word.  It 
means  suffering,  but  suffering  for  a  purpose  ;  suffering  which  is  correction ;  suffering 
which  is  disciplinary ;  suffering  which  is  intended  to  lead  to  something  beyond 
itself.  Fear,  the  apprehension  of  personal  evil,  has  the  same  function  in  the  moral 
world  as  pain  has  in  the  physical.  It  is  a  symptom  of  disease,  and  is  intended  to 
bid  us  look  for  the  remedy  and  the  Physician.  What  is  an  alarm-bell  for,  but  to 
rouse  the  sleepers  and  to  hurry  them  to  the  refuge !  And  so  this  wholesome, 
manly  dread  of  the  certain  issue  of  discord  with  God  is  meant  to  do  for  us  what 
the  angels  did  for  Lot — lay  a  mercifully  violent  hand  on  the  shoulder  of  the 
sleeper,  and  shake  him  into  aroused  wakefulness,  and  hasten  him  out  of  Sodom. 
The  intention  of  fear  is  to  lead  to  that  which  shall  annihilate  it,  and  take  away  its 
cause.  There  is  nothing  more  ridiculous,  nothing  more  likely  to  betray  a  man, 
than  the  indulgence  in  an  idle  fear  which  does  nothing  to  prevent  its  own 
fulfilment.  Horses  in  a  burning  stable  are  so  paralysed  by  dread  that  they  cannot 
stir,  and  get  burnt  to  death.  I  fear  ;  then  what  do  I  do  ?  Nothing  !  And  that  is 
true  about  hosts  of  us.  What  ought  I  to  do?  Let  the  dread  direct  me  to  its 
source — my  own  sinfulness.  Let  the  discovery  of  my  own  sinfulness  direct  me  to 
its  remedy — the  righteousness  and  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ.  He,  and  He 
alone,  can  deal  with  the  disturbing  element  in  my  relation  to  God.  So  my 
fear  should  proclaim  to  me  the  merciful  "  name  that  is  above  every  name," 
and  drive  me  as  well  as  draw  me  to  Christ,  the  Conqueror  of  sin  and  the 
Antagonist  of  all  dread.  I  think  we  shall  scarcely  understand  the  religion  of  love 
unless  we  recognise  that  dread  is  a  legitimate  part  of  an  unforgiven  man's  attitude 
towards  God.  My  fear  should  be  to  me  like  the  misshapen  guide  that  may  lead  me 
to  the  fortress  where  I  shall  be  safe.  Oh  I  do  not  tamper  with  the  wholesome 
sense  of  dread.  Do  not  let  it  lie,  generally  sleeping,  and  now  and  then  awaking  in 
your  hearts  and  bringing  about  nothing.  III.  Lastly,  the  expulsion  of  fear. 
My  text  points  out  the  natural  antagonism  and  mutual  exclusiveness  of  these  two 
emotions.  If  I  go  to  Jesus  Christ  as  a  sinful  man,  and  get  His  love  bestowed  upon 
me,  then,  as  the  next  verse  to  my  text  says,  my  love  springs  in  response  to  His  to 
mp.  and  in  the  measure  in  which  that  love  rises  in  my  heart  will  it  frustrate  ita 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  365 

antagonistic  dread.  As  I  said,  you  cannot  love  and  fear  the  same  person, 
unless  the  love  is  of  a  very  rudimentary  and  imperfect  character.  But  just  as 
when  you  pour  pure  water  into  a  bladder,  the  poisonous  gases  that  it  may  have 
contained  will  be  driven  out  before  it,  so  when  love  comes  in  dread  goes  out.  But 
remember  that  it  is  "  perfect  love  "  which  "  casts  out  fear."  Inconsistent  as  the 
two  emotions  are  in  themselves,  in  practice,  they  may  be  united  by  reason  of  the 
imperfection  of  the  nobler.  And  in  the  Christian  life  they  are  united  with  terrible 
frequency.  There  are  many  professing  Christian  people  who  live  all  their  days 
vnth  a  burden  of  shivering  dread  upon  their  shoulders  and  an  icy  cold  fear  in  their 
hearts,  just  because  they  have  not  got  close  enough  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  kept  their 
hearts  with  sufficient  steadfastness  under  the  quickening  influences  of  His  love,  to 
have  shaken  off  their  dread  as  a  sick  man's  distempered  fancies.  A  little  love  has 
not  mass  enough  in  it  to  drive  out  thick,  clustering  fears.  See  that  you  resort 
only  to  the  sane,  sound  way  of  getting  rid  of  the  wholesome,  rational  dread  of 
which  I  have  been  speaking.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  soul-tormenting  fear  and  a 
fear-expelling  love  : — I.  A  soul-tormentino  feab.  1.  This  slavish  fear  is  co- 
extensive with  the  unregenerate  race.  A  slavish  fear  of — (1)  Poverty.  (2)  Death. 
(3)  Ketribution.  (4)  God.  2.  This  slavish  fear  is  ever  associated  with  mental 
Buffering.  It  makes  the  present  miserable  by  its  horrid  forebodings  of  the  future. 
n.  A  rEAR-EXPELLiNQ  LOVE.  This  includes — 1.  A  consciousness  that  God  loves  us. 
2.  A  settled  confidence  in  God's  fatherly  regard  for  us.  3.  The  influential  dwelling 
of  God  within  us.  4.  The  extinction  by  God  of  all  selfi-.hness  within  us. 
Conclusion  :  This  subject — 1.  Supplies  the  test  of  true  religion.  2.  Indicates  the 
criterion  of  true  preaching.  3.  Shows  the  philosophy  of  the  gospel.  {D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Fear  and  love : — The  words  of  St.  John  as  to  fear  and  love  would 
probably  startle  us  if  they  were  less  familiar.  What  they  say  is,  in  effect,  that 
"fear "and  "love"  are,  as  such,  in  antagonism;  tLat  in  proportion  as  "love" 
gains  strength,  it  tends  to  oust  "  fear  "  ;  that  to  be,  ir  a  religious  sense,  under  the 
influence  of  "  fear,"  is  to  be  in  an  imperfect  condition  with  regard  to  "  love."  And 
yet  Scripture  assigns  to  fear  a  considerable  place  in  the  apparatus,  so  to  speak,  of 
religious  motives  and  forces  (Luke  xii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10,  11 ;  Phil.  ii.  12,  13  ;  1  Pet. 
i.  17).  In  such  passages  the  underlying  purport  is  obvious  :  "  Do  this,  avoid  that, 
or  it  will  be  the  worse  for  you :  obey,  on  peril  of  the  consequences  of  disobedience." 
How,  then,  will  the  text  stand  when  confronted  with  a  line  of  address  at  once  so 
authoritative,  so  luminous,  and  so  stern  ?  The  answer  is,  that  our  Lord  and  St. 
Peter  and  St.  Paul  are  urging  men  to  fear  the  penal  consequence  of  sin,  considered 
in  their  whole  length  and  breadth,  and  concentrated  into  that  one  supremely 
terrible  consequence — perpetual  exclusion  from  the  presence  of  God;  whereas  St. 
John  is  looking  at  "  fear  "  of  penal  suffering  considered  in  itself — the  dread  of  hell, 
pure  and  simple.  This  is  the  fear  which,  he  says,  "  hath  torment,"  or  rather 
"  punishment  "  ;  it  carries  punishment  in  its  bosom.  It  regards  God  not  as  the  all- 
holy  and  all-good  Father,  who  has  every  right  to  filial  obedience,  but  as  an 
irresistible  Power,  not  to  be  trifled  with  or  escaped  from,  who  can  and  will  inflict 
tremendous  penalties  on  those  who  venture  to  defy  His  authority.  Fear  of 
punishment,  either  as  imminent  or  as  distant,  is  not  a  false  or  bad  principle  of 
action  in  its  own  place  and  for  its  own  time.  It  is  appropriate  for  the  earlier  stage 
of  spiritual  training ;  it  marks  a  stage  in  the  moral  progress  through  which  the 
Supreme  Educator,  Divinely  equitable  and  patient,  conducts  His  children  by  slow 
steps,  in  consideration  of  hearts  not  fully  softened  and  consciences  not  thoroughly 
enlightened,  which,  as  yet,  are  unfit  for  a  high  religious  standard.  Is  not  this 
"  fear  "  worth  something?  Bishop  Andrewes,  alluding  to  it,  observes  that  it  is  "as 
the  base-court  to  the  temple,"  and  adds  that  a  man  must  do  his  duty  "  for  fear  of 
punishment,  if  he  cannot  get  himself  to  do  it  for  love  of  righteousness."  As  St. 
Augustine  says,  this  is  not  the  fear  that  "  is  clean  " — it  arises  not  out  of  love  of 
God,  but  out  of  the  terror  of  suffering  ;  yet  it  may  make  the  whole  difference  to  a 
person's  moral  future  whether,  at  a  particular  critical  time,  he  has  it,  or  has  it  not. 
If  he  has  it,  he  resists  the  temptation,  he  does  not  commit  the  sin  ;  and  that  is  to 
gain  much.  The  perilous  hour  is  got  through  safely;  the  conscience  escapes  a 
defilement  and  a  burden  ;  the  ground  so  far,  is  clear  for  the  further  operations  of 
grace.  And  these  will,  by  degrees,  absorb  the  fear  of  punishment,  simply  as  such — 
into  what  ?  Into  such  a  love  for  God  as  excludes  all  fear  whatsoever  ?  No,  rather 
into  a  fear  which  is  so  absolutely  compatible  with  love  that  it  may  even  be  said  to 
grow  out  of  love,  to  be  contained  in  love's  very  heart.  For  what  is  the  love  here 
bitended,  but  a  closer  and  closer  adhesion  to  the  will  of  God  as  the  supreme  good, 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

an  ever-growing  desire  to  please  Him  and  to  be  right  with  Him,  because  He  la 
what  He  is  to  us  ?  But  as  long  as  we  live,  failure  is  possible ;  there  must  be  the 
possibility  of  ultimate  failure,  even  on  the  part  of  the  gray-haired  saint,  as  Bunyan 
in  his  "dream  "  Saw  that  "there  was  a  way  to  hell  from  the  gates  of  heaven  aa 
well  as  from  the  city  of  destruction  " ;  as,  before  now,  men  have  fallen  from  God 
at  their  very  "  la&t  hour."  And  that  possibility  involves  a  fear  which  dwells  not 
on  the  mere  pain  of  future  punishment,  but  on  that  which  is  the  essential  and 
misery  of  hell — the  forfeiture  of  the  life-giving  love  of  God.  This  fear  may  be 
called  filial,  and  not  servile ;  for  in  proportion  as  a  child  loves  heartily  a  good 
parent,  the  more  solicitous  will  he  be  not  to  grieve,  displease,  disappoint  that  parent 
by  an  exhibition  of  thankless  perversity.  (TT'^.  Bright,  D.D.)  Fear  has  many 
eyes.  Fear  hath  punishment  (K.V.) : — This  is  true  in  two  ways — (1)  Fear  involves 
the  idea  of  punishment;  (2)  fear  is  a  foretaste  of  punishment.  (Cambridge  Bible 
for  Schools.)  Fear  by  anticipating  punishment  has  it  even  now.  (Dean  Alford.) 
Perfect  Love : — Love  is  like  honey,  but  perfect  love  is  like  the  honey  with  all  the 
comb  and  wax  strained  out.  Love  is  like  fire,  but  pure  love  is  like  the  same  fire 
free  from  all  smoke  and  soot.  Love  is  like  water,  but  unmixed  love  is  like  the  same 
water  freed  from  all  earthy  matter.  Love  is  like  light,  but  simple  and  perfect  love 
is  like  the  same  light  freed  from  all  cloud,  and  fog,  and  smoke.     (G.  D.  Watson.) 

Ver.  19.  We  love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us. — The  priority  of  God : — 
Everything  which  we  do  God  has  first  made  it  possible  for  us  to  do.  Everywhere 
God  is  first ;  and  man,  coming  afterward,  enters  into  Him  and  finds  in  God  the 
setting  and  the  background  of  his  life.  There  is  no  part  of  life  in  which 
this  is  not  true.  We  may  say  a  few  words  first  upon  the  whole  subject  of 
the  backgrounds  of  life  in  general.  Man  never  is  sent  first  into  the  world  and 
bidden  to  evolve  out  of  his  own  being  the  conditions  in  which  he  is  to  live.  Always 
something  is  before  him  ;  always  there  is  a  landscape  in  which  he  finds  his  figure 
standing  when  he  becomes  conscious  of  himself.  The  material  is  background  for 
the  spiritual — the  earth,  which  is  body,  for  man,  who  is  soul.  A  child  was  born 
yesterday.  How  he  lies  to-day  in  his  serene,  superb  unconsciousness  I  And  all 
the  forces  and  resources  of  the  earth  are  gathered  about  his  cradle  offering  them- 
selves to  him.  He  takes  what  they  all  bring  as  if  it  were  his  right.  Not  merely  on 
his  senses,  but  even  on  his  mind  and  most  unconscious  soul,  the  world  into 
which  he  has  come  is  pressing  itself.  Its  conventionalities  and  creeds,  its 
prejudices  and  limitations  and  precedents,  all  its  discoveries  and  hopes  and 
fears — they  are  the  scenery  in  which  this  new  life  stands.  They  are  here  before 
him,  and  he  comes  into  them.  Shall  we  talk  about  all  this  as  if  it  were 
a  bondage  into  which  the  new  child  is  born  ?  Shall  we  dream  for  him  of  a 
freedom  which  he  might  have  had  if  nothing  had  been  before  him?  Surely 
that  is  no  true  way  to  think  about  it.  There  are  men  who,  if  they  cannot 
destroy  the  world  of  assured  truths,  would  at  least  destroy  the  consciousness 
of  it.  They  would  ignore  it.  They  would  seem  at  least  to  be  trying  experiments 
as  if  nothing  had  yet  been  proved.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  deny  the  exceptional 
value  of  such  men ;  but  their  value  is  the  value  of  protest  and  exception.  The 
normal,  healthy  human  life  lives  in  its  environments  and  keeps  its  backgrounds. 
It  is  not  their  slave,  but  their  child.  It  fastens  itself  into  them,  and  realises  and 
fulfils  its  life  by  them,  and  makes  in  its  due  time  along  with  them  the  background 
for  the  lives  of  the  years  to  come.  Now  all  of  this  is  not  religious,  save  in  the  very 
largest  sense  ;  but  all  of  this  becomes  distinctly  religious  the  moment  that  all  this 
background  of  life  gathers  itself  into  a  unity  of  purpose  and  intention  and  becomes 
a  Providence,  or  care  of  God.  When  once  that  truth  has  opened  on  us,  then  all  the 
interest  of  life  centres  in  and  radiates  from  this— that  He,  God,  is  before  it  all. 
Every  activity  of  ours  answers  to  some  previous  activity  of  His.  Do  we  hope  ?  It 
is  because  we  have  caught  the  sound  of  some  promise  of  His.  Do  we  fear  ?  It  is 
because  we  have  had  some  glimpse  of  the  dreadfulness  of  getting  out  of  harmony 
with  Him.  Do  we  live  ?  It  is  a  projection  and  extension  of  His  being.  Do  we 
die?  It  is  the  going  home  of  our  immortal  souls  to  Him.  Oh,  the  wonderful 
richness  of  life  when  it  is  aU  thus  backed  with  the  priority  of  God  !  It  is  the 
great  illumination  of  all  living.  And  the  wonder  of  it  is  the  way  in  which,  in  that 
illumination,  the  soul  of  man  recognises  its  right.  That  is  what  it  was  made  for. 
See  what  the  religious  world  really  is  in  its  idea,  and  shall  be  when  it  shall  finally 
be  realised.  A  world  everywhere  aware  of  and  rejoicing  in  the  priority  of  God, 
feeling  all  power  flow  out  from  Him,  and  sending  aU  action  back  to  report  itself  to 


CHAP,  rv.]  I.  JOHN.  367 

Him  for  judgment — a  world  where  goodness  means  obedience  to  God,  and  sin  means 
disloyalty  to  God,  and  progress  means  growth  in  the  power  to  utter  God,  and  know- 
ledge means  the  understanding  of  God's  thought,  and  happiness  means  the  peace  of 
God's  approval.  That  is  the  only  world  which  is  religious.  And  now  see  how  all 
this  truth  comes  to  the  full  display  of  its  richness  in  the  Christian  faith.  The 
Christian  faith  is  the  sum  and  flower  of  the  religious  life  of  man.  Whatever  has 
struggled  in  all  other  religions  comes  to  its  free  and  full  expression  there.  And  so 
the  truth  of  the  priority  of  God  is  the  first  and  fundamental  truth  of  Christianity. 
With  Jesus  it  was  always,  "  God  loves  you."  He  went  about  saying  that  from 
house  to  house,  from  man  to  man.  He  built  this  background  behind  every  life. 
What  will  you  do  if  you  are  sent  to  carry  the  Gospel  to  your  friend,  your  child  ? 
Will  you  stand  over  him  and  say,  "  You  must  love  God ;  you  will  suffer  for  it  if 
you  do  not?  "  When  was  ever  love  begotten  so  ?  "  Who  is  God  ?  "  Why  should 
I  love  Him  ?  "  "  How  can  I  love  Him  ?  "  answers  back  the  poor,  bewildered  heart, 
and  turns  to  the  things  of  earth  which  with  their  earthly  affections  seem  to  love  it, 
and  satisfies  itself  in  loving  them.  Or  perhaps  it  grows  defiant  and  says,  "  I  will 
not,"  flinging  back  your  exhortation  as  the  cold  stone  flings  back  the  sunlight. 
But  you  say  to  your  friend,  your  child,  "  God  loves  you,"  say  it  in  every  language 
of  yours,  in  every  vernacular  of  his,  which  you  can  command,  and  his  love  is 
taken  by  surprise,  and  he  wakes  to  the  knowledge  that  he  does  love  God  without  a 
resolution  that  he  will.  How  shall  you  make  man  know  that  God  loves  him  ?  In 
every  way  there  is  no  speech  nor  language  in  which  that  voice  may  not  be  heard — 
but  most  of  all  by  loving  the  man  with  a  great  love  yourself.  We  may  think  again 
not  of  the  way  in  which  we  shall  get  our  friends  to  love  God,  but  of  the  way  in 
which  we  shall  get  ourselves  to  love  Him.  Oh,  the  old  struggles!  How  many 
have  said,  "  I  will  love  God ;  I  ought  to,  and  I  will,"  and  so  have  wrestled  to  do 
what  they  could  not  do — what  in  their  hearts  they  knew  no  real  reason  for  doing — 
and  have  miserably  failed,  and  now  are  satisfying  themselves  with  loveless 
obedience,  or  else  have  left  God  altogether,  and  tell  their  hearts  that  they  must 
forego  all  such  beautiful,  hopeless  ambitions.  Ah,  what  you  need  is  to  get  away 
round  upon  the  other  side  of  the  whole  matter.  It  is  not  whether  you  love  God, 
but  whether  God  loves  you.  If  He  does,  and  if  you  can  know  that  He  does,  then 
give  yourself  up  totally  and  unquestioningly  to  the  assurance  of  that  love.  Rejoice 
in  it  by  day  and  night.  Sometimes  it  seems  good  to  sweep  aside  all  the  complica- 
tions of  spiritual  experience  and  bring  it  all  to  absolute  simplicity.  Here  is  God, 
and  here  is  a  child  of  God.  The  Father  loves  the  child,  not  because  the  child  is 
this  or  that,  or  anything  but  just  His  child.  He  says  to  you,  "  Go,  save  My  child 
for  me."  And  you  say,  "  How,  my  Father  ?  "  And  He  says,  "By  Me."  And  you 
say,  "  Yes,  I  see,"  and  go  and  take  the  Father's  love  and  press  it  on  that  child  of 
His,  just  as  you  find  him.  You  know  that  the  fire  and  the  wood  belong  together. 
You  are  sure  that  if  the  fire  gets  at  the  wood,  the  wood  will  burn,  and  by  and  by, 
look  !  the  wood  is  burning.  The  wood  turns  to  fire  because  the  fire  gave  itself  to 
the  wood.  The  wood  loves  the  fire  because  the  fire  first  loved  it.  And  now  I 
wonder  whether  in  some  of  your  minds  there  does  not  come  a  question  regarding 
all  this  that  I  have  said.  "After  all,"  yoru  may  ask. yourself,  "what  does  it 
matter  ?  If  the  end  is  gained,  if  God  and  man  come  together,  what  matter  is  it  from 
which  side  the  first  impulse  came  ?  But  must  it  not  make  a  difference  ?  Is  there 
a  situation  or  a  fact  or  a  condition  anywhere  which  is  absolute  and  identical,  and 
does  not  vary  with  the  character  of  him  who  occupies  it  ?  The  man  is  more  than 
the  situation.  The  situation  means  little  without  the  soul  of  the  man  giving  it  its 
meaning.  When  then  I  see  man  reconciled  to  God  and  walking  with  his  Lord  in 
the  white  garment  of  a  new  life,  it  makes  vast  difference  what  is  the  spirit  of  that 
reconciled,  regenerated  man.  If  it  is  the  first  fact  of  his  new  existence — that 
which  he  never  loses  for  a  moment — that  the  impulse  of  it  came  from  God ;  that 
before  he  ever  thought  of  the  higher  life  its  halls  were  made  ready  for  him  and  its 
Lord  came  forth  into  the  wilderness  to  find  him — then  the  strength  of  a  profound 
humility  is  always  with  him.  The  paralysis  of  pride  does  not  creep  over  him. 
Besides  this,  the  appeal  of  the  new  life  to  the  soul  which  lives  it  is  largely  bound 
up  with  the  truth  of  the  priority  of  God.  The  man  is  stone  whom  that  does  not 
appeal  to.  How  shall  he  overtake  this  love  which  has  so  much  the  start  of  him  ? 
This  is  what  makes  his  service  eager  and  enthusiastic.  Again  this  truth,  that  God 
is  first,  gives  me  the  right  to  keep  a  strong  and  lively  hope  for  all  my  fellow-men. 
It  gives  me  also  the  chance  to  believe  that  I  can  help  them.  I  have  only  to  tell 
them  over  and  over  again  how  near  He  is  ;  I  have  only  to  beg  them  to  open  their 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

eyes  and  see  I  Have  I  talked  to-day  too  generally  of  the  priority  of  God  ?  Then 
make  it  absolutely  special  and  concrete.  There  is  some  duty  which  God  has  made 
ready  for  you  to  do  to-morrow  ;  nay,  to-day  !  He  has  built  it  like  a  house  for  you 
to  occupy.  You  have  not  to  build  it.  He  has  built  it,  and  He  will  lead  you  up  to 
its  door  and  set  you  with  your  feet  upon  its  threshold.  Will  you  go  in  and 
occupy  it?  Will  you  do  the  duty  which  He  has  made  ready?  {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.) 
Lave,  not  fear,  the  animating  principle  of  a  believer's  conduct : — I.  It  is  a  pbesciple 
EXACTLY  SUITED  TO  OUR  MENTAL  CONSTITUTION.  Take  the  case  of  oui  love  to  the 
creature,  and  whence  does  it  arise?  Two  elements  invariably  attach,  in  our 
apprehension,  to  the  object  of  it.  These  are  excellence  in  itself  and  some  advantage 
arising  from  it  to  ourselves.  Neither  of  these  alone  will  produce  love.  Even  in 
the  natural  love  of  the  parent  for  the  child  or  of  the  child  for  the  parent,  it  will  be 
found  these  two  elements  exist.  Belative  goodness  seems  to  be  essential  to  love. 
It  may  be  said,  such  a  view  destroys  the  disinterested  nature  of  love,  and  introduces 
an  element  of  selfishness.  Even  were  this  true,  it  would  not  set  aside  a  fact 
of  which  all  must  be  conscious  in  their  mental  constitution.  But  we  do  not 
admit  that  a  regard  to  our  own  happiness  is  of  the  nature  of  selfishness. 
It  is  in  itself  good.  The  Creator  has  implanted  it  in  all  His  intelhgent  off- 
spring, and  it  is  therefore  not  blameworthy.  Now  this  is  the  very  ground  on 
which  the  love  of  God  is  based.  Every  perfection  that  can  command  our 
approval  and  admiration  belongs  to  Him.  But  this  excellence  is  all  relative  to 
us.  In  every  feature  of  it  we  recognise  an  advantage  to  ourselves.  That  unerring 
■wisdom  is  our  guide,  that  almighty  power  is  our  protection,  that  boundless  goodness 
is  our  support.  We  look  upon  them  with  delight,  and  say,  "  This  God  is  our  God." 
And  so  we  acquiesce  in  the  apostle's  sentiment — "  We  love  Him  because  He  first 
loved  us."  II.  This  principle  is  as  Scriptural  as  it  is  reasonable.  How  naturally 
and  properly  does  David  express  himself  (Psa.  xviii.  1-3).  Excellence  upon 
excellence  he  discovers  in  God  and  celebrates  with  the  highest  praise,  but  every  one 
of  them  is  regarded  as  a  source  of  benefit  to  himself.  The  Scriptures  unite  the  glory 
of  God  and  our  good.  III.  This  principle  is  well  illustrated  in  the  history  op 
EEDEMPTioN.  It  began  with  God.  The  first  movement  was  on  His  part.  When 
our  first  parents  fell  they  fled  from  God,  and  discovered  no  disposition  to  return  to 
Him.  But  He  followed  them  with  proposals  of  love.  Observe,  then,  the  practical 
effect  of  such  a  revelation  on  the  mind  of  him  who  becomes  concerned  about  his 
own  redemption.  He  sees  what  the  mind  of  God  is.  He  can  have  no  doubt  upon 
the  great  truth  that  "  the  will  of  God  is  his  salvation."  He  has  only  to  acquiesce 
in  an  arrangement  that  has  been  made  already  by  unerring  wisdom  and  infinite 
love.    IV.  The    principles    of    the    text  apply   to   every   individual   who  is 

SAVED,  AS   WELL   AS     TO     THE     SCHEME    OF   REDEMPTION    BY   WHICH    HE    IS    SAVED.       God 

has  not  devised  redemption,  and  then  left  it  to  men  to  receive  it  if  they  will 
and  reject  it  if  they  will.  The  same  grace  that  provided  it  applies  it.  V. 
When   the  soul  is  thus  brought  under  the  power  of   grace,  it  continues  to 

BE  powerfully  INFLUENCED  BY  ITS  APPREHENSION  OF  THE  UNDESERVED  AND 
GRACIOUS  LOVE  OF  GOD.  VI.  EVERYTHING  IB  SO  ORDERED  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  THE 
BELIEVER   AS   TO    EXERCISE^ AND   ADVANCE    THIS   DiVlNE    PRINCIPLE.       He    is    taUght    tO 

trace  up  all  he  enjoys  to  the  gift  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  (1.  Cor.  iii.  21-23). 
He  lives  in  the  midst  of  continual  remembrances  of  God  and  His  love.  He 
looks  upon  the  world  in  which  he  has  been  placed.  The  marks  of  sin  are  many, 
but  the  tokens  of  the  Divine  love  are  many  more  and  greater  far.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
Love  : — I.  The  parentage  of  true  love  to  God.  There  is  no  light  in  the  planet 
but  that  which  cometh  from  the  sun ;  there  is  no  light  in  the  moon  but  that  which 
is  borrowed,  and  there  is  no  true  love  in  the  heart  but  that  which  cometh  from 
God.  From  this  overflowing  fountain  of  the  infinite  love  of  God,  all  our  love  to 
God  must  spring.  II.  Love,  after  it  is  Divinely  born  in  our  heart,  must  be  Divinely 
NOURISHED.  Love  is  an  exotic  ;  it  is  not  a  plant  that  will  flourish  naturally  in 
human  soil.  On  what,  then,  does  love  feed  ?  Why,  it  feeds  on  love.  That  which 
brought  it  forth  becomes  its  food.  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  The 
constant  motive  and  sustaining  power  of  our  love  to  God  is  His  love  to  us.  And 
here  let  me  remark  that  there  are  different  kinds  of  food  in  this  great  granary  of 
love.  When  we  are  first  of  all  renewed  the  only  food  on  which  we  can  live  is  milk, 
because  we  are  but  babes  and  as  yet  have  not  strength  to  feed  on  higher  truths. 
The  first  things,  then,  that  our  love  feeds  upon  when  it  is  but  an  infant,  ij  a  sense 
of  favours  received.  And  mark,  however  much  we  grow  in  grace  this  will  always 
constitute  a  great  part  of  the  food  of  our  love.    But  when  the  Christian  grows  older 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  '  369 

and  has  more  grace  he  loves  Christ  for  another  reason.  He  loves  Christ  because 
he  feels  Christ  deserves  to  be  loved.  But  mark  at  the  same  time,  we  must  always 
mingle  with  this  the  old  motive.  We  must  stUl  feel  that  we  begin  with  that  first 
Btepping-stone,  loving  Christ  because  of  His  mercies,  and  that  although  we  have 
chmbed  higher  and  have  come  to  love  Him  with  a  love  that  is  superior  to  that  in 
motive,  yet  still  we  carry  the  old  motive  with  us.  We  love  Him  because  of  His 
kindness  towards  us.  This,  then,  is  the  food  of  love  ;  but  when  love  grows  sick — 
and  it  does  sometimes — the  most  loving  heart  grows  cold  towards  Christ.  Do  you 
know  that  the  only  food  that  ever  suits  sick  love  is  the  food  on  which  it  fed  at  first  ? 
Take  it  to  the  Cross  and  bid  it  look  and  see  afresh  the  bleeding  Lamb  ;  and  surely 
this  shall  make  thy  love  spring  from  a  dwarf  into  a  giant,  and  this  shaU  fan  it 
from  a  spark  into  a  flame.  And  then,  when  thy  love  is  thus  recruited,  let  me  bid 
thee  give  thy  love  full  exercise  ;  for  it  shall  grow  thereby.  You  say,  "  Where  shall 
I  exercise  the  contemplation  of  my  love  to  make  it  grow  ?  "  Oh !  Sacred  Dove  of 
love,  stretch  thy  wings  and  play  the  eagle  now.  Come  !  open  wide  thine  eyes  and 
look  full  in  the  Sun's  face,  and  soar  upward,  upward,  upward,  far  above  the  heights 
of  this  world's  creation,  upwards,  tiU  thou  art  lost  in  eternity.  III.  The  work  of 
IjOVE.  "  We  love  Him."<  Children  of  God,  if  Christ  were  here  on  earth,  what  would 
you  do  for  Him?  "Do  for  Him!"  says  one ;"  do  for  Him ! '^  "Did  He  hunger,  I  would 
give  Him  meat  though  it  were  my  last  crust.  Did  He  thirst,  I  would  give  Him  drink, 
though  my  own  lips  were  parched  with  fire.  Was  He  naked,  I  would  strip  myself  and 
shiver  in  the  cold  to  clothe  Him.  Did  He  want  a  soldier,  I  would  enlist  in  His 
army  ;  did  He  need  that  some  one  should  die,  I  would  give  my  body  to  be  burned 
if  He  stood  by  to  see  the  sacrifice  and  cheer  me  in  the  flames."  Ah  I  we  think  we 
love  Him  so  much  that  we  should  do  all  that ;  but  there  is  a  grave  question  about 
the  truth  of  this  matter  after  aU.  Do  you  not  know  that  Christ's  family  are  here  ? 
And  if  ye  love  Him,  would  it  not  foUow  as  a  natural  inference  that  you  would  love 
His  offspring?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Love's  logic: — Our  love  to  God  is  like  a 
trickling  riU  speeding  its  way  to  the  ocean  because  it  first  came  from  the  ocean. 
All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea,  but  their  floods  first  arose  from  it :  the  clouds  that 
were  exhaled  from  the  mighty  main  distilled  in  showers  that  filled  the  water-brooks. 
Here  was  their  first  cause  and  prime  origin ;  and,  as  if  they  recognised  the  obhga- 
tion,  they  pay  tribute  in  return  to  the  parent  source.  The  ocean  love  of  God,  so 
broad  that  even  the  wing  of  imagination  could  not  traverse  it,  sends  forth  its 
treasures  of  the  rain  of  grace,  which  drop  upon  our  hearts,  which  are  as  the 
pastures  of  the  wilderness ;  they  make  our  hearts  to  overflow,  and  in  streams  of 
latitude  the  life  imparted  flows  back  again  to  God.  I.  The  indispensablb 
NECESSITY  OP  LOVE  TO  GoD  IN  THE  HEART.  You  will  find  in  the  seventh  verse  of 
this  chapter,  that  love  to  God  is  set  down  as  being  a  necessary  mark  of  the  new- 
birth.  "Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God."  In  the  eighth 
verse  we  are  told  also  that  love  to  God  is  a  mark  of  our  knowing  God.  True  know- 
ledge is  essential  to  salvation.  God  does  not  save  us  in  the  dark.  Further,  the 
chapter  teaches  us  that  love  to  God  is  the  root  of  love  to  others  (ver.  11).  He,  who, 
being  in  the  Church,  is  yet  not  of  it  heart  and  soul,  is  but  an  intruder  in  the  family. 
But  since  love  to  our  brethren  springs  out  of  love  to  our  one  common  Father,  it  is  plain 
that  we  must  have  love  to  that  Father  or  else  we  shall  fail  in  one  of  the  indispensable 
marks  of  the  children  of  God.  Again,  keeping  to  the  run  of  the  passage,  you  will 
find  by  the  eighteenth  verse  that  love  to  God  is  a  chief  means  of  that  holy  peace 
which  is  an  essential  mark  of  a  Christian.  Love  must  co-operate  with  faith  and 
cast  out  fear,  so  that  the  soul  may  have  boldness  before  God.  We  also  see,  if  we 
turn  again  to  St.  John's  Epistle  and  pursue  his  observations  to  the  next  chapter  and  the 
third  verse,  that  love  is  the  spring  of  true  obedience.  "  This  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we 
keep  His  commandments."  Though  the  fruit  be  not  the  root  of  the  tree,  yet  a  well 
rooted  tree  wiU,  in  its  season,  bring  forth  its  fruits.  Love  to  God  is  as  natural  to  the 
renewed  heart  as  love  to  its  mother  is  to  a  babe.  Who  needs  to  reason  a  child  into 
love  ?  As  certainly  as  you  have  the  hf e  and  nature  of  God  in  you  you  wiU  seek 
after  the  Lord.  II.  The  source  and  spring  of  true  love  to  God.  "  We  love 
Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  Observe,  then,  that  love  to  God  does  not  begin  in  the 
heart  from  any  disinterested  admiration  of  the  nature  of  God.  Again,  our  love  to 
God  does  not  spring  from  the  self-determining  power  of  the  wiU.  A  man  can  only 
love  God  when  he  has  perceived  some  reasons  for  so  doing ;  and  the  first  argument 
for  loving  God  which  influences  the  intellect  so  as  to  turn  the  affections,  is  the 
reason  mentioned  in  the  text,  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  Now. 
having  thus  set  the  text  in  a  negative  light  let  us  look  at  it  in  a  more  positive 

24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

manner.  It  is  certain  that  faith  in  the  heart  always  precedes  love.  We  first 
believe  the  love  of  God  to  us  before  we  love  God  in  return.  And,  oh  what  an 
encouraging  truth  this  is.  Your  first  step  is  to  believe  that  God  loves  you,  and 
■when  that  truth  is  fully  fixed  in  your  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  fervent  love  to  God 
wiU  spontaneously  issue  from  your  soul,  even  as  flowers  willingly  pour  forth  their 
fragrance  under  the  influence  of  the  dew  and  the  sun.  Eest  assured  that  in  pro- 
portion as  we  are  fully  persuaded  of  God's  love  to  us,  we  shall  be  affected  with  love 
to  Him.  Do  not  let  the  devil  tempt  you  to  believe  that  God  does  not  love  you 
because  your  love  is  feeble  ;  for  if  he  can  in  any  way  weaken  your  belief  in  God's 
love  to  you  he  cuts  off  or  diminishes  the  flow  of  the  streams  which  feed  the  sacred 
grace  of  love  to  God.  Oh  for  a  great  wave  of  love  to  carry  us  right  out  into  the 
ocean  of  love.  Observe  day  by  day  the  deeds  of  God's  love  to  you  in  the  gift  of  food 
and  raiment  and  in  the  mercies  of  life,  and  especially  in  the  covenant  blessings  which 
God  gives  you,  the  peace  which  He  sheds  abroad  in  your  hearts,  the  communion 
which  He  vouchsafes  to  you  with  Himself  and  His  blessed  Son,  and  the  answers  to 
prayer  which  He  grants  you.  Note  well  these  things,  and  if  you  consider  them 
carefully  and  weigh  their  value,  you  will  be  accumulating  the  fuel  on  which  love 
feeds  its  consecrated  flame.  III.  The  revival  of  our  love.  Perhaps  some  of  you 
have  become  so  cold  in  your  affections  that  it  is  difficult  to  be  sure  that  you  ever 
did  love  God  at  all.  Now  note  well  that  the  cause  which  originated  your  love  is  the 
same  which  must  restore  it.  You  went  to  Christ  as  a  sinner  at  first,  and  your  first 
act  was  to  believe  the  love  of  God  to  you  when  there  was  nothing  in  you  that 
evidenced  it.  Go  the  same  way  again.  Think  of  the  Lord's  unchanging  grace, 
and  you  will  feel  the  spring-time  of  love  returning  to  your  soul.  Many  considera- 
tions ought  to  aid  you,  a  backslider,  to  believe  more  in  the  love  of  God  than  ever 
you  did.  For  think  what  love  it  must  be  that  can  invite  you  still  to  return,  you, 
who  after  knowing  so  much  have  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge ;  you,  who 
after  having  experienced  so  much  have  given  the  lie  to  your  profession.  IV.  The 
PEKFECTiNG  OF  OUR  LOVE  TO  GoD.  There  are  few  of  us  who  know  much  of  the 
deeps  of  the  love  of  God  ;  our  love  is  shallow.  Love  to  God  is  like  a  great  moun- 
tain. The  majority  of  travellers  view  it  from  afar  or  traverse  the  valley  at  its  base: 
a  few  climb  to  a  halting  place  on  one  of  its  elevated  spurs  whence  they  see  a  portion 
of  its  sublimities :  here  and  there  an  adventurous  traveller  climbs  a  minor  peak, 
and  views  glacier  and  alp  at  closer  range  ;  fewest  of  all  are  those  who  scale  the  top- 
most pinnacle  and  tread  the  virgin  snow.  As  fear  goes  out  love  comes  in  at  the 
other  door.  So  the  more  faith  in  God  the  more  room  there  is  for  soul-fiUing  love. 
Again,  strong  faith  in  God's  love  brings  great  enjoyment ;  our  heart  is  glad.  This 
deep  enjoyment  creates  the  flaming  love  of  which  I  have  just  now  spoken.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Love's  birth  and  parentage  : — I.  We  shall  use  the  text  for  doctrinal 
INSTRUCTION ;  and  one  point  of  doctrinal  instruction  is  very  clear,  namely,  that  God's 
love  to  His  people  is  first.  From  all  eternity  the  Lord  looked  upon  His  people  with 
an  eye  of  love,  and  as  nothing  can  be  before  eternity  His  love  was  first.  Another  part 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  text  is  this,  that  the  love  of  God  is  the  cause  of  our  love  to 
God.  A  thing  may  be  first  and  another  second,  and  yet  the  first  may  not  be  the 
cause  of  the  second,  there  may  be  no  actual  link  between  the  two  :  but  here  we  have 
it  unmistakeably,  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us  " ;  which  signifies  not 
merely  that  this  is  the  motive  of  which  we  are  conscious  in  our  love,  but  that  this  is 
the  force,  the  Divine  power  which  created  love  in  us.  If  you  love  God  it  is  with  no 
love  of  yours,  but  with  the  love  which  He  has  planted  in  your  bosoms.  Unrenewed 
human  nature  is  a  soil  in  which  love  to  God  will  not  grow.  There  must  be  a  taking 
away  of  the  rock  and  a  supernatural  change  of  the  barren  ground  into  good  soil, 
and  then,  as  a  rare  plant  from  another  land,  love  must  be  planted  in  our  hearts  and 
sustained  by  power  divine  or  else  it  will  never  be  found  there.  There  is  no  love  to 
God  in  this  world  that  is  of  the  right  kind  except  that  which  was  created  and  formed 
by  the  love  of  God  in  the  soul.  II.  Secondly,  we  shall  use  the  text  for  experimental 
INFORMATION  ;  and  here — 1.  We  learn  that  all  true  believers  love  God.  I  do  not  say 
that  they  all  feel  an  equal  love,  or  that  they  all  feel  as  much  love  as  they  should. 
I  will  not  say  that  they  do  not  sometimes  give  cause  to  doubt  their  love.  But  there 
is  love  in  the  heart  of  every  true-born  child  of  God ;  it  is  as  needful  to  spiritual  life 
as  blood  is  to  natural  life.  2.  Observe  carefully  the  kind  of  love  which  is  essential 
to  every  Christian — "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  Much  has  been  said 
about  disinterested  love  to  God;  there  maybe  such  a  thing,  and  it  may  be  very 
admirable,  but  it  is  not  mentioned  here.  You  may  not  be  able  to  rise  into  those 
heights  into  wliich  others  have  ascended  because  you  are  as  yet  only  a  babe  in  grace ; 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  371 

but  you  are  safe  enough  if  your  love  be  of  this  simple  character,  that  it  loves  because 
it  is  loved.  See  whether  such  a  humble,  grateful  love  towards  God  dwells  in  your 
hearts,  for  it  is  a  vital  point.  3.  Love  to  God  wherever  it  is  found  is  a  sure  evidence 
of  the  salvation  of  its  possessor.  If  you  are  loving  God  you  must  have  been  loved 
of  God :  true  love  could  not  have  come  into  your  heart  in  any  other  conceivable 
way;  and  you  may  rest  assured  that  you  are  the  object  of  His  eternal  choice.  III. 
Thirdly,  we  shall  use  the  text  as  a  matter  of  peactical  direction.  The  text  tells 
you  how  to  love  God.  The  text  shows  us  the  method  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He 
reveals  the  love  of  God  to  the  heart,  and  then  the  heart  loves  God  in  return.  Go 
thou  to  the  fragrant  mystery  of  redeeming  love,  and  tarry  with  it  tiU  in  those  beds 
of  spices  thine  own  garments  shall  be  made  to  smell  of  myrrh  and  aloes  and  cassia. 
There  is  no  way  of  sweetening  thyself  but  by  tasting  the  sweetness  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
the  honey  of  His  love  will  make  thy  whole  nature  to  be  as  a  honeycomb,  every  cell 
shorter  of  thy  manhood  shall  drop  sweetness.  {Ibid.)  Love  of  God  : — The 
phrase  of  the  revised  version  has  the  larger  meaning.  "  We  love "  includes 
"  We  love  Him,"  and  it  is  evident  from  the  rest  of  the  passage  that  we  have  here  a 
distinct  though  not  an  exclusive  reference  to  the  love  of  God.  How  can  we  love 
Him  then,  the  Invisible,  the  Infinite,  and  Omnipotent  ?  Might  we  not  as  well  try 
to  love  illimitable  space  or  embrace  the  elastic  and  viewless  air  ?  And  yet  a  great 
multitude  which  no  man  can  number  declare  with  St.  John  that  they  do  love  God. 
Yes,  and  moreover  you  will  find  that  the  love  of  God  will  stand  aU  the  tests  which 
can  be  applied  to  any  love  known  among  men.  Things  widely  different  in  their 
nature  are  often  much  alike  in  their  appearance.  Artificial  flowers  are  very  Hke  real 
ones ;  gilt  is  very  like  gold ;  and  paste  is  made  to  look  like  gems.  Wise  men, 
therefore,  apply  tests  which  only  the  real  articles  can  stand.  They  find  the  real 
flower  by  its  scent ;  test  gold  by  acids,  and  the  file  teUs  them  at  once  which  is  the 
gem  and  which  is  the  worthless  imitation.  What,  then,  are  the  marks  of 
true  love?  I.  True  love  is  unselfish.  False  love  rushes  onwards  to  its 
own  low  ends.  It  is  meanly  selfish,  and  when  resisted,  cruel  as  the  grave. 
But  true  love  gives  up  and  goes  without.  'Tis  finely  prodigal,  royally 
extravagant,  and  divinely  liberal.  Well,  men's  love  for  God  has  this  mark 
upon  it ;  it  teaches  men  to  deny  seK — ^to  give  up  and  go  without.  Oh,  what  sacri- 
fices men  have  made  for  God  !  The  sacrifice  of  God's  love  for  men  is  indeed,  and 
ever  must  be,  the  great  fact  of  all  history.  But  the  next  great  fact  is  the  sacrifice 
of  men's  love  for  God.  God's  love  in  Christ  gave  its  "  aU  "  to  men,  and  the  love  of 
God  in  Christian  hearts  gives  "all"  to  God  to-day.  It  is  a  constraining  power  in 
men's  lives.  11.  True  love  has  pleasure  in  fellowship  with  its  object.  As 
the  needle  turns  to  the  pole,  so  love,  if  true,  seeks  communion  with  its  object  and  ia 
only  there  at  rest.  Sir  Henry  Taylor,  in  his  autobiography,  says  that  when  the 
affection  of  a  certain  couple  of  friends  for  each  other  was  spoken  of  in  Wordsworth's 
hearing,  the  poet  asked,  "Are  they,  so  far  as  circumstances  permit,  continually 
together:  for  that  is  the  test?"  Yes;  fellowship  is  the  measure  of  love.  "It  is 
good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God,"  said  one  psalmist ;  and  sacred  history  proves 
that  such  is  the  conviction  of  all  saints.  Every  halting  place  along  the  patriarch's 
line  of  march  became  at  once  a  place  of  worship.  These  men  and  their  God  were 
continually  together.  They  delighted  in  God  ;  and  all  who  love  Him  still  live  with 
Him.  They  go  to  prayer  and  worship,  not  as  the  "  whining  schoolboy,  with  his  satchel 
and  shining  morning  face,  creeping  Uke  snaU  unwillingly  to  school,"  but  rather  as 
children  run  from  their  tasks  to  play.  III.  True  love  is  ennobling  in  its  influence. 
Passion  degrades,  and  lust  dehumanises  man  ;  but  love  makes  aU  men  better  and 
nobler.  Sir  Eichard  Steele  said  of  Lady  Hastings  that  "  to  love  her  was  a  liberal 
education."  But  all  true  love  educates.  You  cannot  tend  in  love  a  wounded  bird, 
or  pity  a  hungry  dog  without  thereby  being  taught  something  of  the  lore  of  angels. 
A  mother  cannot  love  her  helpless  babe  without  thereby  being  lifted  nearer  God. 
Love,  like  mercy,  is  twice  blessed,  "  it  blesseth  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes." 
WeU,  men's  love  to  God  does  this.  It  cleanses  speech  of  all  impurities  and  gruff- 
ness.  It  refines  manners  and  educates  the  taste.  It  expands  sentiment  and  deepens 
sympathy.    It  makes  the  clown  gentle  and  the  coward  brave.    IV.  Taua  lovb  is 

FAITHFUL  UNTO   THE   END. 

"  Love  is  not  love  which  alters  when  it  alteration  finds, 
Or  bends  with  the  remover  to  remove. 
Oh,  no !  it  is  an  ever-fix^d  mark. 
That  looks  on  tempests  and  is  never  shaken ; 
It  is  the  star  to  every  wandering  barque. 
Whose  worth's  unknown,  although  his  height  be  taken." 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

It  is  no  fickle  fancy,  no  passing  mood,  no  fair-weather  affection.     {J.  M.  Gibbon.) 
Love  God  and  humanity : — I.  Love  to  God  is  essential  to  the  Christian  mfe. 
1.  The  Lord  is  not  satisfied  unless  He  obtains  our  love.     2.  Unless  we  love  the  Lord 
there  cannot  be  complete  personal  union.     3.  Love  to  Him  makes  our  obedience 
Bweet.     4.  Love  to  God  acts  as  an  irresistible  magnet  to  draw  us  from  sin.     5.  The 
mutual  love  between  the  Christian  and  his  Lord  is  the  heart  music  of  life.     11.  The 
LOVE   OF  God  is  the  grand  motive  power  of  the  Christian  life.      1.  The  love 
of  God  is  the  fountain  of  our  love  to  each  other.     To  do  good  to  those  who  need 
our  active  sympathy  merely  because  it  is  our  duty  to  do  so  is  pulling  up  stream,  and 
the  best  of  us  would  soon  tire  of  it,  but  to  bless  men  because  we  love  them  constrains 
as  to  be  faithful  in  active  goodness  unto  death.     2.  The  love  of  God  is  needful  to 
inspire  us  to  noble  deeds.    In  olden  times  the  maiden  promised  her  hand  to  the 
knight  if  he  did  some  valiant  deed  of  warfare  ;  but  in  our  case  the  Lord  loves  us 
first  of  all,  and  that  love  is  the  impulse  of  a  noble  life.     3.  The  love  of  God  to  us  ia 
a  sure  foundation  for  our  faith.     4.  The  love  of  God  to  the  world  is  an  ever  present 
rainbow  of  hope  to  the  Christian.     Why  ?     Because  God  will  second  your  efforts. 
He  loves  them,  and  therefore  let  us  hope  for  the  worst  of  men.     HI.  We  are  com- 
manded to  love  our  brother-man.     1.  This  love  oils  the  wheels  of  service.     2. 
Love  to  our  brother-man  is  the  motive  of  self-denial  for  his  sake.     Pure  love  is  its 
own  exceeding  great  reward.    IV.  I  would  now  remind  you  why  tou  love  God.     1. 
We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us.     2.  We  also  love  Him  because  He  laid 
down  His  life  for  us.  3.  We  love  Him  because  His  love  is  unchangeable.  {W.  Birch.) 
God^s  love  to  us,  and  ours  to  Him : — Our  nature  is  so  constituted  that  we  are  never 
really  happy  untU  we  love  God.    A  bold  assertion  this  ;  but  does  not  our  experience 
prove  that  it  is  a  true  one  ?    We  can  love  Him.     Millions  have  done  so  already. 
And  having  the  capacity  within  us,  which  we  must  admit  to  be  the  highest  of  aJI 
our  capacities,  when  we  consider  the  object  on  which  it  may  be  exercised,  we  are 
never  quite  at  ease  tiU  it  has  fastened  itself  on  its  proper  object.     TUl  then  there 
is  uneasiness,  insecurity,  a  sense  of  disproportion  between  the  promise  of  our 
nature  and  its  performance.     We  are  like  guests  at  a  banquet  who  cannot  find 
their  place,  and  go  hunting  up  and  down  bewildered.    But  when  once  we  have  got 
to  love  God  there  is  tranquillity.    But  if  it  be  true  that  man  is  so  constituted  that 
he  cannot  be  really  happy  unless  he  love  God,  it  is  also  true  that  he  cannot  love 
God  unless  he  knows  Him.    Not  tUl  an  object  is  brought  in  some  way  or  other 
into  contact  with  our  experience  can  we  have  any  emotion  about  it,  much  less  that 
highest  and  most  appreciative  of  all  emotions — love.    And  therefore  man,  with 
that  inborn  capacity  of  his  for  loving  God,  has  at  all  times,  however  imperfectly, 
sought  to  know  Him.    He  has  "  felt  after  God."    But  here  an  obstacle  rises  up, 
before  which  some,  who  may  have  so  far  gone  with  us,  turn  back  in  despair.     They 
grant  that  it  were  man's  happiness  to  love  God  if  he  could,  and  that  to  love  Him 
he  must  know  Him ;  but  who,  they  ask,  can  know  the  Unknowable  ?    We  can  but 
enumerate  the  things  He  is  not,  but  that  is  far  from  discerning  what  He  is.    In 
reply,  we  grant  the  difiBculty,  but  remain  undiscouraged  by  its  existence.    It  only 
shows  that  if  a  man  is  to  know  God,  God  must  take  the  initiative ;  God  must 
reveal  Himself  to  man.    And  to  reveal  Himself  means  not  to  disclose  His  whole 
essence,  but  so  much  of  His  being,  and  so  much  of  man's  relation  to  Him,  as  it 
may  be  well  or  possible  for  man  to  know.    Now  this,  if  revelation  be  true,  is  what 
God  in  His  wisdom  and  His  goodness  haa  seen  fit  to  do ;  and  we  might  as  well 
refuse  the  aid  of  a  lamp  in  the  darkness  because  it  is  not  the  sun  as  decline  to  be 
guided  by  such  knowledge  of  Himself  as  He  has  given  us  because  it  is  not  and 
cannot  be  complete  knowledge.    But  God's  revelation  is  manifold,  and  they  do  ill, 
and  lose  much  of  it  that  is  precious,  who  confine  it  within  the  four  corners  of  a 
book,  which  does  but  contain  the  imperfect  record  of  a  part,  though  it  be  far  the 
most  important  part,   of  it.     God  reveals  Himself  in  nature  as  the  sustaining 
power,  by  which  all  things  exist  and  have  their  being,  and  as  a  power  working 
through  fixed  laws,  which  reach  from  the  minutest  particles  of  matter  on  eartk 
to  the  naost  distant  star,  not  one  of  which  laws  varies  one  hair's  breadth,  not  one 
of  which  ever  fails.     God  reveals  Himself  in  history  as  the  moral  governor  of  the 
world  ;  and  here  also  He  works  by  fixed,  unalterable  laws.    He  shows  us  that  He 
loves  good  and  hates  evil,  and  that  evil  shall  in  the  end  be  overcome  by  good.    God 
reveals  Himself  in  conscience  to  each  individual  man  with  that  inevitable,  unim- 
peachable verdict  on  our  past  actions  as  they  proceed  from  us  one  by  one,  and 
those  promptings  and  monitions  as   to  future   actions,  which  we  may  neglect, 
because  we  are  free,  but  which,  "whether  we  hear  or  whether  we  forbear,"  have 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  373 

still  been  given  us.  These  are  some  of  the  revelations  by  which  God  imparts,  or 
is  ready  to  impart,  to  all  men  some  knowledge  of  Himself.  But  as  yet  we  touch 
but  the  hem  of  His  garment,  we  do  not  see  His  face.  God  is  on  His  throne  in 
heaven,  and  we  are  poor  mentals  upon  the  distant  earth.  But  what  if  God,  in  Hia 
infinite  goodness,  sees  fit  to  bridge  over  from  His  side  the  chasm  which  we  cannot 
pass,  to  satisfy  the  longing  which,  if  He  has  made  us,  He  has  Himself  imparted 
in  our  souls,  and  to  reveal  Himself  to  man,  not  now  in  a  cold  immutable  law,  but 
in  a  living  breathing  person  like  ourselves,  who  can  gather  up  all  our  God-ward 
affections  as  in  a  focus,  and  transmit  them  in  concentrated  fulness  to  the  awful 
throne  on  high  ?  Shall  we  not  know  Him  then  as  we  never  knew  Him  before  ? 
And  shall  we  not  be  able  to  love  Him  then  as  we  never  loved  Him  before  ?  But 
this  is  the  revelation  which  He  has  actually  vouchsafed  to  give  us  in  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  And  this  manifestation  of  God  was  not  opened  on  us  unexpectedly, 
in  which  case  we  might  have  missed  its  fuU  significance,  but  prepared  for  and  led 
up  to  by  a  long  C9urse  of  discipline  and  aroused  anticipation.  The  record  of  thia 
preparation  we  have  in  the  pages  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  record  of  its  fulfil- 
ment in  the  New.  What  if  those  to  whom  it  was  first  tendered  misunderstood  it 
in  part,  as  we  can  now  see,  mixed  up  much  that  was  local  and  temporary  with  it, 
and  failed  to  come  at  the  whole  truth  ?  Their  knowledge  of  God  was  coloured 
knowledge,  but  it  was  not  therefore  unreal ;  their  expectations  of  a  further  revela- 
tion of  Him  were  coloured  expectations,  but  they  were  none  the  less  inspired  from 
a  Divine  source.  In  this  as  in  other  things  connected  with  the  education  of  our 
race  the  same  order  prevails  :  "  That  is  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which 
is  natural,  then  that  which  is  spiritual."  And  when  that  fuUer  revelation  was 
made,  did  not  illusion  cease,  and  did  men  see  nothing  but  the  pure  absolute  light  ? 
By  no  means.  They  saw  as  much  as  they  were  capable  of  seeing ;  they  understood 
as  much  as  they  had  capacities  for  understanding.  Now,  if  we  turn  from  the 
manner  of  the  revelation  of  Himself  which  God  has  made  in  Christ  Jesus  to  the 
matter  of  it,  we  find  that  it  conveys  to  us  precisely  that  which  we  most  need  to 
know.  I  admit  that  God  is  my  Creator,  but  does  He  regard  me  as  the  workman 
regards  the  machine  that  he  has  made?  There  is  no  sympathy  between  them. 
He  can  make  it  and  break  it,  so  far  as  the  machine  is  concerned,  with  equal 
indifference.  I  admit  that  God  controls  the  affau-s  of  men  by  fixed  moral  laws, 
but  so  far  men  may  be  to  Hun  but  as  pawns  are  in  the  hand  of  the  chess  player. 
The  player  cares  not  for  the  pawns  in  themselves,  he  moves  them  this  way  or  that, 
according  to  the  requirements  of  the  game.  I  admit  further  that  the  working  of 
these  laws,  when  considered  through  a  long  period  of  time,  convinces  me  that 
God  approves  of  good  and  punishes  evil,  and  so  far  I  may  recognise  a  kind  of 
moral  similarity  between  my  own  imperfect  character  and  what  I  may  reverently 
style  the  character  of  God ;  but  does  this  warrant  me  in  hoping  for  any  closer 
union  with  Him?  If  I  desire  to  draw  nearer  to  Him,  will  He  suffer  it?  The 
unlikeness  is  greater  than  the  likeness,  and,  besides,  sin  bars  the  way.  Yea, 
answers  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  all  these  questionings,  God  is  not  your  Maker  and 
Governor  only,  but  your  Father.  He  loves  you  and  desires  your  love.  I  know  it 
and  reveal  it  to  you.  My  life  itself  is  the  manifestation  of  His  love.  I  am  Hia 
Son,  He  sent  Me  to  you.  Behold  in  Me,  so  far  as  human  eyes  can  see,  the 
character  of  God.  But  beautiful,  winning,  soul-satisfying  as  this  revelation  is, 
there  are  difiiculties  in  the  way  which  make  some  men  hesitate  to  accept  it. 
Doubtless  there  are  such  difiiculties,  but  do  they  lie  in  our  path  here  only,  or  are 
they  not  greater  for  him  who  rejects  it  ?  Our  life  is  hemmed  in  with  difficulties  on 
every  side,  they  are  the  necessary  accompaniment  of  our  limited  faculties,  and  wa 
may  sit  reckoning  them  up  for  ever,  till  they  paralyse  every  thought  and  every 
action.  To  complain  of  them  is  to  complain  that  God  has  made  us  men,  and  not 
a  creature  quite  different  from  man.  He  is  wisest  and  most  loyal  to  his  Master 
who  bears  the  burden  laid  upon  his  back  and  moves  on  in  spite  of  it  as  best  he 
can.  And  further,  whilst  we  admit  the  existence  of  these  diflBculties,  we  must  be 
careful  not  to  exaggerate  their  number  or  their  importance.  We  may  divide  them 
into  two  classes :  those  which  are  inherent  in  the  subject  itself,  and  those  which 
we  create  for  ourselves  or  others  have  created  for  us.  The  former  we  shall  never 
abolish,  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  put  up  with  them ;  the  latter  we  may,  in  some 
cases,  extenuate  or  remove.  Is  it  possible,  we  ask,  for  God  to  reveal  His  very  self 
in  a  man  ?  That  is  an  inherent  difficulty,  and  the  only  answer  we  can  make  is 
that  we  cannot  fully  understand  it,  neither  can  we  expect  to  understand  it,  because 
we  do  not  know  the  limits  of  possibility  with  God,  but  we  can  believe  and  act  on 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  belief,  as  we  do  in  a  score  of  other  instances  every  day,  and  when  we  do  so  we 
find  rest  for  our  souls.  He  gave  us  a  person  and  a  life  to  imitate,  to  trust  in  and 
to  love;  let  us  beware  lest  we  substitute  for  Him  in  our  hearts  a  theory  and  a 
scheme  of  salvation.  Let  us  observe  further,  for  our  comfort,  how  many  of  the 
difficulties  which  so  perplex  us  are  merely  intellectual  difficulties,  not  moral.  That 
shows  us,  perhaps,  that  they  are  somehow  of  our  own  creating.  It  is  much  learn- 
ing that  doth  make  us  mad.  The  poor  and  the  ignorant  do  not  feel  them.  It  is 
with  the  heart  they  believe,  not  the  head  ;  and  we  must  humbly  imitate  them.  Let 
us  then  be  encouraged  to  cast  away  the  thought  of  difficulties,  and  open  our  hearts 
to  receive  in  simple  faith,  and  respond  to,  the  full  stream  of  Divine  love.  "What 
I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  That  may  suffice  us. 
God  loves  us — stupendous  thought ! — and  therefore  we  may  love  Him.  When  a 
little  child  has  done  wrong  and  offended  his  father  he  goes  about  uneasy  and  with 
an  aching  heart.  He  tries  to  distract  himself  with  other  things  ;  he  turns  to  this 
amusement  or  to  that — innocent  amusements,  it  may  be,  in  themselves — but  they 
have  all  lost  their  interest.  There  is  something  amiss  in  the  relation  of  perfect  love 
between  him  and  his  parent,  and  the  consciousness  of  this  goes  with  him  wherever 
he  goes.  He  fortifies  himself  in  his  pride,  dwells  on  the  fancied  wrong  that  he  has 
suffered  by  being  rebuked,  not  on  the  real  wrong  that  he  has  wrought  by  dis- 
obedience, and  resolves  to  be  self-sufficient  and  do  without  the  love  which  seems 
withheld ;  but  the  aching  heart  is  still  there,  the  dull  sense  of  unhappiness.  At 
last  his  father  calls  to  him  with  a  father's  voice,  full  of  pity  and  of  love,  and  at 
the  sound  of  that  voice  his  heart  is  melted  like  wax  within  him,  not  with  fear,  but 
with  penitent,  trustful  love;  all  the  barriers  which  pride  had  raised  are  broken 
down,  and  he  rushes  to  his  father's  arms  and  is  folded  once  more  in  a  loving 
embrace.  (E.  H.  Bradby,  M.A.)  God's  love  to  man: — To  many  it  seems  that 
perfect  amiableness  and  goodness  in  our  Creator  requires  Him  to  look  with  entire 
approbation  and  indulgence  upon  men,  without  regard  to  the  principles  upon  which 
they  are  acting,  whether  holy  or  unholy.  And  yet  some  of  this  very  class  of 
persons,  when  brought  to  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  themselves  and  to  a 
higher  conception  of  what  they  ought  to  be,  see  that  a  holy  God  must  hate  them  ; 
and  if  He  hates  them  they  cannot  imagine  that  He  loves  them  at  the  same  time. 
Here  are  the  two  extremes  of  error,  one  of  which,  probably,  mankind  generally 
regard  as  truth.  I.  God  can  hate  and  love  the  same  person  at  the  same  moment. 
It  is  shown  in — 1.  The  very  nature  of  benevolence.  What  is  a  good  man?  Try 
him  by  a  case  of  this  kind.  He  knows  a  man  who  is  addicted  to  drunkenness,  and 
who  in  his  paroxysms  abuses  his  family.  How  does  this  good  man  regard  the 
case  ?  He  abhors  the  drunkard's  character  and  conduct,  yet  he  loves  and  pities 
the  man.  And  thus  God  exhibits  Himself  to  us  as  a  holy  God.  He  abhors  aU  our 
Bins.  He  threatens  us  with  eternal  destruction,  and  yet,  while  we  were  still 
enemies.  He  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  us.  2.  Scriptural  representation  of  God's 
feelings  towards  the  children  of  men.  Notice  the  case  of  those  who  murdered 
Christ.  None  can  doubt  that  they  were  most  hateful  to  God.  And  yet  the  dying 
Son,  who  fully  represented  His  Father's  feelings,  regarded  them  as  deserving  the 
wrath  of  God  at  the  same  time  He  prayed  for  their  forgiveness.  And  was  that  prayer 
ineffectual  ?  No ;  for  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  a  servant  of  Christ  is  commissioned  to 
go  and  charge  upon  them  their  crime,  not  to  condemn  them,  but  to  bring  them  to 
repentance.  And  then  the  Holy  Spirit  descends  to  bring  them  to  exercise  repentance, 
and  some  of  them,  at  least,  are  forgiven.  Then  look  abroad  upon  a  world  lying 
in  wickedness,  sometimes  as  great  as  that  which  brought  the  deluge  of  water  on 
the  world  or  that  of  fire  on  Sodom.  But  He  sendeth  His  rain  upon  the  thankful 
and  the  unthankful.  II.  God  does  love  all  men.  It  is  seen  in — 1.  The  very 
act  of  creation.  What  endowments  has  He  bestowed  on  man !  2.  Forming  a 
moral  government  for  man.  The  laws  under  which  He  has  placed  us  all  aim  at 
our  personal  perfection  and  the  highest  degree  and  form  of  happiness  of  which  we 
are  capable.  But  the  crowning  proof  of  God's  love— 3.  Is  in  Christ  and  redemption. 
in.  Every  human  being  should  love  Him.  The  benevolence  of  God  claims  our 
admiration,  complacency,  and  gratitude.  {E.  N.  Kirk,  D.D.)  Gratitude  not  a 
sordid  affection  : — Some  theologians  have  exacted  from  an  inquirer,  at  the  very 
outset  of  his  conversion,  that  he  should  carry  in  his  heart  what  they  call  the 
disinterested  love  of  God.  They  have  set  him  on  the  most  painful  efforts  to  acquire 
this  affection.  They  have  led  him  to  view  with  suspicion  the  love  of  gratitude,  as 
having  in  it  a  taint  of  selfishness.  The  effect  of  all  this  on  many  an  anxious 
seeker  after  rest   has   been  most  discouraging.     With  the  stigma  that  has  been 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  375 

aflBxed  to  the  love  of  gratitude,  they  have  been  positively  apprehensive  of  the 
inroads  of  this  affection,  and  have  studiously  averted  the  eye  of  their  contemplation 
from  the  objects  which  are  fitted  to  inspire  it.  1.  The  proper  object  of  the  love  of 
gratitude  is  the  Being  who  has  exercised  towards  me  the  love  of  kindness ;  and 
this  is  more  correct  than  to  say  that  the  proper  object  of  this  affection  is  the  Being 
who  has  conferred  benefits  upon  me.  Just  let  the  naked  principle  of  kindness 
discover  itself,  and  through  it  have  neither  the  power  nor  the  opportunity  of 
coming  forth  with  the  dispensation  of  any  service,  it  is  striking  to  observe  how, 
upon  the  bare  existence  of  this  affection  being  known,  it  is  met  by  a  grateful 
feeling  on  the  part  of  him  to  whom  it  is  directed ;  and  what  mighty  argumentations 
may  be  given  in  this  way  to  the  stock  of  enjoyment,  and  that  by  the  mere  recipro- 
cation of  kindness  begetting  kindness.  For  to  send  the  expression  of  this  kindness 
into  another's  bosom  it  is  not  always  necessary  to  do  it  on  the  vehicle  of  a  positive 
donation.  It  may  be  conveyed  by  a  look  of  benevolence  ;  and  thus  it  is  that  by 
the  mere  feeling  of  cordiality  a  tide  of  happiness  may  be  made  to  circulate  through- 
out aU  the  individuals  of  an  assembled  company.  Now  this  is  the  very  principle 
which  is  brought  into  action  in  the  dealings  of  God  with  a  whole  world  of  male- 
factors. It  looks  as  if  He  confided  the  whole  cause  of  our  recovery  to  the  influence 
of  a  demonstration  of  good-will.  It  is  truly  interesting  to  mark  what,  in  the 
devisings  of  His  unsearchable  wisdom,  is  the  character  which  He  has  made  to 
stand  most  visibly  out  in  the  great  scheme  and  history  of  our  redemption ;  and 
surely  if  there  be  one  feature  of  prominency  more  visible  than  another  it  is  the 
love  of  kindness.  As  soon  as  His  love  of  kindness  is  believed,  so  soon  does  the 
love  of  gratitude  spring  up  in  the  heart  of  the  believer.  As  soon  as  man  gives  up 
his  fear  and  his  suspicion  of  God  and  discerns  Him  to  be  his  friend,  so  soon  does 
he  render  Him  the  homage  of  a  willing  and  affectionate  loyalty.  There  is  not  a 
man  who  can  say,  I  have  known  and  believed  the  love  which  God  hath  to  us,  who 
cannot  say  also,  I  have  loved  God  because  He  first  loved  me.  The  law  of  love 
begetting  love  will  obtain  in  eternity.  Like  the  law  of  reciprocal  attraction  in  the 
material  world,  it  will  cement  the  immutable  and  everlasting  order  of  that  moral 
system,  which  is  to  emerge  with  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness.  Now,  by  looking  more  closely  to  this  affection,  both  in  its 
origin  and  in  its  exercises,  we  shall  perceive  in  it  more  clearly  all  the  characteristics 
of  virtue.  Let  it  be  remarked,  then,  that  an  affection  may  simply  exist,  and  yet  be 
no  evidence  of  any  virtue  or  of  any  moral  worth  in  the  holder  of  it.  I  may  enter 
the  house  of  an  individual  who  is  an  utter  stranger  to  the  habit  of  acting  under  a 
sense  of  duty ;  who  is  just  as  much  the  creature  of  mere  impulse  as  the  animals 
beneath  him ;  and  who  therefore,  though  some  of  these  impulses  are  more 
characteristic  of  his  condition  as  a  man  and  most  subservient  to  the  good  of  his 
fellows,  may  be  considered  as  possessing  no  virtue  whatever,  in  the  strict  and 
proper  sense  of  the  term.  But  he  has  the  property  of  being  affected  by  external 
causes.  And  I,  by  some  ministration  of  friendship,  may  flash  upon  his  mind  such 
an  overpowering  conviction  of  the  good-will  that  I  bear  him  as  to  affect  him  with  a 
Bense  of  gratitude,  even  unto  tears.  The  moral  obligation  of  gratitude  may  not 
be  present  to  his  mind  at  all .  But  the  emotion  of  gratitude  comes  into  his  heart 
unbidden,  and  finds  its  vent  in  acknowledgments  and  blessings  on  the  person 
of  his  benefactor.  We  would  say  of  such  a  person  that  he  possesses  a  happier 
original  constitution  than  another  who,  in  the  same  circumstances,  would  not  be 
so  powerfully  or  so  tenderly  affected.  And  yet  he  may  have  hitherto  evinced 
nothing  more  than  the  workings  of  a  mere  instinct,  which  springs  spontaneously 
within  him  and  gives  its  own  impulse  to  his  words  and  his  performances,  without 
a  sense  of  duty  having  any  share  in  the  matter,  or  without  the  will  prompting  the 
individual  by  any  such  consideration  as,  Let  me  do  this  thing  because  I  ought  to 
do  it.  The  first  way,  then,  in  which  the  will  may  have  to  do  with  the  love  of 
gratitude  is  by  the  putting  forth  of  a  desire  for  the  possession  of  it.  It  may  long 
to  realise  this  moral  accomplishment.  It  may  hunger  and  thirst  after  this  branch 
of  righteousness.  Even  though  it  has  not  any  such  power  under  its  command  as 
would  enable  it  to  fulfill  such  a  volition,  the  volition  itself  has  upon  it  the  stamp 
and  the  character  of  virtue.  But,  again,  there  are  certain  doings  of  the  mind  over 
which  the  will  has  a  control,  and  by  which  the  affection  of  gratitude  may  either 
be  brought  into  being  or  be  sustained  in  lively  and  persevering  exercise.  At  the 
bidding  of  the  will  I  can  think  of  one  topic  rather  than  another.  I  can  transfer 
my  mind  to  any  given  object  of  contemplation.  I  can  keep  that  object  steadily  in 
view,  and  make  an  effort  to  do  so,  when  placed  in  such  circumstances  as  might 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

lead  me  to  distraction  or  forgetfulness.  And  it  is  in  this  way  that  moral  praise  or 
moral  responsibility  may  be  attached  to  the  love  of  gratitude.  Ere  the  heart  caa 
be  moved  by  this  aiJection  to  another  there  must  be  in  the  mind  a  certain  appro- 
priate object  that  is  fitted  to  call  it  and  to  keep  it  in  existence — and  that  object  is 
the  love  of  kindness  which  the  other  bears  me.  It  is  this  which  anns  with  such  a 
moral  and  condemnatory  force  the  expostulation  which  He  holds  with  Israel, 
"  that  Israel  doth  not  know,  that  My  people  do  not  consider."  It  is  because  we 
like  not  to  retain  God  in  our  knowledge  that  our  minds  become  reprobate ;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  is  by  a  continuous  effort  of  my  will  towards  the  thought  of  Him 
that  I  forget  not  His  benefits.  It  is  by  the  strenuousness  of  a  voluntary  act  that  I 
connect  the  idea  of  an  unseen  benefactor  with  all  the  blessings  of  my  present  lot 
and  aU  the  anticipations  of  my  futurity.  It  is  by  a  combat  with  the  most  urgent 
propensities  of  nature  that  I  am  ever  looking  beyond  this  surrounding  materialism 
and  setting  God  and  His  love  before  me  all  the  day  long.  There  is  no  virtue,  it  ia 
allowed,  without  voluntary  exertion ;  but  this  is  the  very  character  which  rims 
throughout  the  whole  work  and  exercise  of  faith.  To  keep  himself  in  the  love  of 
God  is  a  habit,  with  the  maintenance  of  which  the  wUl  of  man  has  most  essentially 
to  do,  because  it  is  at  his  wUl  that  he  keeps  himself  in  the  thought  of  God's  love 
towards  him.  2.  We  now  feel  ourselves  in  a  condition  to  speak  of  the  gospel  in 
its  free  and  gratuitous  character — to  propose  its  blessings  as  a  gift — to  hold  out  the 
pardon  and  the  strength  and  all  the  other  privileges  which  it  proclaims  to  believers 
as  so  many  articles  for  their  immediate  acceptance — to  make  it  known  to  men  that 
they  are  not  to  delay  their  compliance  with  the  overtures  of  mercy  tUl  the  dis- 
interested love  of  God  arises  in  their  hearts,  but  that  they  have  a  warrant  for 
entering  even  now  into  instant  reconciliation  with  God.  Nor  are  we  to  dread  the 
approach  of  any  moral  contamination,  because  when,  after  their  eyes  are  opened  to 
the  marvellous  spectacle  of  a  pleading  and  offering  and  beseeching  God,  holding 
out  eternal  life  unto  the  guilty,  through  the  propitiation  which  His  own  Son  hath 
made  for  them,  they  must  from  that  moment  open  their  whole  souls  to  the 
influences  of  gratitude  and  love  the  God  who  thus  hath  first  loved  them.  We 
conclude,  then,  with  remarking  that  the  whole  of  this  argument  gives  us  another 
view  of  the  importance  of  faith.  It  brings  the  heart  into  contact  with  that  influence 
by  which  the  love  of  gratitude  is  awakened.  The  reason  why  man  is  not  excited 
to  the  love  of  God  by  the  revelation  of  God's  love  to  him  is  just  because  he  does 
not  beUeve  that  revelation.  This  is  the  barrier  which  lies  between  the  guUty  and 
their  offended  Lawgiver.  Could  the  kindness  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  be  seen  by 
him,  the  softening  of  a  kindness  back  again  would  be  felt  by  him.  This  also 
suggests  a  practical  direction  to  Christians  for  keeping  themselves  in  the  love 
of  God.  They  must  keep  themselves  in  the  habit  and  in  the  exercise  of 
faith.  They  must  hold  fast  that  conviction  in  their  minds,  the  presence 
of  which  is  indispensable  to  the  keeping  of  that  affection  in  their  hearts. 
{T.   Chalmers,  D.I).)        The   reciprocal   action   of  love : — I.   Divine  love  in  its 

MANIFESTATION   TO    THE    CEEATURE.       11.    ThE   BECIPROCAL   INFLUENCE     OF     THAT     LOVE. 

m.  The  pbioritt  of  the  Divine  love  to  the  human.  IV.  The  Divine  lovb 
CAUSATIVE  of  THE  HUMAN.  (Johu  Tesseyman.)  On  love  to  God  : — I.  The  nature 
AND  ACTINGS  OF  OUR  LOVE  TO  GoD.  1.  Love  to  God  supposes  01  springs  from  the 
knowledge  of  Him  and  faith  in  Him.  2.  Love  to  God  includes  the  highest 
esteem  of  Him.  3.  Love  to  God  includes  earnest  desires  after  His  grace  and 
favour,  communion  with  Him,  and  the  enjoyment  of  Him.  4.  Love  to  God 
includes  or  produces  complacency,  joy,  and  delight  in  Him.  5.  Love  to  God 
includes  or  springs  from  a  thankful  sense  of  His  benefits.  6.  Love  to  God  may 
also  include  good-will  to,  and  zeal  for.  His  honour  and  glory  in  the  w^orld.  U. 
Keasons  and  MOTIVES  TO  IT.  1.  How  uujust  and  how  unhappy  the  disposition 
opposite  to  this  love  is.  2.  Consider  that  love  to  God  is  the  true  honour  and 
happiness  of  your  souls.  3.  To  excite  your  love  to  God  consider  what  a  tran- 
Bcendently  glorious,  excellent,  and  amiable  Being  He  is  in  Himself.  4.  Consider 
that  God,  and  He  alone,  can  be  a  suitable  and  satisfying  portion  to  your 
Bouls.  5.  Consider  the  goodness  and  mercy,  love  and  grace  of  God,  and 
the  blessed  fruits  of  it,  to  you  and  others.  (T.  Fernie,  M.A.)  Why  we  love 
Him; — Love  is  said  to  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  law;  and,  in  its  highest  conditions, 
it  casts  out  all  fear.  A  soul  that  is  filled  with  love  to  God  has  no  anxieties 
in  reference  to  the  future.  A  man  so  filled  with  love  is  elevated ;  and  while 
he  walks  on  earth,  his  conversation  is  in  heaven,  his  associations  with  the 
invisible.    But  how  shall  this  love  be  developed  in  our  hearts  ?    What  is  the  law 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  377 

of  its  development  and  of  its  manifestations  ?  How  shall  we  love  God  with  that 
perfect  love  which  thus  associates  us  with  the  redeemed,  and  makes  us  confident 
in  the  midst  of  all  dangers?  Love  Divine  has  the  same  law  of  origin  and  of 
development  as  love  human.  We  love  a  mother  because  she  first  loved  us.  We 
love  God  because  He  first  loved  us.  And  that  long  tutelage  and  care  which  the 
child  receives  fixes  on  its  heart  this  sentiment  of  love.  It  grows  with  its  growth, 
it  strengthens  with  its  strength  ;  and  were  there  no  depravity,  no  stains  on  htunan 
nature,  that  love  would  grow  up  in  all  its  beauty,  strengthening  from  year  to  year. 
But  let  us  look  at  some  of  the  manifestations  that  God  has  given  of  Himself  to 
develop  this  emotion  of  love  in  our  hearts.  And,  first,  in  the  works  of  creation 
around  us,  God  has  manifested  Himself  as  the  loving  Creator.  He  hath  placed  us 
in  a  world  framed  for  our  enjoyment.  Not  only  have  we  indications  of  God's  love 
around  us  in  this  creation,  but  we  can  rise  higher  as  we  come  to  the  realm  of 
mind.  If  I  compare,  step  by  step,  as  I  advance :  A  child's  affection  for  a  parent  is 
increased  by  beautiful  material  arrangements  made  for  the  comfort  of  the  child. 
The  chamber,  the  furniture,  the  clothing,  everything  prepared  by  a  father's  affec- 
tion or  a  mother's  love,  indicate  to  the  child  that  affection.  So,  in  these  material 
arrangements,  God  tells  us  He  loves  us ;  and  as  we  gaze  on  these  arrangements, 
we  ought  to  love  God  ;  but  as  the  book  of  the  mind  opens  up  before  us,  how  this 
care  is  multiplied !  The  thought  of  God  strangely  drops  into  our  bosom.  There  is 
thought  in  animate  beings.  We  take  those  animals  that  serve  our  comfort,  that 
labour  for  us,  that  watch  for  us,  and  there  are  indications  of  thought  evidently  in 
them.  They  are  made  to  serve,  and  their  range  of  thought  is  exceedingly  small. 
We  are  made  to  rule,  and  our  thought  seems  to  be  almost  limitless.  How  ought 
we  to  love  God,  in  that  He  loved  us  so  much  as  to  give  us  this  power !  And  then 
could  He  call  us  up  while  the  great  mass  of  us  are  all  the  time  disposed  to  look 
downward !  Man  not  loving  God,  not  looking  upward  and  outward,  becomes 
sensual.  He  spends  his  time  in  feeding  his  body,  in  satisfying  his  appetites,  and 
he  forgets  the  realm  of  empire  over  nature,  and  over  ideas,  and  over  thoughts,  that 
God  opens  out  before  him  ;  and  hence,  without  love  of  God,  man  is  the  animal ; 
with  love  to  God,  he  is  the  seraph ;  with  love  to  God,  he  lives  in  His  affections  and 
rises  toward  glory  ;  without  love  to  God,  he  crawls  like  the  worm  ;  without  love  to 
God,  he  goes  downward  until  he  is  ready  to  make  his  bed  with  demons  ;  with  love 
to  God,  he  rises  above  angels  and  archangels,  and  is  preparing  for  the  throne  of 
God.  What  a  glorious  provision,  and  how  ought  we  to  love  God  in  that  He  loved 
us,  and  gave  to  us  such  prerogatives  I  But  then,  again,  God  hath  not  only  given 
this  mental  power,  this  dominion  of  thought,  this  government  of  the  lower  world, 
but  He  hath  given  unto  us  an  exalted  spiritual  nature.  Now,  this  spiritual  nature 
has  in  it  this  power  :  First,  in  looking  at  the  objects  of  admiration,  in  seeing  what 
God  has  done,  reflecting  toward  Him  gratitude ;  and,  secondly,  in  reflecting  that 
gratitude,  growing  into  His  image,  and  when  that  image  is  formed,  becoming  like 
God  Himself  in  radiating  light,  and  giving  satisfaction  to  all  around  us,  just  as  the 
eyes  develop  love.  Now,  as  God  develops  in  us  this  love  from  our  first  growing  up 
into  the  likeness  of  God,  as  our  hearts  are  grateful,  we  recognise  Him  to  be  the 
grand  idea,  the  perfect  pattern ;  our  souls  long  for  His  image,  we  want  to  be  like 
God  in  the  development  of  this  love,  we  long  to  be  changed  into  His  image,  and  we 
are  changed  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  Oh,  as  we 
grow  up  into  the  image  of  the  Master,  then  we  would  be  like  Hkn  in  action, 
imitating  Him ;  and  this  brings  up  in  our  hearts  the  desire  to  do  good  to  others. 
Oh,  were  aU  men  filled  with  love  to  God,  this  earth  would  be  quite  on  the  verge  of 
heaven ;  tears  would  be  wiped  away  by  some  soft  hand ;  darkness  would  be 
illuminated  by  the  smile  of  love ;  wants  would  be  provided  for  by  the  supply  of 
affectionate  charity  ;  and  this  earth  would  bear  the  impress  of  being  the  footstool 
of  God.  We  love  Him  in  the  origin  of  our  love ;  we  love  Him  in  the  law  of  the 
development  of  our  love ;  we  love  Him  in  the  manifestation  of  love  as  we  grow  into 
His  likeness.  But  this  law  of  Divine  love  is  not  like  that  of  human  love,  merely  in 
its  origin ;  it  is  like  it  in  the  means  of  its  growth.  Human  love  increases,  as  we 
know,  most  perfectly  the  object  of  that  love,  if  the  being  be  entirely  lovable.  In 
God  there  is  no  blemish.  The  more  we  can  know  of  Him,  not  only  do  we  love 
Him  better,  as  we  love  our  friends,  but  there  is  no  drawback  to  that  love.  In  Him 
is  love  without  blemish — no  selfishness,  no  defect ;  and  hence  the  more  we  know 
of  God,  the  better  we  must  love  Him.  (M.  Simpson,  D.D.)  The  genesis  of  love  : — 
When  we  read  one  of  the  writings  of  St.  John  the  Divine  it  is  as  if  one  heard 
strange  and  beautiful  music,  and  for  the  moment  our  mind  is  filled  with  the  sound 


878  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

of  composed  emotions.  First,  we  are  lifted  above  this  earth,  and  taken,  with  that 
eagle  eye,  into  the  blue  above  where  old  things  have  passed  away  and  all  things 
have  become  new.  We  next  become  conscious  of  the  things  that  have  before 
haunted  us,  the  vague  thoughts  that  have  entered  into  our  minds,  the  unfulfilled 
desires  that  were  ever  eluding  our  grasps,  and  the  ideals  which  have  floated  before 
our  imaginations ;  and  we  see  for  the  first  time  what  before  we  had  only  imagined 
— the  perfect  shape  of  heavenly  and  spiritual  beauty.  And  then,  after  that,  we 
become  conscious  of  something  else,  and  that  is  our  own  unloveliness  and  our  own 
imperfection.  But  I  find  that  the  last  feeling  left  upon  one's  mind,  if  one  is  in  a 
healthy  state,  is  this  :  a  great  longing  to  be  rid  of  one's  own  self,  and  to  be  lifted 
up  and  made  like  God.  You  see,  St.  John  is  the  master  of  the  philosophy  of  love, 
and  there  is  one  question  I  should  like  to  ask  you.  How  can  a  person  create  love 
if  love  does  not  exist  ?  And  if  it  does,  how  can  a  person  increase  it  ?  If  there  be 
no  fire  at  all  upon  my  cold  hearth,  how  shall  I  light  it  ?  And  if  there  be  a  flicker 
of  flame  upon  the  cold  ashes,  how  shall  I  bring  it  to  a  blaze  ?  It  is  a  very  difficult 
question.  No  person,  for  instance,  can  love  by  an  act  of  will.  I  can,  by  an  act  of 
win,  lift  my  arm,  because  my  arm  is  moved  by  voluntary  muscles.  I  cannot,  by 
an  act  of  will,  make  my  heart  beat.  And  neither  I,  nor  any  other  man,  nor  all 
men  together,  shall  be  able  to  make  it  give  one  beat  more  on  some  future  day  fixed 
upon  by  the  Divine  will.  I  will  to  love,  but  what  follows  ?  I  find  I  cannot  love. 
"Love  is  not  a  duty,  but  a  virtue."  That  is  why  love  can  never  be  commanded. 
Before  you  can  obey,  you  must  have  love.  Now  I  turn  to  St.  John,  and  he  just 
meets  my  question  about  how  love  can  be  created.  It  is  with  love  exactly  as  with 
life.  Life  cannot  spring  into  existence,  it  must  be  communicated.  It  is  exactly 
the  same  thing  with  regard  to  love.  You  cannot  make  the  black  coals  on  your 
hearth  burst  into  flame  unti^  you  apply  a  light.  If  you  want  to  love,  you  must 
wait  till  love  comes  from  without.  There  is  just  one  source  of  love,  and  that  is 
God.  And  there  can  be  no  love  in  the  human  heart  till  the  love  of  God  comes  in 
and  creates  it  there.  It  muLt  come  by  a  genesis,  not  by  spontaneous  generation. 
We  love  because  God  has  first  loved  us.  What  He  means  is  this :  there  may  be  a 
great  many  secondary  and  important  reasons  and  causes  for  love,  but  there  is  only 
one  Source  of  love  in  the  whole  universe,  just  as  to  this  world  there  is  only  one 
source  of  heat.  Remove  any  human  soul  from  the  perpetual  consciousness  of  the 
Divine  and  Fatherly  love,  you  have  got  no  love  in  that  soul.  Now  let  me  illustrate 
this  spiritual  truth,  first  from  the  reverse  side.  Take  a  street  arab.  How  do  you 
expect  he  can  be  approached  ?  Leave  him  alone.  He  will  then  become  an 
outcast,  a  vagabond,  perhaps  a  murderer.  Now  ask  yourselves  this  question,  How  is 
it  that  this  man  is  a  curse  to  himself  and  a  danger  to  society  ?  Ask  yourselves 
another  question.  Was  he  ever  loved  ?  His  father — why  his  father  kicked  him 
when  he  came  across  him,  and  swore  at  him  as  a  nuisance !  His  mother  sent  him 
out  to  beg  as  soon  as  he  could  stand.  His  companions,  in  Court  No.  6,  off  Street 
So-and-so,  why  they  were  just  young  savages,  and  they  treated  him  like  a  savage  ! 
Depend  upon  it,  if  you  deny  a  human  being  his  natural  rights,  if  you  treat  him 
with  injustice,  and  disregard  all  his  feelings,  you  wiU  turn  him  into  a  fiend.  Why 
should  he  not  ?  He  cannot  help  it ;  it  is  the  constitution  of  human  nature.  He 
hates  because  he  is  hated.  Now  there  is  the  other  side.  Take  the  opposite  product 
of  our  civilisation.  Nothing,  I  suppose,  is  more  beautiful  than  the  way  in  which 
some  boys  are  trained.  They  are  then  natural  boys ;  ay,  spiritual  boys  too !  A 
boy  comes  home  from  school  after  morning  lessons ;  the  first  thing  he  asks  is, 
"  Where  is  mother  ?  "  Not  because  he  wants  her,  but  just  to  take  her  hand  to  tell 
her  what  has  happened  at  school.  If  she  is  not  at  home  he  is  miserable.  And  if 
she  goes  away  for  a  little  he  is  never  happy  till  she  returns.  What  is  the  reason  ? 
"It  is  natural,"  you  say,  "because  he  loves  her."  What  do  you  mean  by 
"natural"?  Do  you  mean  that  there  is  a  little  germ  of  love  in  every  human 
heart  ?  I  believe  that,  too,  whether  it  is  nurtured  or  not.  Do  you  believe  it  still 
lives  ?  In  some  homes  the  boys  are  happier  when  they  are  away  at  school.  "  How 
that  boy  does  love  his  mother!"  Well,  what  do  you  argue  from  that?  I  argue 
that  his  mother  first  loved  him.  The  mother  shone  on  him,  now  he  shines  on  her. 
The  sun  gave  out  its  heat,  now  the  earth  gives  out  its  heat.  "  A  capital  son  that 
to  his  mother !  "  He  does  not  think  so.  She  is  getting  in  her  old  age  what  she 
gave  before.  Again,  if  you  see  a  man  that  is  pleasant  and  kind  to  everybody,  men 
like  that  man.  He  never  says  a  mean  thing  about  any  one.  Do  not  praise  him 
too  much.  Pass  it  back  !  He  has  had  a  good  mother,  a  good  father.  Do  not 
praise  the  tropics  because  the  fruit  is  there.     The  arctic  regions  might  have  done 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  379 

as  well  if  they  had  had  as  much  sun.  We  will  "  love  Him  because  He  first  loved 
us."  Let  us  see  how  this  applies  in  the  sphere  of  religion.  If  a  man  believes  that 
God  is,  but  never  has  got  the  length  of  believing  that  God  is  love,  then  I  do  not 
expect  much  from  that  man.  I  expect  him  to  be  uncharitable,  narrow,  not  par- 
ticularly generous  in  his  feelings.  The  Pharisee  did  not  believe  that  God  was  love, 
so  he  did  not  love.  He  could  not  help  it  any  more  than  the  arctic  regions  can  help 
being  frozen.  Now  you  turn  to  the  other  side.  Why,  how  the  children  loved 
Jesus !  Why,  how  all  kinds  of  people  followed  Jesus  I  Because  He  was  lovable  ; 
because  He  loved.  We  are  getting  on  now.  Why  did  Jesus  love  as  no  person  has 
ever  loved  yet,  or  ever  can  love  again  ?  Because  He  could  not  help  it.  St.  John 
tells  us  that  He  "  lay  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,"  where  all  is  love.  Now  this  law 
of  St.  John  throws  a  marvellous  light  upon  many  events.  The  devotion  of  some 
people  in  the  history  of  the  world  is  quite  beyond  explanation  unless  you  under- 
stand St.  John's  principle.  There  is  one  of  the  saints  whose  life  was  so  beautiful 
that  the  story  of  it  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  that  ever  was  written.  The  beasts 
of  the  field  all  loved  him ;  all  living  things  loved  him.  You  may  call  it  legend, 
but  I  do  not  see  any  limit  to  the  possibilities  of  human  love.  I  cannot  tell  what 
might  have  followed  if  that  man  had  lived.  When  all  creation  is  reconciled  it  will 
be  through  the  reconciliation  of  love.  Francis  Xavier  was  ordained  for  the  salvation 
of  the  East,  and  he  used  to  cry  out  in  his  prayers,  "  Give  me  more  suffering  that 
men  may  be  saved."  It  seems  marvellous ;  but  it  is  not  marvellous  when  you 
know  that  the  love  of  God  burned  inside  that  man's  heart  just  like  a  flame  from 
the  day  of  his  conversion  to  the  day  of  his  death.  (J.  Watson,  M.A.)  The  love 
of  God  reciprocated : — I.  The  love  of  God.  1.  Its  antiquity.  2.  Its  sovereignty. 
3.  It  is  displayed  in  Christ.  4.  It  has  ever  been  a  love  of  complacency  and  delight. 
5.  It  is  unchangeable  and  everlasting.  II.  The  cfvkacter  of  the  Christian's 
LOVE  TO  God.  1.  It  is  not  natural  to  man.  2.  It  is  caused  or  produced  by  the 
love  of  God.  3.  It  is  influenced  by  the  love  of  God.  4.  It  is  manifested  in  various 
ways.  (1)  It  boldly  professes  Christ  before  the  worh' .  (2)  It  manifests  anxious 
solicitude  and  suitable  exertions  to  advance  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  world.  (3)  It 
constrains  to  the  consecration  of  our  talents  to  God's  service.  (4)  It  readily  makes 
sacrifices  when  necessary.  (5)  It  is  manifested  by  loving  that  which  God  loves.  5. 
Love  to  God  is  necessary.  {Pulpit  Themes.)  Love  for  love: — I.  Chbistians 
CHERISH  GREAT  AFFECTION  FOR  Christ.  "  We  lovc  Him."  1.  It  is  implied  that 
they  are  an  exception  to  others.  The  majority  of  the  human  race  either  ignore  or 
oppose  Christ.  2.  It  is  implied  that  there  was  a  time  when  they  did  not.  Keligion 
is  not  inherent.  It  is  an  after-production.  3.  It  is  implied  that  they  are  fuUy 
conscious  of  their  love.  4.  It  is  implied  that  it  is  personal.  "We  love  Him" — 
not  His  gifts,  but  Himself.     H.  Christians  cherish  great  affection  for  Christ 

BECAUSE    OF   HiS     GREATER    AFFECTION     FOR     THEM.       "  BeCaUSB    He    first    loVCd    US." 

Natural  if  we  consider — 1.  The  greatness  of  the  Lover.  2.  The  wretchedness  of 
the  loved.  3.  The  wonderfulness  of  the  love.  (1)  Gracious  in  its  source.  (2) 
Sovereign  in  its  initiation.  (3)  Infinite  in  its  sacrifice.  (4)  Unchangeable  in  its 
power.  (5)  Unspeakable  in  its  benefits.  Conclusion:  1.  Jesus  continues  to  love. 
2.  He  loves  all.  3.  All  should  love  Him.  (B.  D.  Johns.)  God's  love  the  cause  of 
ours  : — Reciprocity  is  the  crown  of  love.  And  although  it  may  be  absent  in  one 
case  or  another,  we  cannot  use  the  word  "love,"  except  metaphorically,  in  any 
field  which  does  not  admit  of  its  possible  reciprocation.  Any  injunction  to  love 
God,  therefore,  will  sound  abstract  and  unreal,  till  we  remember  that  its  cause  and 
condition  is  that  "  He  first  loved  us."  God's  condescension,  not  man's  aspiration, 
is  the  beginning  of  religious  life.  There  have  been  times  when  the  sense  of  the 
Divine  oppressed  men,  and  led  to  superstition.  But  such  times  are  not  ours.  The 
world  of  the  present  day  believes,  but  does  not  tremble.  It  thinks,  and  speaks,  and 
acts,  and  goes  about  its  business  as  if  our  race  were,  for  practical  purposes,  self- 
centred  and  alone.  Many  causes  have  contributed  to  this.  The  psychological 
character  of  our  philosophy,  leading  to  agnosticism ;  our  overestimate  of  liberty, 
with  its  attendant  shadow  self-assertion,  to  the  comparative  neglect  of  obedience, 
humility,  reverence  and  awe ;  the  splendid  spectacle  of  our  vast  achievements  in 
mechanism  and  science — have  all  tended  to  reinforce  the  natural  pride  of  the 
human  heart.  It  needs,  therefore,  a  very  real  effort  to  bear  constantly  in  mind  the 
fact  that  we  are  creatures,  and  that  our  nearest  relation  is  our  Creator.  If  we 
turn,  then,  to  the  Divine  share  in  the  development  of  our  faculties,  we  shaU  see 
that  what  we  call  our  action  may  be  better  described  as  God's  attraction,  and  that 
we  advance  in  exact  proportion  as  we  let  ourselves  be  led  by  Him.     We  are  the 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

creatures,  science  tells  us,  of  our  environment.     Yes ;  but  the  reason  why  we  are 
so  is  that  our  true  environment  is  God.     Take  the  instance  of  the  will.     The  denial 
of  its  freedom  is  only  a  parody  of  the  truth  that  it  must  be  developed  by  external 
law.     The  laws  of  nature,  the  laws  of  society,  the  laws  of  conscience,  iJE  we  obey 
them,  slowly  determine  our  wills  towards  that  uniform  course  of  conduct  which 
constitutes  our  character.     The  character  of  the  scientific,  the  civilised,  the  moral 
man  is  formed  by  successive  acts  of  more  or  less  difficult  obedience  to  a  particular 
class  of  laws.    We  do  not  form  ourselves,  we  are  conformed  to  the  law ;  and  by 
every  step  in  that  conformity  our  true  freedom  is  enlarged.    And  what  is  this  but 
saying  that  God,  the  Source  of  all  law,  is  for  ever  at  work,  attracting  our  wills  into 
harmony  with  His  wiU,  increasing  our  liberty,  and  expanding  our  capacities,  in 
proportion  as  that  harmony  grows  more  complete ;  teaching  us  to  see,  in  what 
once  seemed  relentless  forces,  tokens  of  His  truthfulness.  His  holiness.  His  love. 
The  same  is  the  case  with  our  minds.     We  study  a  great  author,  and  in  doing  so, 
as  the  phrase  goes,  make  his  thoughts  our  own.     But  in  reality  it  is  he  who  throws 
the  spell  of  his  personality  upon  us,  and  makes  our  thoughts  his.     So  with  all 
other  mental  objects,  the  course  of  the  stars,  the  laws  of  mathematics,  chemical 
properties,  mechanical  forces — they  are  there,  they  exist  before  us ;   we  do  not 
create,  we  only  discover  them.     Our  intellect  grows  with  nourishment,  but  the 
nourishment  must  be  given  from  without.    Knowledge,  therefore,  rightly  viewed, 
is  the  progressive  acceptance  of  revelation ;  and  thence  the  moral  qualities  which 
we  see  that  it  involves.     So,  too,  our  power  of  loving  is  drawn  into  activity  from 
without.     The  tenderness  of  our  mother,  our  father's  protecting  pride,  the  warm- 
hearted affections  of  the  companions  of  our  youth,  bodily  beauty,  nobleness  of  life, 
sanctity  of  soul — aU  these  draw  the  heart  out  of  us,  and  teach  us  what  it  is  to  love. 
But  who  created  them  all,  and  endowed  them  with  their  loveliness  ?     God,  that  He 
might  draw  us  with  the  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love.     The  love  of  God  for 
us  once  realised  has  a  constraining  power  that  compels  us  to  return  it  with  all  our 
heart,  and  soul,  and  mind.      But  such  realisation  never  can   be   ours  tLU  our 
faculties  are  duly  disciplined.     Only  the  heart  that  knows  what  true  love  is  can 
read  the  indications  of  God's  love  for  us  aright.     Only  the  mind  that  is  directed 
upward  can  teach  the  heart  that  heavenly  knowledge.     Only  the  will  that  has ' 
learned  obedience  can  give  the  mind  its  true  direction.    We  must  will  in  order  to 
know,  and  know  in  order  to  love,  before  we  can  consciously  enter  within  the  sphere 
of  the  Divine  attraction.     There  remains  the  crowning  evidence  that  He  first  loved 
as.     He  gave  Himself  for  us.     The  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
supreme  appeal  to  our  love,  because  it  is  the  supreme  proof  of  His.     And  yet  there 
are  many  earnest  theists  in  the  present  day  willing  enough  to  trace  the  signs  of  a 
Divine  presence  in  the  universe,  but  inconsistently  stopping  short  of  a  belief  in  the 
Incarnation.    For  it  is  an  inconsistent  stoppage  on  the  part  of   any  real  theist, 
since  God,  who  is  conceived  of  as  caring  for  His  creatures,  must  be  supposed  to 
reveal  Himself  in  ways  suiting  their  capacity  ;  and  an  Incarnation,  as  many  a  pre- 
Christian  thinker  saw,  would  be  the  reasonable  culmination  of  such  ways  of  self- 
revealing.     There  is  evidence  enough  of  God's  love  for  us  in  the  beauty  of  the 
world,  the  beneficence  of  nature,  and  all  the  joy  of  human  intercourse.     It  is  only 
when  we  come  to  the  dark  sad  side  of  life  that  our  faith  begins  to  fail.    And  here 
the  Incarnation  takes  up  the  thread  of  proof,  not  by  removing  the  problem  of  the 
mystery  of  sorrow  from  our  minds,  but  by  revealing  God  Himself  as  willing  to 
bear  it  with  and  for  us,  and  so  enabling  our  hearts  to  feel  it  the  crowning  testimony 
of  His  love.     The  soul  that  has  reached  this  certitude  needs  no  other  motive  to 
ensure  its  obeying  the  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."     (/. 
R.  lUingworth,  M.A.)        Love  viore  attractive  than  light  .—What  is  the  force  that 
draws  men  ?     Somebody  says  it  is  light.    But  men  are  not  aU  drawn  to  Christ  by 
light ;  they  are  sometimes  driven  from  Him  by  it.     By  all  means  let  people  have 
their  board  schools  and  so  on,  but  do  not  imagine  that  that  will  ever  do  the  work 
of  the  Church.     No,  Christ  must  do  that.     Have  you  noticed  that,  in  this  brush  we 
are  having  with  the  Egyptians,  Arabi  Pasha  promised  not  to  go  on  with  the  earth- 
works ?     But  when  the  sun  went  down,  there  were  the  fellows  with  their  barrowa 
hard  at  work.     Admiral  Seymour  one  night  turned  the  electric  light  on  the  gentle- 
men, and  there  they  were.     But  they  did  not  at  once  put  down  their  barrows  and 
their  spades  and  go  away  home,  feeling  very  much  ashamed  at  being  detected. 
They  rather  kept  on  working  day  and  night.     Sometimes  when  men  get  light,  they 
rebel  against  it,  and  use  the  truth  they  have  learned  as  an  instrument  to  their 
detriment.     That  has  often  happened.     I  would,  if  I  could,  turn  the  electric  light 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  381 

on  some  men's  minds  and  let  them  see  themselves ;  but  I  know  that  in  many  cases 
it  would  increase  responsibility  and  increase  hostility,  and  it  would  not  win  the 
Boul.    How,  then,  are  men  won  to  Christ  ?    It  is  by  the  force  of  love.     {C.  JS. 
Spurgeon.)         Creed  and  life  : — "  Religion  is  not  a  creed,  but  a  life."    We  will 
venture  to  put  two  little  words  into  that  sentence,  "  Religion  is  not  only  a  creed, 
but  also  a  life."    Is  not  this  nearer  the  truth  ?     1.  In  reUgion  there  is  a  creed. 
"He  first  loved  us."     2.  In  reUgion  there  is  a  life.      "We  love  Him."     3.  In 
reUgion  there  is  a  Ufe  because  there  is  a  creed.     "  We  love  because  He  loved."     (C. 
Clemance,  D.D.)        God's  love  : — If  we  want  to  know  just  what  the  apostle  meant 
when  he  used  these  words  we  must  refer  to  other  verses  in  this  Epistle.     1.  One  of 
these  gives  us  love's  expression.     "  He  sent  His  Son,  the  propitiation  for  our  sins." 
2.  We  have  love's  object.     "  He  first  loved  us."     3.  We  have  love's  intensity. 
"  Herein  is  love."    4.  We'  have  love's  achievements.     "  Behold,  what  manner  of 
love,"  &c.  (chap.  ill.  1).     5.  We  have  love's  ultimate  intentions.     "  It  doth  not  yet 
appear,"  &c.  (chap.  iii.  2).     {Ibid.)        Love  : — Every  Christian  grace  is  some  form 
or  other  of  love.    Repentance  is  love — grieving.     Faith  is  love — leaning.     Hope  is 
love — expecting.     Courage  is  love — daring.     Patience  is  love — waiting.     And  so  on 
through  all  the  list  of  Christian  virtues.    And  thus  we  see  how  it  is  that  a  man  has 
just   as  much  religion  as  he  has  love  and  no  more.      {Ibid.)         Paganism  and 
Christianity  : — We   find  indications  of  the   Pagans  fearing  their  gods,  dreading 
them,  trying  to  appease  their  wrath  by  sacrifices  and  offerings,  being  very  much 
obliged  to  their  gods  if  they  gave  them  a  good  harvest,  and  so  on ;  but  nowhere  can 
\re  recall  any  indications  of  a  Pagan  loving  his  god !    And  why  ?    Because  the 
Pagans  never  knew  of  God  loving  them !     {Ibid.)        Our  love  the  reflex  of  God's  : — 
And  as  the  reflected  beams  of  the  sun  are  weaker  than  the  direct,  so  are  our 
affections  weaker  than  God's.     (J.  Trapp.)        Richard  Baxter's  prayer  : — Draw  my 
Boul  to  Thyself  by  the  secret  power  of  Thy  love,  as  the  sunshine  in  the  spring 
draws  forth  the  creatures  from  their  winter  cells  ;  meet  it  half  way,  and  entice  it  to 
Thee,  as  the  loadstone  doth  the  iron,  and  as  the  greater  flame  attracts  the  less. 
{R.  Baofter.)         Doctrine  and  morals  : — God  first  loved  us  is  the  summary  of 
Christian  doctrine ;  we  love  Him  is  the  summary  of  Christian  moraUty.     {Luthardt.) 
The  Christian's  love  : — I  can  think  of  no  better  illustration  of  the  relation  of  the 
Christian's  love  to  the  love  of  God,  than  that  which  is  afforded  by  the  contempla- 
tion of  th£  rising  spray  from  the  Falls  of  Niagara.    Who  that  has  stood  beside  that 
mighty  cataract,  and  looked  upon  the  water  pouring  in  a  thundering  torrent  over 
that  stupendous  precipice,  and  watched  the  mist  as  it  floats  upward  and  backward 
over  the  Falls,  and  outward  over  the  river  and  land,  has  not  been  charmed  and 
filled  with  holy  admiration  as  he  has  contemplated  this  parable  in  nature  ?     That 
mighty  torrent,  pouring  itself   with   ceaseless  and  exhaustless  energy,  day  and 
nJght,  into  the  river  below,  is  what  the  love  of  God  is  to  sinners.    Who  can 
measure  it  ?    Who  can  estimate  it  ?    The  thin,  and  yet  beautiful  spray,  arising 
from  the  foot  of  the  Falls,  is  just  a  little  of  these  same  waters  going  back  in  grate- 
ful acknowledgment  to  the  source  whence  they  came.     So  is  the  believers'  love  to 
God.    It  is  the  rebound  of  His  own  love — only  a  little,  yea,  only  an  infinitesimal 
portion  given  back  to  Him  who  so  loved  us.    As  the  spray  does  not  rise  by  any 
forced  effort  of  its  own,  so  the  believer,  who  stands  under  the  Niagara  of  God's  love 
poured  out  through  Christ,  will  not  have  to  make  an  effort  to  love  God ;  his  love 
will  ascend  without  effort.     {G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)        Action  and  reaction  between 
God  and  man : — ^You  have  seen  a  flowering-plant  unfold  itself  under  the  kindly 
■ays  of  the  morning  sun.     It  eagerly  drank  in  the  heat  and  life  that  came  to  it  in 
each  rill  of  celestial  fire,  and  opened  itself  more  and  more  fuUy  as  the  beams  grew 
in  strength,  until  at  length  its  whole  being  seemed  to  go  forth  in  a  glad  return  of 
fragrance  and  beauty.     That  plant,  in  its  relation  to  the  sun,  was  a  type  or  symbol, 
in  the  material  world,  of  the  action  and  reaction  that  pass  between  God  and  man 
in  the  spiritual  realm.     Analyse  the  symbol  and  you  observe — 1.   That  in  the 
nature  of  the  plant  there  must  be  a  certain  affinity  with  the  sun  and  his  rays.    But 
for  that  the  sun  might  shine  for  ever,  and  produce  no  more  vital  effect  on  the 
plant  than  he  does  on  a  stone.     2.  That  the  plant  does  not  find  the  sun,  but  the 
Bun  the  plant.    Initial  action  proceeds  from  the  sun — the  plant  at  first  is  only 
passive  and  receptive.     3.  That  what  the  sun  sends  down  is  energy,  not  instruction 
how  or  where  to  get  it,  but  energy,  life,  direct  and  simple.     4.  That  the  life  thus 
radiated  evokes  responsive  action.     The  plant  lifts  its  head,  expands  every  leaf  and 
petal,  follows  the  sun  wherever  he  goes,  and  spends  itself  in  works  of  fragrant  beauty 
in  praise  of  Him  who  rescaed  it  from  darkness  and  decay.     (P.  if.  Steenstra,  D.D.) 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ly. 

Vers.  20,  21.  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar, — I. 

The  lesson  is  taught  with  peculiar  force  which  is  deserving  of  attention. 
The  several  clauses  of  the  text  are  so  constructed  as  to  cast  light  upon  it.  "  A  man 
may  say,  I  love  God."  He  may  say  it  and  think  it,  and  yet  not  do  it.  In  that 
case  he  is  self-deceived.  Or  he  may  say  it  and  not  think  it.  In  such  a  case  he  is 
a  hypocrite.  In  the  midst  of  such  self-deception  or  hypocritical  profession  the 
man  "  may  hate  his  brother,"  The  man  who  so  speaks  and  acts  is  pronounced  to 
be  "  a  liar."  There  is  an  entire  inconsistency  between  what  he  says  and  does. 
His  conduct  towards  men  is  a  contradiction  to  his  profession  toward  God.  An 
argument  is  next  used  to  prove  the  inconsistency  of  professing  love  to  God,  while 
hatred  is  indulged  to  men.  "  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother,  whom  he  hath  seen, 
how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  "  This  is  assumed  to  be  an  im- 
possibility. And  it  really  is  so.  His  brother  is  the  child  of  God.  Can  I  love  a 
man  and  hate  his  child  ?  My  brother  is  to  me  the  representative  of  God,  and  in 
hating  him  I  hate  God.  To  confirm  the  argument,  it  is  added,  "  and  this  com- 
mandment have  we  from  him,  that  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother  also."  We 
say  we  love  God.  Of  that  love  the  great  proof  is  that  "  we  keep  His  command- 
ments." But  one  of  His  commandments  is,  that  we  love  one  another.  II.  Thb 
incompatibility  of  the  love  of  God  with  the  hatred  of  men.  It  is  to  be  feared 
that,  in  this  matter,  a  widespread  delusion  prevails  among  men.  Many  say  they 
love  God  who  are  seen  to  hate  men.  It  may  be  well,  therefore,  to  notice  some  of 
the  principal  forms  under  which  this  incongruity  has  appeared  in  both  past  times 
and  the  present.  1.  A  remarkable  example  of  it  may  be  seen  in  the  national  spirit 
that  prevailed  among  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  and  His  apostles.  The 
Jew  said  he  loved  God,  and  yet  he  was  injurious  to  men.  And  so  far  did  this 
spirit  prevail  that  it  formed  the  national  character  in  the  time  of  our  Lord.  2, 
This  habit,  however,  did  not  arise  out  of  anything  peculiar  to  Judaism;  for,  it! 
may  be  observed  next,  that  it  is  found  to  prevail  in  all  unenlightened  nations.  The 
Mussulman,  out  of  zeal  for  God,  as  he  alleges,  goes  forth  with  his  sword  to  demand 
subjection  from  all  men  ;  and,  when  he  has  the  power,  to  plunge  it  into  the  bosom 
of  any  one  who  dares  to  resist  him.  It  is  the  same  under  other  and  more  aggra- 
vated forms  in  nations  that  are  purely  heathen.  The  Hindoo,  out  of  zeal  for  God, 
refuses  to  eat  with  his  brother  of  another  caste,  lest  he  should  be  defiled.  The 
Chinaman  has  been  taught  from  his  infancy  to  reckon  all  men  barbarians  beyond 
the  boundaries  of  his  own  land.  All  heathen  people  entertain  the  same  idea  of 
religion.  They  regard  it  as  a  service  of  certain  forms  due  to  God ;  but  which,  it 
never  occurs  to  them,  is  designed  to  regulate  their  deportment  toward  one  another. 
The  love  of  God,  prompting  love  to  mankind,  is  nowhere  to  be  found,  even  as  a 
theory,  among  men  devoid  of  revelation.  Greece  and  Rome,  at  the  height  of  their 
enlightenment,  made  no  such  discovery.  It  is  humiliating  to  see  the  vanity  of 
their  worship,  which  was  neither  intended  nor  fitted  to  influence  their  conduct 
toward  men.  We  may  suppose  it  to  be  an  easy  thing  to  see  the  connection  between 
the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  man.  But  we  should  remember  we  are  indebted 
for  the  knowledge  of  it  entirely  to  the  Divine  Word.  3.  But  alas  !  even  where  the 
light  of  revelation  shines,  this  simple  truth  has  been  sadly  obscured.  Men  have 
thought  that,  because  they  had  been  born  and  Mved  within  certain  geographical 
boundaries,  they  were  not  required  to  seek  the  good,  but  rather  the  injury  of  those 
beyond  them.  They  have  engaged  in  the  most  savage  attacks  upon  one  another 
in  the  name  of  religion.  How  necessary  it  is  that  the  nations  should  learn  the 
lesson  of  the  text — "  that  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother  also."  4.  We  may 
go  for  another  illustration  beyond  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  fix  upon  the 
Christian  churches  themselves.  In  some  we  discover  the  most  uncharitable  zeal 
for  their  doctrines.  They  construct  a  system  which  they  hold  is  founded  on  the 
Word  of  God,  and  agreeable  to  it.  Admit  that  it  is  so.  Its  views,  they  maintain, 
are  essential  to  salvation.  Admit  that  they  are  so.  Forthwith  they  proceed  to 
denounce  all  who  do  not  see  with  them  eye  to  eye.  We  have  need  to  be  watchful 
lest  our  love  for  God,  in  maintaining  His  truth,  should  degenerate  into  bitterness 
against  men.  In  others,  again,  we  discern  the  uncharitableness  of  sect.  We  may 
go  further,  and  find  an  example  even  among  those  who  hold  the  same  truths,  and 
worship  in  the  same  sanctuary.  We  may  profess  love  to  God  in  His  ordinance, 
and  yet  be  indulging  ill-will  to  our  brother.  Worse  than  that,  we  may  do  him 
much  injury.  We  may  injure  him  in  his  good  name,  in  his  property,  in  his  peace, 
and  still  maintain  the  profession  of  love  for  God.  (/.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Love  to 
God  promotive  of  love  to  man : — There  is  an  element  of  Christian  ethics  present  in 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  JOHN.  383 

the  Gospels,  and  everywhere  attributed  to  Jesus,  which  we  scarcely  find  at  all  in 
the  Epistles.  It  is  the  setting  up  of  an  antagonism  between  duty  to  God  and  the 
claims  of  natural  affection.  It  will,  I  think,  be  profitable  to  inquire  whether  our 
duty  to  God  and  our  love  of  Him  ought  ever  to  override  our  duty  to  our  families 
and  our  natural  affection  for  our  nearest  and  dearest  relations.  Turning  over  the 
leaves  of  that  flesh-bound  revelation,  we  find  our  home-love  to  be  the  most  precious, 
most  redeeming,  most  sanctifying  of  all  our  spiritual  treasures.  According  to  our 
possession  of  family  love  our  home  is  either  our  heaven  or  our  hell.  But  love  is 
much  more  than  this— it  is  our  real  moral  teacher.  It  is  at  home  that  our  cha- 
racters are  formed  for  fatherly,  motherly,  sisterly,  and  brotherly  lives  in  the  outer 
world.  And  how  love  purifies  and  restrains  !  Who,  looking  back  on  his  past  life, 
cannot  remember  the  many  times  when  he  would  have  fallen  before  temptation  but 
for  the  love  he  bore  to  his  father  or  mother,  or  wife  or  children  ?  Last  of  aU,  our 
actual  possession  and  exercise  of  love  is  our  only  key  to  the  knowledge  of  the  love 
of  God.  From  this  springs  all  true  religion,  all  true  worship  of  the  Father  in 
heaven,  and  all  service  acceptable  to  Him.  So  I  read  in  our  poor  human  hearts 
this  sublime  truth.  Love  is  our  highest  bliss,  our  best  guide  to  duty,  our  strongest 
impulse  to  perform  it,  the  most  efficient  cultivator  of  a  noble  character,  our  surest 
defence  in  the  face  of  temptation,  and  the  highest  revelation  of  God  Himself.  And  . 
now  I  venture  to  affirm  that  our  duty  to  God  never  does  conflict  with  our  duty  to 
each  other.  And  why  ?  It  needs  no  argument.  It  is  the  very  principle  of  religious 
morality  that  our  duty  to  God  consists  mainly  in  our  duty  to  each  other.  We  can 
render  to  Him  no  service  at  all  but  in  and  through  the  service  of  our  brethren  who 
are  His  children.  Our  love  to  God  never  yet  weakened — nay,  it  has  evermore 
strengthened — our  family  love.  The  more  conscientious  we  have  become  in  the 
discharge  of  what  we  thought  to  be  our  duty  to  God,  the  more  loving  and  faithful 
we  have  been  to  our  dear  ones  at  home.  (C.  Voysey.)  The  great  commandment : — 
We  enter  the  family  circle  now.  It  has  become  a  very  large  family,  and  is  destined 
to  become  still  larger,  till  it  includes  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Whether  large 
or  small,  there  is  one  grand  principle  which  is  to  flow  through  the  hearts  of  all  its 
members,  and  to  constitute  a  bond  which  neither  time  nor  eternity  can  dissolve. 
That  one  principle  is  mutual  love.  Nothing  else  can  take  its  place.  Nothing  else 
can  do  its  work.  I.  It  will  be  well  for  us  to  look  a  little  carefully  at  the  peeson 
FOR  whom  this  love  IS  CLAiJiED — our  brother.  Our  brother,  in  the  New  Testament, 
has  a  new  and  definite  meaning.  It  is  not  our  neighbour,  as  such.  To  a  Jew,  it 
was  not  his  fellow-Jew.  Nor  is  it  necessarily  the  son  of  our  own  father  and 
mother.  There  may  be  many  such  sons  whom,  alas  !  we  cannot  regard  in  this  high 
sense  as  our  brothers.  There  are  those  who  come  nearer  to  us  as  Christians,  and 
are  endeared  to  us  by  stronger  ties.  The  elements  of  the  union  between  us,  and 
which  constitute  them  our  brethren,  are  altogether  peculiar.  The  first  of  these  is 
faith  in  our  common  Saviour.  From  the  moment  that  faith  is  exercised  a  new  set 
of  conditions  spring  up.  We  have  parted  company  with  the  world,  and  shall  soon 
find  that  we  have  forfeited  its  love  and  its  sympathy.  Then  the  faith  which  unites 
us  to  Christ  unites  us  to  all  who  are  thus  united  to  Him.  And  that  irrespective  of 
all  external  differences.  Another  of  these  elements  is  regeneration  by  the  same 
Spirit.  And  now  there  opens  before  us  another  view  of  our  subject,  although 
necessarily  glanced  at  already.  Our  Creator  has  become  not  only  our  God,  but  our 
Father.  Further,  our  hoavenly  Father  has  embraced  us  all  alike  in  the  arms  of 
His  adopting  grace.  II.  We  shall  next  have  to  enter  into  some  of  the  reasons 
WHT  THIS  LOVE  IS  REQUIRED.  And  wc  need  hardly  insist  on  the  fact  that  all  the 
reasons  why  we  are  called  upon  to  love  our  neighbour  obtain,  and  obtain  with 
redoubled  force,  here.  The  ethics  of  the  Second  Table  are  not  abrogated  by  the 
great  law  of  brotherly  love.  Nay,  those  ethics  are  carried  up  to  a  higher  plane, 
and  enforced  by  sanctions  of  a  higher  order.  Then  He  bases  this  precept  on  the 
deep  ground  of  His  own  love  to  us.  "  As  I  have  loved  you."  We  can  understand 
how  He  can  have  loved  others.  But  us  ?  There  is  the  difficulty.  Yet  we  have 
His  own  word  for  it,  and  that  ought  to  be  enough ;  and  most  persuasive  in  its 
eloquence.  Learn  from  this  unique  example  of  My  love  to  you  to  love  one  another. 
My  love  to  you  has  been  unmerited,  disinterested,  self-sacrificing,  all-enduring. 
Let  your  love  to  each  other  take  this  as  its  pattern.  "  Love  one  another  as  I  have 
loved  you."  It  will  also  be  seen  that  the  claim  of  our  brother  to  our  love  is  founded 
on  our  love  to  God.  "  And  this  commandment  have  we  from  Him,  that  He  who 
loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also."  John,  however,  touches  the  deepest  foundations 
of  aU  for  this  demand  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  verses  of  this  same  chapter. 


884  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.t. 

"  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent  His  Son  to 
be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love 
one  another."     HI.  There  must  be  some  pbacticai,  methods  available  fob  thb 

UKEQOTVOCAIi   MANTFESTATION    OF    THIS    BROTHEKLT   LOVE.      LoVe    tO    OUT   brother  is  not 

a  mere  profession.  Nor  will  this  association  be  a  mere  formal  and  external  thing ; 
but  we  shall  be  led  into  real  and  intimate  fellowship  of  heart  and  spirit  with  our 
brother.  Readiness  to  sympathise  with  and  help  will,  in  like  manner,  present 
itself  as  an  evidence  and  display  of  this  love.  Love  can  withhold  nothing  from  its 
object.  The  love  in  question  wiU  at  the  same  time  lead  to  mutual  charity  and  for- 
bearance.      IV.     A    CURSORY   GLANCE    AT    THE   GREAT   IMPORTANCE   OF   THE   PRINCIPLB 

WHICH  IT  HAS  BEEN  OUR  EARNEST  DESIRE  TO  INCULCATE.  And  let  US  begin  at  home. 
We  have  a  deep  personal  interest  in  this  matter.  Nothing  tends  more  to  promote 
our  own  happiness,  profit,  and  usefulness  than  that  love  which  we  owe  to  our 
fellow-Christians.  It  fills  the  heart  with  sunshine.  If  the  Church  is  ever  to 
become  the  power  for  good  in  the  world  which  she  was  intended  to  be,  this  will  be 
the  secret  and  fountain  of  her  strength.  Beside  and  above  all  these  considerations, 
the  honour  of  our  Divine  Lord  and  Head  is  bound  up  with  this  matter.  Nothing 
pleases  Him  so  much  as  the  love  which  should  unite  all  His  disciples  together  in 
one  close  but  grand  confraternity.  Nothing  can  furnish  so  powerful  a  demonstra- 
tion of  the  might  and  benignity  of  His  truth.  Nothing  csin  present  so  worthy  and 
influential  an  exhibition  of  His  character.  (J.  Drew.)  Love  to  God  produces 
love  to  man: — When  God  comes  to  man,  man  looks  round  for  his  neighbour. 
(Geo.  Macdonald,  LL.D.)  "  He's  my  brother  "  : — Dr.  Macgregor  met  in  a  great 
Scotch  city  a  little  girl  carrying  in  her  arms  a  baby,  so  bonny  that  she  fairly 
staggered  under  its  weight.  "Baby's  heavy,  isn't  he,  dear?"  said  the  doctor. 
••  No,"  replied  the  winsome  bairn,  •'  he's  not  heavy ;  he's  my  brother."  {U.  It, 
Thomas,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vbb.  1.  WliOBoever  believetli  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  Is  bom  of  Ood. — Belief  in 
Jetut  at  the  Christ : — This  is  the  third  virtual  repetition  of  this  truth  (see  chap. 
ir.  2,  15).  Now  in  the  apostles'  days  every  Christian  as  such  believed  that  Jesus 
was  tiie  Christ.  By  this  belief  and  its  confession  he  was  distinguished  from  a  Jew 
on  the  one  side  and  a  heathen  on  the  other ;  and  the  same  might  be  said  of  the 
confession  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,  for  this  in  the  apostle's  eyes 
•would  be  the  same  as  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  for  if  He  was  the  Christ,  His  assertion 
of  Himself  as  being  the  true  and  only  begotten  of  God,  who  came  down  from  heaven, 
must  be  true,  for  God  would  never  send  into  the  world  one  who  would  so  misrepresent 
His  truth  as  to  say  that  He  was  His  special  anointed  messenger  and  representative 
when  He  was  not;  and  so  with  Jesus  being  the  Son  of  God  of  chap.  iv.  14. 
Faith  and  regeneration  : — I,  What  is  the  believing  intended  in  the  text  ?  1.  The 
beheving  here  intended  is  that  which  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  exhorted  men  to 
exercise,  and  to  which  the  promise  of  salvation  is  always  appended  in  the  Word  of 
God.  2.  The  faith  here  intended  is  the  duty  of  all  men.  Jesus  Christ  is  worthy  at 
the  confidence  of  all  men ;  it  is  therefore  the  duty  of  men  to  confide  in  Him. 
8.  At  the  same  time  this  faith,  wherever  it  exists,  is  in  every  case,  without 
exception,  the  gift  of  God  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  has  wrought  all 
our  works  in  us,  and  our  faith  too.  4.  The  faith  intended  in  the  text  evidently 
rests  upon  a  person — upon  Jesus.  "  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ 
is  bom  of  God."  What  is  meant  by  '*  Jesus  is  the  Christ,"  or  Jesus  is  the  Anointed? 
First,  that  He  is  the  Prophet ;  secondly,  that  He  is  the  Priest ;  thirdly,  that  He  is  the 
King  of  the  Church,  for  in  all  these  three  senses  He  is  the  Anointed.  5.  True  faith 
is  reliance.  Have  you  confidence  as  well  as  credence  ?  A  creed  will  not  save  yoH, 
but  reliance  upon  the  anointed  Saviour  is  the  way  of  salvation.  Moreover,  true 
faith  is  not  a  flattering  presumption,  by  which  a  man  says,  "  I  believe  I  am 
saved,  for  I  have  such  delightful  feelings,  I  have  had  a  marvellous  dream,  I 
have  felt  very  wonderful  sensations ;  "  for  all  such  confidence  may  be  nothing 
but  sheer  assumption.      Faith,  again,  is  not  the  assurance  that  Jesus  died  for 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  385 

me.  On  such  a  theory  every  believer  in  a  universal  atonement  would  neces- 
sarily be  born  of  God,  which  is  very  far  from  being  the  case.  Neither  is  it 
faith  for  me  to  be  confident  that  I  am  saved,  for  it  may  be  the  case  that  I  am 
not  saved,  and  it  can  never  be  faith  to  believe  a  lie.    II.  We  must  now  pass  on  to 

show    that   WHEEEVEB    IT    EXISTS    IT    IS    THE    PEOOF   OF    REGENERATION.       "  WhoSOCVer 

believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God."  "  Ah !  "  I  hear  thee  say,  poor 
soul,  "  the  new  birth  is  a  great  mystery  ;  I  am  afraid  I  am  not  a  partaker  in  it." 
You  are  born  again  it  you  are  relying  upon  a  crucified  Saviour.  Mystery  or 
no  mystery,  the  new  birth  is  yours  if  you  are  a  believer.  Electricity  is  a  great 
mystery,  and  you  cannot  see  it ;  but  the  operator  tells  you  that  the  electric  current 
is  moving  along  the  wire.  How  does  he  know  ?  "  I  know  it  by  the  needle."  How 
is  that  ?  I  could  move  your  needles  easily.  "  Yes ;  but  do  not  you  see  the  needle 
has  made  two  motions  to  the  right,  one  to  the  left,  and  two  to  the  right  again  ?  I 
am  reading  a  message."  "  But,"  say  you,  "  I  can  see  nothing  in  it ;  I  could 
imitate  that  clicking  and  moving  very  easily."  Yet  he  who  is  taught  the  art  sees 
before  him  in  those  needles,  not  only  electric  action,  but  a  deeper  mystery  still ;  he 
perceives  that  a  mkid  is  directing  the  invisible  force,  and  speaking  by  means  of  it. 
Not  to  all,  but  to  the  initiated  is  it  given  to  see  the  mystery  hidden  within  the 
simplicity.  The  believer  sees  in  the  faith,  which  is  simple  as  the  movements  of  the 
needle,  an  indication  that  God  is  operating  on  the  human  mind,  and  the  spiritual 
man  discerns  that  there  is  an  inner  secret  intimated  thereby,  which  the  carnal  eye 
cannot  decipher.  To  believe  in  Jesus  is  a  better  indicator  of  regeneration  than 
anything  else,  and  in  no  case  did  it  ever  mislead.  Now  let  me  reply  to  certain 
questions.  Must  not  a  man  repent  as  well  as  believe  ?  Eeply ;  No  man  ever 
believed  but  what  he  repented  at  the  same  time.  Faith  and  repentance  go  together. 
They  must.  If  I  trust  Christ  to  save  me  from  sin,  I  am  at  the  same  time  repenting 
of  sin,  and  my  mind  is  changed  in  relation  to  sin,  and  everything  else  that  has  to 
do  with  its  state.  All  the  fruits  meet  for  repentance  are  contained  in  faith  itself, 
in.  Now  WHAT  FLOWS  O0T  OF  THIS  ?  Love  is  the  legitimate  issue !  We  must  love  if 
we  are  begotten  of  God  all  those  who  are  also  born  of  God.  First,  I  love  God,  and 
therefore  I  desire  to  promote  God's  truth,  and  to  keep  God's  gospel  free  from  taint. 
But  then  I  am  to  love  all  those  whom  God  has  begotten,  despite  the  infirmities  and 
errors  I  see  in  them,  being  also  myself  compassed  about  with  infirmities.  Life  is 
the  reason  for  love,  the  common  life  which  is  indicated  by  the  common  faith  in  the 
dear  Kedeemer  is  to  bind  us  to  each  other.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  theory  of 
brotherly  love  : — Four  things  are  here  associated,  and  said  to  arise  out  of  one 
another — faith,  regeneration,  the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  man.  I.  Faith — 
"whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ."  Jesus  is  found  to  be  all  that  the 
Scripture  predictions  declared  the  Messiah  should  be.  They  who  discover  this 
harmony  can  say,  "  we  have  found  the  Messias,  which  is,  being  interpreted,  the 
Christ."  Even  in  this  state  of  mind  there  are  the  elements  of  rich  promise,  but 
there  is  far  more  in  the  reception  of  Jesus  as  the  Christ.  He  is  acknowledged,  not 
merely  in  general  terms,  as  a  Divine  Saviour ;  but  He  is  appreciated  in  the  special 
offices  which  He  bears  for  the  redemption  of  men.  11.  The  regeneration  con- 
nected with  it — "  is  born  of  God."  Faith  and  regeneration  are  united.  This 
view  is  brought  out  still  more  fully  in  John  i.  12,  13.  We  ask  what  must  be  the 
moral  effect  produced  by  accepting  Christ  in  His  gracious  offices  ?  It  is  plain  it 
must  be  vital  and  saving.  We  see  at  onoe  how  just  and  reasonable  is  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  text — that  faith  and  regeneration  are  united.    IH.  In  evert  mind 

THUS  INFLUENCED  THE  LOVE   OF    GoD   OBTAINS   A   PROMINENT    PLACE.       "  EvCry  OUC  that 

loveth  Him  that  begat."  It  must  be  bo,  considering  the  change  that  has  been 
produced.  It  is  a  new  birth.  God  is  seen  to  be  the  only  Master  who  can  claim 
unreserved  obedience.  A  mind  thus  enlightened  must  love  God.  Especially  must 
it  be  so  when  it  is  considered  that  He  is  the  Author  of  this  change.  In  His  gracious 
love  He  has  been  pleased  to  put  forth  His  power,  and  create  the  soul  anew  in 
righteousness.  How  calculated  is  such  a  contemplation  to  call  forth  the  warmest 
exercise  of  love !  Add  to  this,  that  when  such  a  change  is  effected  in  the  soul  by 
God,  it  brings  us  into  a  new  relation  to  Him,  and  one  that  eminently  calls  forth  our 
love.  It  is  that  of  a  child.  It  is  natural  to  a  child  to  love  his  parent.  Nor  let  it 
be  overlooked  how  God  is  continuaDy  increasing  His  claims  on  His  own  children. 
They  are  constrained  to  say  (Eph.  i.  3).  IV.  The  love  of  God  is  accompanied  by 
THE  LOVB  of  MAN.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  Him  that  begat,  loveth  Him  also  that  is 
begotten  of  Him."  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Love  to  man  inspired  by  new  life : — 
If  we  do  not  love  Him  more  than  what  Ues  around  us — houses  and  lands,  father  or 

25 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

mother,  son  or  daughter — we  are  not  worthy  of  Him.  Nor  are  we  worthy  of  them. 
Unless  we  come  to  them  and  they  to  us  in  the  richness  of  a  life  inspired  and 
quickened  by  Him,  in  the  wealth  of  aiiections,  impulses,  desires,  and  hopes  thus 
quickened  and  inspired  by  a  loftier  faith,  we  come  to  one  another  as  trees  encased 
in  ice.  But  if,  first  of  all,  we  give  ourselves  to  Him,  and  the  generous  hopes  and 
affections  which  faith  in  Him  may  awaken  in  us,  we  shall  be  like  these  same  trees, 
lifting  up  their  branches  to  the  spring-day  sun,  till  from  the  lowest  root  to  the 
highest  twig  they  feel  the  pulses  of  a  new  life  bursting  out  into  leaf  and  blossom, 
while  birds  nestle  within  their  shade,  and  the  air  is  burdened  with  their  melodies. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  By  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children  of  God,  when  we  love  God, 
and  keep  His  commandments. — How  shall  we  be  certified  that  we  love  the  brethren : — 
To  reply  to  this  inquiry  seems  to  be  the  specific  object  of  these  verses.  Con- 
templating them  in  this  connection,  they  suggest  four  evidences.  I.  The  first  is 
THAT  WE  LOVE  GoD.  "  By  this  we  know,"  &c.  It  must  seem  strange,  at  first  sight, 
to  find  the  love  of  God  cited  as  a  proof  of  the  love  of  His  people.  We  would 
expect  rather  the  reverse  order.  This  too  is  found  to  be  the  usual  practice 
(see  chap.  iv.  7,  8).  At  the  same  time  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  love  of  God 
ought  to  be  sought  in  our  hearts  as  a  proof  of  the  love  of  His  people.  It  is  one  that 
will  readily  occur  to  a  mind  jealous  of  itself.  It  is  not  unnatural  to  ask.  Does  his 
love  of  the  people  of  God  arise  out  of  the  love  of  God  ?  In  this  view  he  might 
properly  seek  for  the  love  of  God  as  a  proof  of  the  love  of  the  brethren.  The  least 
reflection  may  show  the  necessity  for  such  an  inquiiy.  Brotherly  love,  or  what 
appears  to  be  such,  may  arise  from  other  sources  besides  the  love  of  God.  It  may 
be  a  natural  feeling  and  not  a  gracious  affection.  We  may  love  our  kindred,  friends, 
neighbours,  benefactors,  and  yet  not  love  God.  It  is  possible  there  may  be  even  an 
active  benevolence  where  this  heavenly  principle  does  not  exist.  It  wUl  be  asked 
how  is  such  a  subject  to  be  investigated  ?  And  we  reply  in  one  of  two  ways,  or  in 
both.  It  may  be  either  by  examining  whether  our  deeds  of  brotherly  love  are 
prompted  and  influenced  by  the  love  of  God ;  or  by  inquiring  into  the  general 
principle,  whether  the  love  of  God  has  ever  been  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  II.  The  peofession  of  bkotheely  love  mat  be  tested  by  OBEDrENCB 
TO  THE  COMMANDMENTS  OF  GoD.  "  We  know  that  we  love  the  children  of  God,  when 
we  love  God,  and  keep  His  commandments."  Viewing  the  subject  in  the  restricted 
light  of  the  context,  the  meaning  of  this  test  must  be,  that  in  our  exercises  of 
brotherly  love,  we  are  guided  by  the  commandments  of  God.  Assuming  this  to  be 
the  just  interpretation,  there  are  two  aspects  in  which  our  conduct  may  be  con- 
templated, the  one  a  refusal  to  do  that  which  God  forbids,  although  it  may  be 
desired  as  an  expression  of  brotherly  love,  and  the  other  a  readiness  to  exercise  it 
in  every  way  which  God  has  required.  HI.  The  next  evidence  of  brotherly  lovb 
IS  AKIN  to  the  second,  and  may  be  regarded  indeed  as  a  summary  of  the  two  already 
considered,  and  an  extension  of  their  meaning  and  application.  "  For  this  is  the 
love  of  God,  that  we  keep  His  commandments."  There  is  great  force  in  the 
expression,  "  This  is  the  love  of  God."  This  is  that  in  which  it  consists,  by  which 
its  existence  is  manifested,  and  without  which  it  cannot  be.  A  child  obeys  his 
parent  because  he  loves  him,  and  as  he  loves  him.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the 
master  and  servant,  the  king  and  his  subjects.  If  there  be  not  love,  uniform  and 
hearty  obedience  cannot  be  rendered.  In  the  case  of  Christ  and  His  people,  the 
claims  are  peculiarly  strong  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  obligations  specially  felt  on 
the  other.  There  is  no  love  so  strong  as  that  by  which  they  are  bound  to  one 
another.  It  takes  precedence  of  every  other.  The  consequence  is,  that  the  love  of 
Christ  urges  His  people  to  the  obedience  of  every  commandment.  No  matter  how 
trifling  it  may  seem  to  be,  it  is  enough  that  He  has  declared  it  to  be  His  will..  IV. 
There  is  one  other  evidence  in  the  verses  before  us,  but  it  may  almost  be  regarded 
as  a  part  of  that  which  has  just  been  noticed.  It  is  such  an  apprehension  of  the 
commandments  of  God  that  they  are  not  considered  to  be  a  bitrthen.  "  His 
commandments  are  not  grievous."  This  saying  is  universally  and  absolutely  true 
of  the  commandments  of  God  in  their  own  nature.  They  are  all  "holy,  and  just, 
and  good."  Such,  however,  is  not  the  sentiment  of  the  ungodly.  They  consider 
many  of  God's  commandments  to  be  grievous.  We  might  instance  such  commands 
as  these — "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  do  aU  to  the  glory  of  God," 
"Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil,"  "The  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly; 
your  whole  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body."    These  are  felt  to  be  grievous  by  the 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  387 

ungodly.  No  so  by  the  godly.  They  may  not  obey  them  as  they  would,  but  they 
approve  of  them.  1.  The  great  reason  is  their  love  of  God.  They  so  love 
Him  that  they  account  nothing  which  He  has  commanded  grievous.  2.  Another 
reason  is  that  his  heart  is  in  the  service  itself.  He  likes  it.  Prayer  and 
holiness  are  agreeable  to  him.  They  are  not  a  drudgery,  but  a  delight.  3.  He 
forms,  moreover,  the  habit  of  obedience,  and  this  greatly  confirms  his  desire  for  it. 
The  more  he  practises  it,  the  better  he  finds  it.  4.  Besides,  the  Holy  Spirit  helps 
his  infirmities,  and  furthers  his  labours.  5.  And  we  may  add,  he  is  animated  by 
the  prospect  of  a  rich  reward.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Whereby  know  we  that  we 
love  God's  children : — I.  Who  ake  described  by  this  title — "  the  children  of 
God."  This  title,  "the  children  of  God,"  is  given  upon  several  accounts. 
1.  By  creation  the  angels  are  called  "  the  sons  of  God,"  and  men  His 
"offspring."  The  reason  of  the  title  is — (1)  The  manner  of  their  production  by 
His  immediate  power.  (2)  In  their  spiritual,  immortal  nature,  and  the  intellectual 
operations  flowing  from  it,  there  is  an  image  and  resemblance  of  God.  2.  By 
external  calling  and  covenant  some  are  denominated  His  "  children"  ;  for  by  this 
evangelical  constitution  God  is  pleased  to  receive  believers  into  a  filial  relation. 
3.  There  is  a  sonship  that  arises  from  supernatural  regeneration.  H.  What  is 
INCLUDED  in  oue  LOVE  TO  THE  CHILDREN  OP  GoD.  1.  The  principle  of  this  love  is 
Divine  (1  Pet.  i.  22).  2.  The  qualifications  of  this  love  are  as  foUows :  (1)  It  is 
sincere  and  cordial.  A  counterfeit,  formal  affection,  set-off  with  artificial  colours, 
is  so  far  from  being  pleasing  to  God,  that  it  is  infinitely  provoking  to  Him.  (2)  It 
is  pure.  The  attractive  cause  of  it  is  the  image  of  God  appearing  in  them.  (3)  It 
is  universal,  extended  to  all  the  saints.  (4)  It  must  be  fervent.  Not  only  in  truth, 
but  in  a  degree  of  eminency.  "  This  is  My  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another, 
as  I  have  loved  you"  (John  xv.  12).  (5)  This  love  includes  all  kinds  of  love,  (a)  The 
love  of  esteem,  correspondent  to  the  real  worth  and  special  goodness  of  the  saints, 
(6)  The  love  of  desire,  of  their  present  and  future  happiness,  (c)  The  love  of  dehght, 
in  spiritual  communion  with  them,  (d)  The  love  of  service  and  beneficence,  that 
declares  itself  in  all  outward  offices  and  acts  for  the  good  of  the  saints.  If 
Christians  thus  loved  one  another,  the  Church  on  earth  would  be  a  lively  image  of 
the  blessed  society  above.  HI.  The  love  of  God  and  obedience  to  His  commands, 
THE  product  of  IT.  1.  The  love  of  God  has  its  rise  from  the  consideration  of  His 
amiable  excellences,  that  render  Him  infinitely  worthy  of  the  highest  affection ;  and 
from  the  blessed  benefits  of  creation,  preservation,  redemption,  and  glorification, 
that  we  expect  from  His  pure  goodness  and  mercy.  2.  The  obedience  that  springs 
from  love  is — (1)  Uniform  and  universal.  (2)  This  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the 
former.  The  Divine  law  is  a  rule,  not  only  for  our  outward  conversation,  but  of  our 
thoughts  and  affections,  of  aU  the  interior  workings  of  the  soul  that  are  open  before 
God.  (3)  Chosen  and  pleasant  (chap.  v.  3).  The  sharpest  sufferings  for  religion 
are  sweetened  to  a  saint  from  the  love  of  God,  that  is  then  most  sincerely,  strongly, 
and  purely  acted  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  (4)  The  love  of  God  produces  persevering 
obedience.     Servile  compliance  is  inconstant.    IV.  From  the  love  op   God,  and 

WILLING  obedience   TO  HiS  COMMANDS,  WE  MAT  CONVINCINGLY  KNOW  THE   SINCEBITT   OP 

our  love  TO  His  children.  1.  The  Divine  command  requires  this  love.  2.  Spiritual 
love  to  the  saints  arises  from  the  sight  of  the  Divine  image  appearing  in  their  conver- 
sation. As  affectionate  expressions  to  the  children  of  God,  without  the  real  supply  of 
their  wants,  are  but  the  shadows  of  love,  so  words  of  esteem  and  respect  to  the  law 
of  God,  without  unfeigned  and  universal  obedience,  are  but  an  empty  pretence.  3. 
The  Divine  relation  of  the  saints  to  God  as  their  Father  is  the  motive  of  spiritual 
love  to  them.  (W.  Bates,  D.D.)  The  love  of  God  and  universal  obedience  : — 
I.  The  nature  of  true  love  to  God.  1.  The  peculiar  acts  of  true  love  to  God. 
(1)  It  has  a  high  approbation  and  esteem  of  God.  (2)  It  has  a  most  benevolent 
disposition  towards  God.  (3)  Its  earnest  desire  is  after  God.  (4)  Its  complacency 
and  delight  is  in  God.  (5)  It  is  pleased  or  displeased  with  itself,  according  as  it  is 
conscious  to  its  own  aboundings  or  defects.  2.  The  properties  of  true  love  to  God. 
(1)  It  is  a  judicious  love.  (2)  It  is  an  extensive  love.  (3)  It  is  a  supreme  love.  (4) 
It  is  an  abiding  love.  3.  The  effects  of  this  love.  A  holy  imitation  of  God  and 
devotedness  to  Him,  self-denial,  patience,  and  resignation  to  His  will,  the  govern- 
ment of  all  our  passions,  appetites  and  behaviour,  a  departure  from  everything  that 
offends  Him,  and  laborious  endeavours  by  His  grace,  to  approve  ourselves  to  Him, 
and  glorify  His  name  in  all  that  we  do.  II.  The  influence  that  true  love  to  God 
HAS  unto  our  obedience,  or  unto  our  keeping  His  commandments.  1.  Love  to  God 
enters  into  the  very  nature  of   all  true  and  acceptable  obedience.     2.  Love  to 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

God  inclines  and  even  constrains  us  to  keep  all  His  commands.     3.  Love  to  God 
gives  us  a  delight  in  keeping  His  commands.  They  are  suited  to  the  holy  nature  of  a 
new-born  soul,  whose  prime  affection  is  love  to  God ;  this  takes  off  distastes,  and  makes 
all  His  precepts  agreeable  to  us ;  it  makes  them  our  choice  and  our  pleasure  ;  it 
sweetens  our  obedience,  and  makes  us  think  nothing  a  trouble  or  a  burden  that  God 
calls  us  to,  and  nothing  too  great  to  do  or  suffer  for  Him,  whereby  we  may  please 
and  honour  Him,  and  show  our  gratitude,  love  and  duty  to  Him.     4.  Love  to  God 
will  make  us  persevere  in  keeping  His  commands.    Use  :  1.  Let  this  put  us  upon 
serious  inquiry  wjiether  the  love  of  God  dwells  in  us.     2.  Let  the  sinner  against 
God  behold  how  odious  and  unworthy  the  principle  is  that  refuses  to  obey  Him. 
3.  Let  us  prize  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  seek  help  from  thence  to 
engage  our  love  and  obedience.     4.  Let  us  look  and  long  for  the  heavenly  state, 
where  all  our  love  and  obedience  shall  be  perfected.     (John  Guyse.)        Loving  Ood 
through  human  love : — The  love  of  man  is  involved  in  the  love  of  God.     There 
is  no  real  love  of  God  that  does  not  include  the  love  of  His  children.     Love  is 
a  state  of  the-  human  spirit ;  an  atmosphere  in  which  one  abides ;  he  who  is  in 
that  atmosphere  loves  the  human  that  appeals  to  him  no  less  than  the  Divine. 
Loving  God  is  not  merely  a  feeHng  toward  Him — a  gushing  out  of  emotion  :  it  is  a 
practical  exercise  of  His  Spirit.     It  is  a  real  doing  of  His  commandments.     "  What 
is  loving  God  ?    Is  it  anything  more  than  loving  men,  and  trying  in  His  name  to 
do  them  good  ?  "     "I  do  not  fiiink  I  love  God,  for  I  do  not  feel  towards  Him  as  I 
do  towards  those  I  love  best."     "  It  is  hard  to  think  of  God  as  the  Great  Energy 
that  fills  all  things,  and  yet  to  love  Him  as  a  Father."     These  are  all  expressions  of 
sincere  minds  trying  to  get  into  the  real  atmosphere  of  the  truth  and  to  live  the 
spiritual  life.     I  should  like,  if  possible,  to  help  clear  up  the  difficulties  indicated. 
Let  us  recognise  the  fact  that  nothing  but  emptiness  and  disappointment  can  come 
from  the  effort  to  love  an  abstract  conception.     Love  goes  out  only  toward  person- 
ality.   And  the  personality  must  lie  warm  and  living  in  our  heaxts,  or  it  fails  to 
quicken  affection  into  life.     Israel,  for  instance,  was  labouring  for  a  thousand  years 
to  bring  forth  its  idea  of  Godhead.     In  the  old  notion  of  Jahveh  as  God  of  Israel 
only,  there  was  a  sort  of  personal  warmth  akin  to  patriotism  ;  a  common  affection 
which  went  out  in  a  crude  way  to  their  personal  champion.    When  the  prophets 
began  to  see  in  Him  much  more  than  this — the  Gtod  of  aU  the  earth,  "who  formeth 
the  mountains  and  createth  the  wind,  and  declareth  to  man  His  thought " — while 
there  was  an  immense  gain  in  breadth  and  truth  of  conception,  there  was  a  loss  of 
the  nearness  that  begets  personal  attachment,  until,  a  little  later,  God's  relation  to 
the  whole  nation  gave  place  to  the  new  idea  of  His  direct  relation  to  every  man  in 
all  the  affairs  of  his  life.     That  gave  birth  to  all  that  is  best  in  the  Psalms  of  Israel, 
with  their  outgoing  of  personal  confidence  and  affection.     Then  after  the  coming 
of  Jesus  and  the  intense  feeling  that  sprang  up  on  His  departure  that  He  was  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh,  there  was  a  leap  of  thought  and  life  which  showed  how  the 
real  heart  of  man  hungered  for  something  more  close  and  personal  than  Judaic 
religion  eould  ever  give  it.     So  complete  was  this  change,  and  so  central  to  the 
Apostolic  age,  that  for  eighteen  hundred  years  the  same  phenomenon  has  been 
witnessed  of  placing  Jesus  in  the  central  place,  with  God  removed  to  a  vague  back- 
ground, the  Being  "  whom  no  man  hath  seen  or  can  see,"  dreaded,  reverenced,  and 
worshipped,  but  never  standing  in  the  intimate  relation  of  close  fatherhood  in  which 
He  was  the  warmth  and  Ught  of  the  life  of  Jesus  Himself.     There  was  abundant 
reason  for  this.     The  human  heart,  seeking  for  a  real  religion,  must  have  some- 
thing concrete  and  close  and  warm ;  it  cannot  love  an  abstract  idea.     Jesus  was 
seen  as  God  reduced  to  the  human  compass,  enshrined  in  a  human  and  personal  love. 
The  whole  responsive  life  of  man  went  out  to  Him.    And  so  it  came  to  pass  that 
He  did  what  He  did  not  ia  the  least  aim  to  do,  but  rather  the  contrary — He  did  not 
bring  the  real  Godhead  of  the  universe  nearer  to  the  average  mind,  but  took  the 
place  of  it,  letting  it  even  sweep  backward,  farther  out  of  sight — farther  into  the 
impenetrable  mystery.    We  are  pillowed  in  our  infancy  on  a  bosom  of  affection.     I* 
is  long  before  we  know  it;  but  when  we  do  awake,  it  is  to  our  mothers  that  the 
earliest  love  goes  forth.    And  if  we  ever  do  love  God,  we  come  to  it  by  rising  from  the 
home  love,  or  some  later  and  even  stronger  love  that  awakes  in  us,  to  the  higher 
affection.     This  makes  the  conwnon  affections  of  life  sacred  and  Divine,  in  that 
without  them  there  is  no  ground  in  us  for  the  love  to  God.    All  love  has  one  source. 
Do  our  mothers  love  us  ?    It  is  God  in  them  that  breaks  out  into  love  in  its  highest 
manifestations,  with  its  Divine  unselfishness  and  ite  clinging  power.      Wherever 
love  is,  we  get  a  glimpse  of  the  Divine  and  infinite.    It  is  only  as  such  love  responds 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  389 

to  the  Spirit  of  God  in  it  that  it  does  and  dares,  and  clings  to  us  and  will  not  let  us 
go,  though  it  cost  struggle  and  patience  and  sacrifice  and  pain.  And  this  love,  as  a 
channel  of  the  love  of  God,  is  the  power  that  most  often  lifts  us  up  into  the  clearer 
realms  where  we  are  at  one  with  the  Divine,  and  its  love  becomes  real  to  our  hungry 
hearts.  The  love  we  have  to  God  is  realised  in  our  love  to  men.  It  cannot  abide 
alone.  They  who  have  thought  to  gain  it  by  retirement  and  meditation  have  found 
it  only  a  will-o'-the-wisp  save  as  it  has  issued  in  the  love  that  seeks  men  and  tries 
to  do  them  good.  For  the  love  of  God  is  not  a  mere  feeling,  a  gush  of  emotion  in 
which  the  soul  is  rapt  away  to  things  ineffable.  It  is  a  spirit,  an  atmosphere,  in 
which  one  lives ;  and  "  he  who  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him." 
But  to  dwell  in  love,  to  be  really  baptized  with  its  spirit,  is  to  have  that  energy  of  it 
within  us  that  seeks  continually  to  find  exercise  for  itself  and  actually  to  give  itself 
to  others.  Unfortunately,  the  service  of  God  has  too  often  been  conceived  of  as  the 
conferring  of  something  on  Him  by  worship  or  sacrifice,  by  which  it  is  thought  He 
will  be  pleased.  But  what  can  we  do  for  Him  by  our  offering  of  gifts  for  His  use, 
or  by  the  singing  of  His  praises,  save  to  give  expression  to  what  is  in  us  and  thereby 
satisfy  our  own  cravings  ?  The  real  love  of  God  will  manifest  itself  in  what  we  do 
for  men.  It  will  set  itself  to  help  on  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth  as  the  dearest 
end  it  can  set  before  itself.  The  Samaritan  did  not  worship  in  the  Jerusalem 
temple;  his  own  on  Mount  Gerizim  had  long  been  levelled  to  the  ground.  But 
when  he  took  care  of  the  wounded  man  on  the  road  to  Jericho,  he  showed  himself 
a  lover  of  God  beyond  the  priest  and  Levite  of  orthodox  connections  and  habits, 
who  passed  by  on  the  other  side.  Men  and  women  are  warned  not  to  love  each 
other  too  dearly,  lest  God  be  jealous;  not  to  love  their  children  too  much,  lest  He 
take  them  away.  This  is  not  religion.  Real  love  does  not  exhaust  itself  by  giving ; 
it  groivs  by  giving.  The  more  you  love  your  child,  if  it  be  unselfish  love,  the  more 
you  will  love  God,  for  the  loving  of  a  little  child  brings  you  into  that  atmosphere 
and  spirit  of  love  where  the  heart  is  living  and  warm  and  goes  forth  to  God  as 
naturally  as  the  sunlight  streams  into  the  ether.  You  will  need  to  be  cautioned  lest 
your  love  of  human  kind  become  selfish  and  exclusive,  and  is  indulged  as  a  mere 
luxury.  That  vitiates  it.  But  the  more  you  love  your  brother  whom  you  have  seen, 
unselfishly,  the  more  you  will  love  God  and  see  Him,  too,  with  the  spiritual  vision. 
To  sum  up,  then,  this  relation  of  Divine  and  human  love  :  all  love  is  of  One,  and 
the  line  cannot  be  drawn  where  the  human  stops  and  the  Divine  begins.  But  we 
may  feel  sure  of  this,  that  to  see  the  love  of  God  in  all  the  love  that  comes  to  us,  to 
recognise  it  in  aU  the  unselfishness  we  see,  is  the  only  way  to  know  it  truly,  and 
the  most  direct  road  to  the  clearer  sense  of  it  as  an  indwelling  lite.  {H.  P.  De 
Forest,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  His  commandments  are  not  gn^evous. — The  service  of  love: — Viewing 
the  Christian  dispensation  as  a  fuller  expansion  of  the  Jewish,  we  naturally  look  to 
the  New  Testament  for  additional  motives  rather  than  for  additional  command- 
ments. An  unexpected  meaning,  indeed,  was  often  brought  out  by  our  Lord 
from  ancient  enactments  and  precepts  which  had  long  lain  in  the  statute-book, 
were  proved  applicable  to  cases  which  they  had  never  before  been  supposed  to 
concern ;  but  still  the  showing  the  hidden  force  of  what  is  old  is  widely  different 
from  the  introducing  what  is  new.  With  respect,  indeed,  to  the  sanction  by  which 
law  is  accompanied,  there  was  a  vast  accession  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
If  we  are  not  prepared  to  go  all  lengths  with  the  theory  that  under  the  Mosaic 
dispensation  men  were  not  acted  on  at  all  by  the  engines  of  the  invisible  world,  at 
least  we  must  admit  that  heaven  and  hell  were  not  so  clearly  made  known  as  to 
effect  by  their  realities  the  general  deportment  of  society.  And  unquestionably  it 
was  a  mighty  throwing  of  life  into  the  commandments  of  the  law  when  Chris- 
tianity opened  up  the  mysteries  of  an  after  state  of  being,  and  showed  men  how  by 
means  of  obedience  or  disobedience  there  was  glory  or  terror  crowding  its  unmea- 
sured expanse.  And  yet  after  all  there  would  have  been  very  little  done  had 
Christ  merely  taught  men  what  apportionments  may  be  looked  for  hereafter.  We 
can  go  further.  We  can  say  of  Christianity,  that  though  it  brought  no  new  com- 
mandments, it  leads  men  to  yield  obedience  to  the  old  upon  an  entirely  new 
principle.  The  way  in  which  Christianity  teaches  you  to  serve  God  is  by  teaching 
you  to  love  God.  St.  Paul  describes  the  love  of  God  as  the  "  fulfilling  of  the  law," 
so  that  what  fear  could  not  effect,  and  what  hope  could  not  effect — results  which 
would  never  have  been  brought  round  by  the  sternest  threatenings  and  the  richest 
promises — these  follow  most  naturally  on  the  implanting  in  the  heart  the  simple 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V. 

principle  of  love  to  the  Almighty ;  and  precepts  which  man  would  have  set  at 
naught,  though  hemmed  round  by  penalties  and  neglected,  though  attended  by 
rewards,  win  all  their  attention  and  all  their  powers  as  coming  from  a  Benefactor 
whom  it  is  a  delight  to  obey.  The  words  of  our  text  are  in  exact  accordance  with 
these  statements.  They  contain,  you  see,  two  definitions:  fii-st,  of  the  love  of 
God,  and  then  of  the  commandments  of  God.  The  love  is  defined  as  the 
keeping  the  commandments "  ;  the  commandments  are  defined  as  "  not  being 
grievous."  Our  text  shows  us,  in  the  first  place,  that  love  makes  men  earnest  to 
obey ;  in  the  second  place,  it  shows  us  that  the  obedience  which  love  produces  it 
also  renders  easy.  Let  us  examine  both  these  points.  I.  Love  makes  men  eaknest 
TO  obey — "this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  His  commandments."  Love 
makes  it  easy  to  obey — "for  His  commandments  are  not  grievous. "  Now,  there 
followed  on  the  entrance  of  evil  into  Paradise  a  great  degeneration  of  human 
capacities,  but  not  in  strict  truth  an  actual  destruction.  Love,  beneath  every  state, 
has  been,  and  still  is,  a  working  principle,  so  that  on  whatever  object  it  fastens  it 
urges  at  once  whether  to  the  undertaking  of  labour  or  the  endurance  of  privation. 
You  may  perceive  from  the  commonest  instances  of  everyday  life  that  from  love 
considered  as  the  working  principle  of  man,  springs  all  that  complex  mechanism 
which  is  made  up  of  the  business  of  an  active  population.  We  take  this  acknow- 
ledged fact  as  a  fair  groundwork  of  argument,  that  if  the  rational  soul  be  driven 
out  as  it  were  from  the  circle  of  the  animal,  and  man  be  taught  to  love  the  Creator, 
in  place  of  centring  all  his  affection  on  the  creature,  all  his  faculties  will  quickly 
be  enlisted  in  the  service  of  God.  Thus  it  is  quite  demonstrable  that  the  love 
of  God  must  produce  the  keeping  His  commandments.  You  put  a  principle  into  the 
immortal  part  of  man  which  causes  that  part  to  rise  from  her  degradation  and  to 
vindicate  the  almost  forgotten  nobleness  of  her  mission.  God  is  then  known,  for 
until  God  is  loved  He  is  not  and  cannot  be  known.  The  reason  is  simple  and 
Scriptural.  Love  is  not  so  much  an  attribute  of  God  as  His  very  essence.  And 
if,  therefore,  in  order  to  our  loving  God,  there  must  be  a  supernatural  bringing 
home  to  the  heart  of  the  love  which  God  hath  turned  on  the  wandering  and  the 
lost,  it  is  evident  that  we  know  only  as  we  love  Him,  seeing  that  to  love  God  pre- 
supposes an  acquaintance  with  God  as  love.  From  this  reasoning  we  fetch  fresh 
illustration  that  the  loving  God  is  keeping  His  commandments.  It  is  not  merely 
because  I  love  Him  I  shall  of  necessity  be  anxious  to  please  Him,  and  therefore  to 
obey  Him  ;  but  in  the  degree  that  I  love  Him,  in  that  same  degree  do  I  know  Him, 
and  to  know  Him  is  to  obtain  altogether  a  different  view  of  His  character  and  pro- 
perties from  any  which  I  have  heretofore  possessed.  It  is  to  have  done  with  vague 
and  indefinite  notions,  and  to  entertain  others  which  are  strict  and  unbending  ;  it 
Is  to  understand  with  something  of  precision  the  power  and  place  of  His  every 
attribute,  and  thus  to  sweep  from  my  calculation  all  those  mountains  of  lies  which 
the  world  are  building  out  of  mistaken  properties  of  Godhead.  And  if  through  the 
act  of  loving  the  Creator  I  thus  pass  to  such  a  knowledge  of  His  several  cha- 
racteristics as  have  never  hitherto  found  place  in  my  mind,  why,  love  must  throw 
an  inexpressible  power  into  the  commandments ;  it  must  make  their  every  letter 
breathe  of  Deity.  11.  Now  we  desire  to  show  you,  in  explaining  our  text,  that  love 
not  only  makes  men  earnest  in  obeying,  but  that  the  obedience  which  it  produces  it 
ALSO  BENDEEs  EASY.  The  man  who  is  making  it  the  business  of  his  days  to  endeavour 
to  obey  God's  commandments  is  only  striving  to  exhibit  to  others  the  beauty  of 
a  system  to  which  he  himself  is  bound.  Conscious  of  the  glory  of  every  property 
of  the  Almighty ;  conscious  also  that  as  a  mirror  each  property  figures  itself  in 
law  with  the  most  accurate  fidelity,  his  efforts  to  fulfil  the  requirements  of  this 
law  are  so  many  struggles  in  the  sight  of  the  world,  that  "  men  seeing  His  good 
works,  may  glorify  His  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  If  this  be  a  true  account  of 
Christian  obedience,  it  plainly  follows  that  whatever  God's  commandments  may  be 
to  the  man  who  merely  observes  their  tenor,  to  the  man  who  is  striving  with  all 
his  heart  and  all  his  soul  to  obey  them,  they  are  not,  and  they  cannot  be,  grievous. 
He  sees  a  beauty  and  a  holiness  and  a  wisdom  in  their  every  enactment,  in  their 
every  requisition,  even  the  beauty,  the  holiness  and  the  wisdom  of  Him  who 
delivered  such  a  code  to  His  creatures.  And  when,  therefore,  he  sets  himself  to 
the  keeping  the  law,  and  so  to  the  endeavouring  to  express  in  living  and  legible 
characters  the  moral  loveliness  which  has  been  disclosed  to  him  by  the  Spirit,  we 
see  not  how  he  can  find  it  burdensome,  though  he  may  find  obedience  diilicult  in 
the  writing,  in  the  vivid  tracery  of  action  what  God  hath  written  in  the  rich 
alphabet  of   His  purposes.     Are  the  commandments  of  Satan  grievous  to  those 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  391 

who  are  His  bondsmen  ?  grievous  when  they  bid  them  handle  the  wine-cup,  mix  in 
the  carnival,  and  gather  the  gold  ?  And  why  not  grievous  ?  Are  they  not  heavy 
with  the  chains  of  the  prison-house,  ponderous  with  accumulated  penalties,  bur- 
dened with  woe  and  wrath  sufiBcient  to  weigh  down  creation  ?  Yet  to  those  who 
obey  them,  they  are  not  grievous.  The  inclination  is  towards  obedience ;  and  when 
these  meet  there  cannot  be  grievousness.  In  like  manner  are  the  commandments 
of  God  not  grievous  to  those  who  are  His  children.  And  why  not  grievous  ?  Are 
they  not  weighty  with  massive  duties,  laden  with  impositions  under  which  the  very 
giants  in  religion  sink  and  bow  down  ?  We  own  it,  yet  we  maintain  that  to 
those  who  obey  they  are  not  grievous.  The  desire  is  towards  obedience ;  the  wish, 
the  longing,  all  are  towards  obedience.  And  if  God  by  His  grace  have  brought 
round  such  a  revolution  of  the  sentiments  and  affections,  that  keeping  His  com- 
mandments is  synonymous  with  loving  Him,  you  must  show  that  loving  God 
is  "grievous"  ere  you  can  show  that  His  commandments  are  "grievous." 
(jET.  Melvill,  B.D.)         Christ's  commandments  not  grievous  : — I.  Eeligion  is  not  an 

IMPRACTICABLE  THING,  AS    SOME  MEN  SUGGEST,  BUT  IT  IS  POSSIBLE  FOB  US  TO  LIVE  UP  TO 

IT.  Take  the  hardest  part  of  the  Christian  yoke,  that  is  to  say,  forgiveness  of 
enemies,  denying  our  worldly  interests,  and  renouncing  all  we  have  for  the  sake  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Yet  there  is  nobody  can  say  that  these  things  are  impossible. 
Thousands  have  actually  done  all  these  things,  and  that  upon  far  hghter  motives 
and  considerations  than  Christ's  reMgion  offers.  And  if  these  things  be  practicable, 
why  must  we  not  think  the  same  of  the  rest  of  the  Christian  precepts,  such  as 
owning  God  for  our  Creator,  and  as  such  paying  Him  our  constant  tribute  of 
worship,  and  prayer,  and  praise,  using  with  temperance  and  moderation  the  good 
things  He  vouchsafes  us,  being  honest  and  just  and  faithful  in  all  our  dealings,  and 
showing  kindness  and  charity  to  all  our  fellow-creatures.  Ay,  but  it  will  be  said  I 
have  not  fairly  represented  the  matter ;  the  impossibiUty  of  keeping  God's  com- 
mandments doth  not  lie  in  any  particular  instance  of  duty;  but  the  objection  is  that 
our  duty  is  impracticable  in  the  whole.  But  it  was  never  intended  to  leave  out  of 
the  account  the  gracious  allowances  that  God  hath  promised  by  Christ  Jesus  to 
make  for  the  infirmities  of  human  nature.    H.  As  the  commandments  of  God  abe 

NOT  GRIEVOUS  UPON  ACCOUNT  THAT  THEY  ARE  IMPOSSIBLE,  SO  NEITHER  ARE  THEY 
GRIEVOUS  IN  THIS  RESPECT,  THAT  THEY  ABE  UNNATURAL,  OR  A  FORCE  UPON  THE  CONSTITU- 
TION OF  MANKIND.  As  loug  as  human  nature  is  as  it  is,  the  happiness  of  mankind 
can  consist  in  nothing  else  but  in  using  their  liberty  according  to  the  best  rules  of 
reason,  and  those  we  are  sure  are  but  another  name  for  the  laws  of  religion.  And 
the  very  transgressing  those  rules,  though  God  had  annexed  no  penalties  to  the 
transgression,  would  of  itself  have  foimd  a  sufficient  punishment.  Ay,  but  it  will 
be  said,  is  it  not  plain  that  men  are  born  with  several  strong  inclinations  to  pleasure, 
to  wealth,  to  power,  and  greatness,  and  the  like?  And  doth  not  rehgion  put  a 
terrible  curb  upon  all  those  appetites  and  passions,  how  then  can  you  call  the  laws 
of  it  agreeable  to  nature  ?  Why,  to  this  I  answer,  that  as  to  all  the  appetites  and 
passions  that  men  are  born,  reMgion,  as  it  is  taught  us  in  the  gospel,  doth  not  hinder 
the  satisfaction  of  any  of  them.  All  that  our  religion  forbids  is  the  irregularity 
and  exorbitancy  of  our  passions.  HI.  Let  our  natural  inabilities  and  our  aver- 
sions TO  THAT  WHICH  IS  GOOD  BE  AS  GREAT  AS  THEY  WILL,  YET  THE  SUPERNATURAL 
ASSISTANCE  WE   MAY  EXPECT    FROM    GoD   FOR   THE    CARRYING    ON    OF    THIS  WORK  WILL  BE 

BUFFicrENT  AT  LEAST  TO  MAKE  THE  SCALES  EVEN.  Though  the  dcvil  and  our  own 
corrupt  natures  may  tempt  us  strongly  one  way,  yet  the  spirit  of  Christ  and  His 
invisible  attendants  that  pitch  their  tents  round  about  us,  do  incline  us  as  much 
the  other  way.  Nor  can  there  be  any  snares  laid  for  us  by  the  wicked  one,  but 
what  by  the  assistance  of  this  invisible  spiritual  army  that  fights  for  us  we  shall 
easily  break  and  overcome.  IV.  This  ought  also  to  be  acknowledged  in  this  argu- 
ment, that  though  there  be  great  difficulties  in  religion,  though  as  the  temper  of 
mankind  now  generally  stands  it  is  much  against  the  grain  to  serve  God,  yet  these 
difficulties  are  chiefly  occasioned  by  our  prejudices  and  evil  habits,  by  our  being 
used  to  a  contrary  course  of  life.    But  then  we  are  to  remember  that  in  a  little 

TIME  THESE  DimCULTIES  WILL  WEAB  OFF  AND  WE  SHALL  FIND  AFTER  SOME  TRIAL  THAT 
A  LIFE  OF  SINCERE  RELIGION  WILL  BE  FAR  MORE  NATURAL  AND  DELIGHTFUL  THAN  ANY 
COURSE    OP    SIN   THAT    WE    WERE    FORMERLY   ENGAGED   IN.      If   CUStom   and   lOUg  USagO 

have  such  a  strange  power  as  to  make  vice  and  sin  not  only  supportable,  but  also 
pleasant  to  us,  then  much  more  will  the  same  custom  and  usage  make  virtue  so, 
than  which,  as  we  have  seen,  nothing  is  more  agreeable,  more  natural  to  the  minds 
of  men.    We  shall  then  acknowledge  that  we  never  till  now  enjoyed  our  true 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

liberty,  and  shall  rather  choose  to  die  than  to  return  to  that  hard  bondage  we 
before  served  in  to  sin  and   Satan.     V.  Whereas  it  is  urged  against  a  life  of 

BELIGION,  THAT  THERE  18  MUCH  PAIKS  AND  WATCHFULNESS  REQUIRED  TO  IT  :  THIS  IS  SO 
FAR  FROM    BEING    A    REAL    DIFFICULTY    OR    INCONVENIENCE    THAT    REALLY   IT    IS   BUT  THE 

NATURAL  EFFECT  OF  OUR  MAKE  AND  CONSTITUTION.  We  Cannot  posslblj  bs  happy  but 
in  motion,  and  therefore  to  charge  this  as  a  hardship  in  religion  that  it  set  our  wits 
at  work,  that  it  exercises  our  diligence,  is  a  very  unreasonable  thing.  That  which 
makes  any  man  uneasy  in  labour  is  not  his  being  busy  and  intent  upon  a  thing, 
but  his  spending  himself  upon  such  things  or  in  such  ways  as  are  no  ways  agree- 
able to  him.  As,  for  instance,  when  he  is  either  employed  on  such  exercises  as  do 
more  than  ordinarily  exhaust  his  animal  spirits,  and  bring  great  heaviness  and 
languor  upon  him ;  or  when  he  lays  out  his  pains  upon  that  which  no  ways  suits 
with  his  temper  and  genius ;  or,  lastly,  when  he  hath  such  a  business  in  hand 
that  he  hath  no  prospect  of  bringing  it  to  good  effect,  but  his  labour  seems  likely  to 
be  lost  upon  it.  But  now  the  diligence  and  application  that  we  must  use  in  this 
matter  of  virtue  and  religion  (let  it  be  otherwise  as  great  as  you  please)  yet  hath 
none  of  those  inconveniences  attending  upon  it.  VI.  Let  all  the  hardships  and 
difficulties  of  religion  be  magnified  as  much  as  we  please,  yet  the  mighty  motives 

AND  ENCOURAGEMENTS  WE  HAVE  FROM    THE    GOSPEL   OF  ChRIST  TO  UNDERTAKE  THAT  WAT 

WILL  VERY  MUCH  OUTWEIGH  THEM.  1.  Let  the  difficulties  of  religion  be  never  so 
great,  yet  we  have  God's  promise  that  He  will  stand  by  us,  and  enable  us  both  to 
support  them  and  to  overcome  them,  if  we  ourselves  be  but  honest  (1  Cor.  x.  13). 
2.  Though  our  religion  were  attended  with  very  great  difficulties,  yet  is  there 
nothing  in  that  peace  of  conscience  which  every  good  man  enjoys  while  he  pursues 
virtuous  ways  for  the  smoothing  those  difficulties.  3.  If  to  this  we  add  the  mighty 
unspeakable  rewards  that  are  promised  to  all  faithful  persevering  Christians  in  the 
other  world,  and  the  sad  portion  that  doth  await  all  wicked  men,  let  the  difficulties 
of  religion  be  never  so  great,  yet  there  will  be  no  comparison  between  sin  and  virtue, 
which  of  them  is  the  easier,  and  which  of  them  most  recommends  itself  to  the 
choice  of  mankind.  {Abp.  John  Sharp.)  God's  commandments  not  grievous  : — 
It  must  ever  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  is  a  very  great  and  arduous  thing  to  attain 
to  heaven  (Matt.  xxii.  14,  vii.  14 ;  Luke  xiii.  24,  xiv.  26).  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  evident  to  any  one  who  reads  the  New  Testament  with  attention  that  Christ  and 
His  apostles  speak  of  a  religious  life  as  something  easy,  pleasant,  and  comfortable. 
Thus,  in  the  text,  "  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."  In  like  manner  our 
Saviour  says  (Matt.  xi.  28-30).  Solomon,  also,  in  the  Old  Testament,  speaks  in  the 
same  way  of  true  wisdom  (Prov.  iii.  17-24).  Again,  we  read  in  Micah  (chap.  vi.  8), 
"  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,"  Ac,  as  if  it  were  a  little  and  an  easy  thing 
so  to  do.  Now  it  must  be  admitted,  first  of  all,  as  matter  of  fact,  that  God's  com- 
mandments are  grievous  to  the  great  mass  of  Christians.  Accordingly,  men  of 
worldly  minds,  finding  the  true  way  of  life  unpleasant  to  walk  in,  have  attempted 
to  find  out  other  and  easier  roads  ;  and  have  been  accustomed  to  argue  that  there 
must  be  another  way  which  suits  them  better  than  that  which  religious  men  walk 
in,  for  the  very  reason  that  Scripture  declares  that  Christ's  commandments  are  not 
grievous.  Some  have  gone  as  far  as  boldly  to  say,  "  God  wiU  not  condemn  a  man 
merely  for  taking  a  little  pleasure,"  by  which  they  mean  leading  an  irreligious  and 
profligate  life.  And  many  there  are  who  virtually  maintain  that  we  may  live  to 
the  world,  so  that  we  do  so  decently,  and  yet  live  to  God ;  arguing  that  this  world's 
blessings  are  given  us  by  God,  and  therefore  may  lawfully  be  used  moderately  and 
thankfully.  Now  then  let  us  proceed  to  consider  how  God  fulfils  His  engagements 
to  us,  that  His  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness.  1.  Now,  supposing  some  superior 
promised  you  any  gifts  in  a  particular  way,  and  you  did  not  follow  his  directions, 
would  he  have  broken  his  promise,  or  you  have  voluntarily  excluded  yourselves 
from  the  advantage  ?  Evidently  you  would  have  brought  about  your  own  loss  ; 
you  might,  indeed,  think  his  offer  not  worth  accepting,  burdened,  as  it  was,  with  a 
eondition  annexed  to  it,  still  you  could  not  in  any  propriety  say  that  he  failed  in 
his  engagement.  Now  when  Scripture  promises  us  that  its  commandments  shall 
be  easy,  it  couples  the  promise  with  the  injunction  that  we  should  seek  God  early 
(Prov.  viii.  17  ;  Eccl.  xii.  1 ;  Mark  x.  14).  Youth  is  the  time  of  His  covenant 
with  us,  when  He  first  gives  us  His  Spirit ;  first  giving  then  that  we  may  then 
forthwith  begin  our  return  of  obedience  to  Him.  Now  it  is  obvious  that  obedience  to 
God's  commandments  is  ever  easy,  and  almost  without  effort  to  those  who  begin 
to  serve  Him  from  the  bcinning  of  their  days  ;  whereas  those  who  wait  awhile 
find  it  grievous  in  proportion  to  their  delay.     For  consider  how  gently  God  leads 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  893 

ns  on  in  our  early  years,  and  how  very  gradually  He  opens  upon  us  the  com- 
plicated duties  of  Ufe.  A  child  at  first  has  hardly  an5d;hing  to  do  but  to  obey  his 
parents;  of  God  he  knows  just  as  much  as  they  are  able  to  tell  him,  and  he  is  not 
equal  to  many  thoughts  either  about  Him  or  about  the  world.  And  while  on  the 
one  hand  his  range  of  duty  is  very  confined,  observe  how  he  is  assisted  in  perform- 
ing it.  First,  he  has  no  bad  habits  to  hinder  the  suggestions  of  his  conscience ; 
indolence,  pride,  ill-temper,  do  not  then  act  as  they  afterwards  act,  when  the  mind 
has  accustomed  itself  to  disobedience,  as  stubborn,  deep-seated  impediments  in  the 
way  of  duty.  To  obey  requires  an  effort,  of  course ;  but  an  effort  like  the  bodily 
effort  of  the  child's  rising  from  the  ground,  when  he  has  fallen  on  it ;  not  the  effort 
of  shaking  off  drowsy  sleep ;  not  the  effort  (far  less)  of  violent  bodily  exertion  in 
a  time  of  sickness  and  long  weakness :  and  the  first  effort  made,  obedience  on  a 
second  trial  will  be  easier  than  before,  till  at  length  it  will  be  easier  to  obey  than 
not  to  obey.  Doubtless  new  trials  would  come  on  him ;  bad  passions,  which  he 
had  not  formed  a  conception  of,  would  assail  him;  but  (1  John  v.  18;  iii.  19).  And 
so  he  would  grow  up  to  man's  estate,  his  duties  at  length  attaining  their  fuU  range, 
and  his  soul  being  completed  in  all  its  parts  for  the  due  performance  of  them. 
Thus  Christ's  commandments,  viewed  as  He  enjoins  them  on  us,  are  not  grievous. 
They  would  be  grievous  if  put  upon  us  all  at  once  ;  but  they  are  not  heaped  on  us, 
according  to  His  order  of  dispensing  them,  which  goes  upon  an  harmonious  and 
considerate  plan  ;  by  little  and  little,  first  one  duty,  then  another,  then  both,  and 
so  on.  Moreover,  they  come  upon  us  while  the  safeguard  of  virtuous  principle  is 
forming  naturally  and  gradually  in  our  minds  by  our  very  deeds  of  obedience,  and 
is  following  them  as  their  reward.  2.  All  this  being  granted,  it  still  may  be 
objected,  since  the  commandments  of  God  are  grievous  to  the  generality  of  men, 
where  is  the  use  of  saying  what  men  ought  to  be,  when  we  know  what  they  are  ? 
and  how  is  it  fulfilling  a  promise  that  His  commandments  shall  not  be  grievous,  by 
informing  us  that  they  ought  not  to  be  ?  It  is  one  thing  to  say  that  the  law  is 
in  itself  holy,  just,  and  good,  and  quite  a  different  thing  to  declare  it  is  not 
grievous  to  sinful  man.  In  answering  this  question,  I  fully  admit  that  our  Saviour 
spoke  of  man  as  he  is,  as  a  sinner,  when  He  said  His  yoke  should  be  easy  to  him. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  grant,  that  if  man  cannot  obey  God,  obedience  must  be 
grievous ;  and  I  grant  too  (of  course)  that  man  by  nature  cannot  obey  God.  But 
observe  nothing  has  here  been  said,  nor  by  St.  John  in  the  text,  of  man  as  by 
nature  born  in  sin  ;  but  of  man  as  a  child  of  grace,  as  Christ's  purchased  posses- 
sion, who  goes  before  us  with  His  mercy,  puts  the  blessing  first,  and  then  adds  the 
command ;  regenerates  us,  and  then  bids  us  obey.  When,  then,  men  allege  their 
bad  nature  as  an  excuse  for  their  dislike  of  God's  commandments,  if,  indeed,  they 
are  heathens,  let  them  be  heard,  and  an  answer  may  be  given  to  them  even  as  such. 
But  with  heathens  we  are  not  now  concerned.  These  men  make  their  complaint 
as  Christians,  and  as  Christians  they  are  most  unreasonable  in  making  it ;  God 
having  provided  a  remedy  for  their  natural  incapacity  in  the  gift  of  His  Spirit. 
Hear  St.  Paul's  words  (Rom.  v.  15-21).  And  now  to  \that  do  the  remarks  I  have 
been  making  tend,  but  to  this  ? — to  humble  every  one  of  us.  For,  however  faith- 
fully we  have  obeyed  God,  and  however  early  we  began  to  do  so,  surely  we  might 
have  begun  sooner  than  we  did,  and  might  have  served  Him  more  heartily.  Let 
each  of  us  reflect  upon  his  own  most  gross  and  persevering  neglect  of  God  at 
various  seasons  of  his  past  life.  How  considerate  He  has  been  to  us !  How  did 
He  lead  us  on,  duty  by  duty,  as  if  step  by  step  upwards,  by  the  easy  rounds  of 
that  ladder  whose  top  reaches  to  heaven !  What  could  have  been  done  more  to  His 
vineyard,  that  He  hath  not  done  in  it  ?  And  "  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep 
His  commandments,  and  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."  Why,  then,  have 
they  been  grievous  to  us  ?  Why  have  we  erred  from  His  ways,  and  hardened  our 
hearts  from  His  fear?  Let  us,  then,  turn  to  the  Lord,  while  yet  we  may.  Difficult  it 
will  be  in  proportion  to  the  distance  we  have  departed  from  Him.  {J.  H.  Newman, 
D.D.)  Love  and  law  : — I.  What  is  the  affection  that  a  good  Christian  bears 
TO  Christ  ?  It  is  love ;  yes,  that  is  the  Christian  virtue,  that  is  the  Evangelical  grace. 
It  is  the  main  difference  betwixt  the  law  and  the  gospel,  timor  and  amor.  Not  that  a 
Christian  ought  to  be  free  from  all  kind  of  fear.  There  is  a  threefold  fear  to  which 
we  are  liable.  1.  As  we  were  in  our  primitive  state  of  subjection,  so  we  owe  to 
God  a  fear  of  loyalty  as  good  subjects  to  their  Prince  and  Sovereign.  2.  Our 
state  of  rebellion,  that  brought  upon  us  the  fear  of  slavery.  3.  Our  state  of  adop- 
tion, that  begets  in  us  a  filial  and  son-like  fear.  Fear,  then,  is  not  wholly  excluded 
from  the  state  of  a  Christian ;  but  yet  the  grace  that  the  gospel  aims  at  is  the  grace 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of  love  (1  Tim.  i.  5).  1.  This  love  of  God  gives  a  chief  title  and  denomination  to 
Christians;  it  is  their  badge  and  cognizance  (1  Cor.  viii.  3).  He  sets  much  by 
BQch,  and  owns  them,  and  highly  accounts  of  them.  2.  This  love  is  the  title  and 
assnrance  of  aU  His  promises.  3.  Love  is  the  ingratiating  quality  of  all  our 
services  ;  it  is  that  which  commends  us  and  our  services  to  God's  acceptation.  It 
is  love  that  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  (Rom.  xiii.  10).  Thus  Christ  shows  what 
kind  of  obedience  He  expects  at  our  hands  (Job  xiv.).  "If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My 
commandments."  The  language  of  the  gospel  is  not,  if  ye  wiU  avoid  wrath, 
vengeance,  escape  damnation,  then  perform  obedience  to  me  ;  but.  If  ye  love  Me. 

1.  AU  other  motives  are  base  and  servile  without  this  willing  and  loving  affection. 

2.  The  service  of  love  is  only  accepted  because  it  alone  is  an  ingenuous  service, 
and  of  a  right  intention.  3.  This  service  out  of  love  is  most  acceptable  to  God 
because  this  kind  of  service  is  most  honourable  to  God.  God  is  a  gracious 
sovereign,  not  a  cruel  tyrant,  and  so  desires  to  be  served  as  good  subjects 
serve  their  king — out  of  love.  4.  The  service  of  love  is  the  only  service  that 
God  sets  much  by,  because  that  service  which  arises  from  love  is  the  only 
constant  and  lasting  service.  Love  is  long-breathed  and  will  hold  out  and 
persevere ;  whereas  fear  is  a  flincher  and  will  soon  tire  and  start  aside.  U.  The 
FBUiT  OF  THIS  LOVING  AFFECTION,  the  actlou  that  flows  from  it,  that  is  obedi- 
ence. Herein  is  love,  that  we  keep  His  commandments — that  is  the  kindly  proof  of 
our  love.  1.  It  shows  our  love  to  God  must  be  an  active,  and  operative,  and  working 
love.  Indeed,  love  is  seated  in  the  will,  the  fountain  of  action  ;  it  rests  not  in  our 
understanding,  the  knowing  faculty.  It  is  not  a  mere  notion  or  speculation,  swim- 
ming in  the  brain,  but  a  devout  affection  rooted  in  the  heart.  2.  It  puts  another 
quaUfication  on  our  love ;  it  is  not  a  love  of  equality,  but  a  love  of  subjection  and 
inferiority ;  such  a  love  as  the  inferior  bears  to  his  superior  that  hath  a  power  to 
command  him.  3.  It  shows  that  our  love  to  God  must  be  a  love  regulated  and 
restrained  to  what  God  commands  us.  Offer  to  Him  not  thine  inventions,  but  His 
own  prescriptions.  4.  This  shows  our  love  to  God  must  be  entire  and  universal,  of 
as  large  extent,  as  aU  God's  commandments.  As  before  ye  heard  of  a  restriction, 
BO  here  we  meet  with  an  extension.  Love  must  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  III. 
What  is  the  disposition  and  inclination  that  he  which  loves  God  finds  in  him- 
BELF  TO  God's  commandments  ?  1.  Indeed,  in  some  respects,  it  is  most  true,  God's 
commandments  are  exceeding  heavy.  (1)  Take  the  law  of  God  at  its  full  height 
and  pitch  of  perfection,  so  it  hath  a  great  difficulty  in  it ;  yea,  in  a  manner,  an 
impossibility  in  it  to  all  men  since  Adam.  (2)  Take  the  law  in  the  lowest  pitch  of 
righteousness,  yet  an  unregenerate  man  cannot  obey  it.  He  is  so  far  from  fulfil- 
ling aU  the  law  that  he  cannot  perform  the  least  part  of  it.  If  the  root  be  not 
good,  which  is  faith  working  by  love,  the  fruit,  though  outwardly  specious,  is 
inwardly  vicious.  (3)  Consider  the  law  in  the  evangelical  mitigation  and  abate- 
ment of  it,  yet  stiU  the  saints  of  God  find  difficulty  in  it.  A  regenerate  man  is 
two  men.  That  which  is  spiritual  and  renewed  in  him,  that  readily  conforms  to 
the  law  of  God.  "  The  Spirit  is  willing,"  saith  our  Saviour.  Aye,  but  the  flesh  is 
weak ;  nay,  oftentimes  wilful,  stubborn,  and  resisting.  2.  But  yet  it  is  most  true 
what  the  text  af&rms,  God's  commandments  are  not  grievous.  His  service  is  no 
such  hard  service  as  the  world  accounts  it.  It  is  a  hard  service  indeed  (for  why 
should  we  be  left  to  a  lawless  liberty  ?),  but  it  is  an  ingenuous  service.  God's 
servants  find  no  grievances  in  this  employment.  (1)  Look  upon  their  state  and 
condition.  God's  people  are  not  in  any  base,  servile  condition ;  but  (a)  they  are 
called  unto  a  state  of  liberty,  and  liberty  is  sweet  in  itself  and  sweetens  all  our 
employments,  (h)  As  it  is  a  free  so  it  is  an  honourable  service.  As  we  know,  the 
greatness  of  the  Master  dignifies  and  ennobles  the  service  that  is  done  unto  Him. 
(2)  Look  upon  their  task  and  employment,  you  shall  find  the  service  of  God  is  no 
such  wearisome  service,  (a)  The  work  which  God  enjoins  them  is  possible  to 
them.  God's  commandments  are  made  possible  to  a  regenerate  man  (Phil.  iv.  13). 
Flesh  and  blood  sees  nothing  in  the  law  of  God  but  impossibility;  like  the 
unbelieving  spies — oh,  we  cannot  conquer  the  land.  But  faith  and  love,  like  Caleb 
and  Joshua,  conceive  it  may  be  done,  and  undertake  it  readily,  (ft)  This  work  is 
easy;  I  said  it  even  now.  (c)  This  work  is  not  only  possible  and  easy,  but 
pleasant  and  delightful.  A  good  Christian  finds  exceeding  great  pleasure  and 
sweetness  in  it.  (3)  Look  upon  the  encouragements  that  Christians  find  in  the 
service  of  God ;  they  will  make  it  appear  that  the  service  of  God  is  no  such  irk- 
some service,  (a)  God  helps  and  assists  His  servants  in  aU  their  works.  This  He 
doth  by  putting  their  souls  into  a  right  frame  of  holiness,     (ft)  God's  merciful 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  395 

connivance.  When  His  servants  that  desire  to  serve  Him,  yet  fail,  and  fall  short 
of  what  is  their  duty,  God  winks  at  their  failings,  and  passes  by  them.  See  this 
graciously  promised  to  us  (Mai.  iii.  17).  (c)  The  many  heartenings  and  secret 
cheerings  that  God  vouchsafes  to  His  servants  in  the  course  of  their  obedience. 
He  is  no  churMsh  Nabal,  sour  and  harsh  to  His  poor  servants,  but  puts  life  and 
heart  into  them,  (i.)  He  vouchsafes  His  presence  to  them,  as  Boaz  to  his  reapers. 
The  Master's  eye,  the  cheerfulness  of  His  countenance,  is  the  man's  encouragement, 
(ii.)  He  speaks  cheerfully  to  their  hearts.  "Well  done,  faithful  servant"  (Acts  xviii. 
9).  (d)  His  loving  acceptance  of  our  poor  services.  Our  faithful  endeavours,  our 
honest  desires,  our  sincere  intentions,  are  graciously  accepted,  (c)  His  bountiful 
rewarding  of  us,  besides  the  grand  payment,  the  weight  of  glory,  the  reward 
of  the  inheritance.  How  many  encouraging  blessings  and  favours  doth  He 
bestow  upon  His  servants,  over  and  above?  Besides  their  wages  they  have 
their  avails  out  of  their  Master's  bounty.  David  found  it  and  acknowledgeth 
it.  Thou  hast  dealt  bountifully  with  Thy  servant.  {Bp.  Brownrigg.)  The 
practicahleness  of  our  Christian  duty : — I.  The  laws  op  the  Christian  keligion 
ASB  reasonable  in  themselves  ;  that  is,  they  are  agreeable  to  the  natural  light  of 
our  minds  and  the  answers  of  inward  truth,  whenever  we  put  the  question  to  it. 
It  is  true,  there  are  some  few  positive  commands  in  the  gospel  which  do  not 
directly  arise  from  any  principle  of  natural  reason,  but  then  they  are  such  as  cannot 
be  urged  to  prove  the  difficulties  of  revealed  religion ;  yet  supposing  the  truth  of  the 
Christian  revelation,  God  had  wise  reasons  for  their  institution.  H.  The  practice 
or  religion  lays  the  only  foundation  of  inward  peace  and  satisfaction  of 
mind.  This  indeed  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  our  acting  as  becomes  reasonable 
agents.  And  who  would  not  be  content  to  undergo  some  slight  trouble  and  incon- 
Tenience,  or  to  deny  himself  in  many  things,  provided  he  may  have  all  things 
calm  and  quiet  within  ?  1.  The  practice  of  religion  has  a  natural  tendency  to 
secure  the  peace  and  freedom  of  our  minds,  as  it  preserves  them  in  an  even  and 
sedate  temper  ;  as  it  removes  every  occasion  of  the  disorders  which  are  apt  to  ruffle 
us,  and  keeps  our  appetites  within  their  due  bounds.  2.  Upon  a  moral  account, 
religion  gives  us  the  supports  of  a  good  conscience,  the  assurances  of  God's  favour, 
and  fills  the  mind  with  bright  and  pleasing  ideas.  3.  Christians,  in  a  faithful  dis- 
charge of  their  duty,  have  their  hearts  frequently  filled  with  the  delights  of  an 
overcoming  and  supernatural  grace.  HI.  We  are  encouraged  to  the  practice 
or  religion  by  the  assistances  of  a  supernatural  power  and  grace.     IV.    Wb 

ABE  FURTHER  ENCOURAGED  TO  THE  PRACTICE  OF  OUR  CHRISTIAN  DUTY  BY  THE  PRO- 
POSAL OF  A  GLORIOUS  AND  ETERNAL  REWARD.  Couclusion :  1.  Are  the  laws  of  religion 
reasonable  in  themselves  ?  Let  us  then  either  follow  them,  or  renounce  reason. 
2.  Does  the  practice  of  religion  conduce  to  the  inward  peace  and  satisfaction  of  our 
minds  ?  Why  do  we  oppose  our  own  happiness  ?  How  strange  is  the  infatuation 
of  sin  I  How  fraught  with  contradiction !  3.  Have  we  indeed  a  Divine  principle  to 
assist  us  in  the  performance  of  our  duty  ?  Let  us  then,  in  all  our  spiritual  wants 
and  conflicts,  be  fervent  in  our  prayers  to  God  for  the  assistances  of  His  Holy  Spirit, 
and  faithfully  comply  with  them.  4.  Besides  all  these  motives  to  reUgion,  has  the 
good  God  still  encouraged  us  to  the  practice  of  it  by  proposing  to  us  the  great  and 
glorious  rewards  of  eternity?  Let  us  live  as  if  we  really  believe  them.  It  is  im- 
possible that  any  difficulty  should  stand  before  a  firm  and  steady  belief  in  them. 
(R.  Fiddet,  D.D.)  The  commandments  of  Christ  not  grievous  : — Christ's  command- 
ments cannot  justly  be  esteemed  grievous,  because  they  are  not — 1.  Unreasonable. 
2.  Impracticable.  3.  Dishonourable.  4.  Dangerous.  5.  Unpleasant.  6.  Unprofit- 
able. {S.  Palmer.)  The  perfection  of  the  law  of  God  : — This  does  not  mean  that 
even  the  sincere  Christian  finds  no  difficulty  in  obedience.  His  life  is  a  daily 
struggle.  Does  not  the  passage  following  our  text  speak  of  a  victory  ?  And  does 
not  victory  imply  the  previous  conflict  ?  And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  true  that 
"  the  yoke  of  Christ  is  easy  and  His  burden  light "  (Matt.  xi.  30).  I  wiU  not  dwell 
on  the  mild  and  gentle  character  of  the  gospel  ordinances,  in  contrast  with  the  com- 
plex and  burdensome  ritual  of  Moses.  But  leaving  this  point,  I  ask  whether  the 
commandments  of  God  are  grievous  when  brought  into  comparison  with  the  law  of 
sin,  when  fliat  tyranny  is  established  in  the  soul  ?  Oh,  the  labours,  the  toils,  the 
vexing  cases,  the  soul-destroying  practice,  of  those  who  are  governed  by  Satan  I 
Earthquake  and  pestilence,  and  famine  and  sword,  have  cut  off  multitudes ;  but 
who  slew  all  these  ?  If  the  hand  of  God  hath  slain  in  its  direct  judgment  its  thousands, 
wilful  sin  hath  offered  on  its  thousand  altars  its  ten  thousands.  The  command- 
ments of  God,  indeed,  are  not  grievous  comparatively.      But  neither  are  they 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

grievous  considered  in  themselves  absolutely,  irrespective  of  all  comparison.  1. 
For,  consider  the  Lawgiver,  is  He  not  such  a  Being,  that,  could  it  be  proved  that  any 
commandments,  purporting  to  come  from  Him,  are  rigid  and  unbearable  to  a  well- 
constituted  mind,  it  would  be  at  once  a  sufficient  evidence  that  they  did  not  derive 
their  origin  from  Him  ?  "  God,"  our  apostle  says,  "  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no 
darkness  at  all  "  (chap.  i.  3).  Then,  we  are  assured,  that  His  commandments  will 
be  very  pure,  and  strictly  just  (Psa.  xix.  9).  But  God  is  "  love,"  benevolence,  un- 
tinctured  by  any  infusion  of  malignity.  2.  Let  us  take  another  view  of  the  subject, 
and  contemplate  the  persons  who  obey  these  commandments.  The  commandments 
are  grievous  to  the  people  of  the  world,  it  is  admitted ;  for  that  which  is  the  object 
of  the  mind's  distaste  and  hatred,  must  of  necessity  be  burdensome.  But  every  true 
Christian  has  a  mind  attempered  to  the  will  of  God.  He  is  "  born  of,  God,"  and  aa 
the  invariable  consequence  of  thi^  change  a  similarity  of  character,  of  judgment,  of 
taste,  is  formed  within  him.  God,  and  the  child  of  God,  therefore,  view  the  command- 
ments in  the  same  light.  God  does  not  esteem  them  grievous ;  neither  does  he  that 
is  begotten  of  Him  (Psa.  cxix.  128).  3.  We  shall  take  another  view  of  the  subject, 
by  considering  the  assistances  which  are  given  to  those  who  obey  the  commandments. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  promised  (Isa.  xl.  30,  31 ;  xli.  10 ;  lix.  19 ;  Eph.  iii.  16).  4. 
Eegard  their  nature.  Eesolving  the  commandments  into  their  most  simple  element, 
we  find  that  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law.  There  could  be  no  defect  in  our 
obedience  did  such  a  love  exist  in  its  perfection.  Then,  I  ask,  can  God's  command- 
ments be  grievous  to  the  man  who  obeys  them  ?  Can  it  be  a  burdensome  thing  to 
the  soul  to  overflow  with  benevolence  ?  5.  Consider  the  effect  of  obedience  to  the 
commandments  upon  the  happiness  of  life,  and  you  arrive  at  the  same  conclusion — 
that  they  are  not  grievous.  "  The  statutes  of  the  Lord,"  David  says,  "  are  right, 
rejoicing  the  heart  "  (Psa.  xix.  8).  In  keeping  them  there  is  great  reward.  "  Great 
peace  have  they  which  love  Thy  law  "  (Psa.  cxix.  165).  And  who  shall  say  how 
many  miseries  are  turned  away  from  the  lot  of  him  who  keeps  in  the  narrow  way  of 
the  heavenly  precepts?  6.  One  further  view  of  the  subject  is  necessary  to  complete 
the  argument  for  the  truth  of  our  text.  Let  us  consider  it,  then,  in  the  connection 
which  exists  between  the  observance  of  the  commandments  and  the  attainment  of 
future  glory.  Obedience  is  a  preparatory  formation  of  the  tempers  of  heaven ;  the 
tuning  of  the  soul  for  the  anthems  of  eternity.  The  labourer  rises  up  early,  and 
late  takes  rest,  and  eats  the  bread  of  carefulness ;  but  his  toil  is  reckoned  as  nothing 
for  the  wages  that  are  to  recompense  it.  The  adventurer  ploughs  the  stormy  deep, 
travels  over  continents  of  ice,  and  explores  the  frost-bound  north ;  and  his  labours 
are  not  grievous,  even  in  hope,  of  some  discovery  with  which  his  name  shall  in  after 
days  be  linked.  On  every  hand  fatigue  is  cheerfully  borne,  privations  are  submitted 
to,  for  some  recompense  bounded  by  the  present  life.  And  is  not  the  Christian's 
glory  lofty  enough,  and  his  crown  bright  enough,  to  induce  us  to  say  that  the 
commandments,  in  obeying  which  he  is  preparing  for  it,  are  not  grievous? 
(T.  Eennion,  M.A.) 

Ver.  4.  For  whatsoever  is  bom  of  God  overcometh  the  world. — The  greatett 
character  and  the  greatest  conquest : — I.  The  greatest  ch.uiactee.  "  Born  of  God." 
This  means  a  moral  generation  in  men  of  a  Divine  character.  It  implies  three  things. 
1,  Fihal  devotion.  2.  Moral  resemblance.  Like  begets  like,  children  are  like  their 
parents.  He  who  is  morally  born  of  God  resembles  God  in  spirit  and  in  character. 
3.  Glorious  heirship.  "  If  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ."  II.  Thb 
OBEATEST  CONQUEST.  "  Overcomcth  the  world."  The  world  is  here  used  to  repre- 
sent the  mighty  aggregation  of  evil.  The  conquest  of  the  world  includes  the 
'i- subordination — 1.  Of  matter  to  mind.  The  rendering  of  all  material  elements, 
circumstances,  and  influences,  subservient  to  the  elevating  of  the  reason  and  the 
ennobling  of  the  soul.  It  includes  the  subordination — 2.  Of  the  mind  to  God.  The 
devotion  of  the  intellect  to  the  study  of  God ;  of  the  heart  to  the  love  of  God ;  of  the 
conscience  to  the  will  of  God.  Sublime  conquest  this  1  The  grand  difference  between 
a  man  Divinely  born  and  others  is  this,  that  he  conquers  the  world  whilst  others 
are  conquered  by  it.     {Hmnilist.)  Worldliness  : — I.  The  Christian's  life  is  a 

IjEnothened  contest  with  the  three  enemies — "  sin,  the  world,  the  devil." 
What  is  the  "  world,"  and  what  is  "  worldliness  "  ?  Can  we  find  in  the  Scriptures 
any  full  lists  of  acts  which  are  worldly  ?  No.  It  is  the  genius  of  Christianity  to 
give  us  principles,  and  not  precise  rules.  II.  In  this  very  liberty  consists  thb 
strictness  ok  thf,  law.  And  owing  to  this,  too,  there  is  a  difficulty  in  obeying  it,  far 
beyond  that  of  obeying  a  law.     To  escape  this  difficulty  various  attempts  have  been 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  397 

made  to  lay  down  precise  rules,  and  to  define  exactly  what  is  and  what  is  not  "the 
world  "  and  "  worldly."  The  most  common  of  these  tests  is,  as  is  well  known,  that 
of  presence  at  social  reunions  and  amusements  of  a  particular  class.  It  seems  un- 
charitable to  pronounce  as  necessarily  irreligious  those  who,  with  every  other  token 
of  sincere  piety,  are  found  nevertheless  sometimes  in  places  where  others  of  us  are 
never  to  be  seen.  If  a  person  whose  whole  life  and  walk  is  that  of  a  Christian  says 
that  he  really  before  God  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  his  spiritual  growth  is  in 
no  wise  retarded  by  the  enjoyment  of  some  pleasure — not  in  itseK  sinful — and  that 
his  example  is  not  likely  to  be  injurious  to  others,  it  does  seem  monstrous  to  say  to 
him,  "  That  is  one  of  the  things  I  have  set  down  as  belonging  to  the  world ;  and  as 
you  see  no  harm  in  it,  you  are  outside  the  covenant."  To  our  own  Master  we  each 
of  us  stand  or  fall.  Moreover,  the  test  is  insufficient,  and  therefore  deceptive.  It  is 
quite  possible  to  bear  it  without  a  particle  of  religion,  or  without  even  any  profession 
of  religion.  Axiother  evil  arising  from  this  arbitrary  and  most  inadequate  test  of 
worldliness  is,  that  the  persons  who  apply  it  are  very  liable  to  be  deceived  by  it 
themselves.  From  habitually  speaking  of  one  kind  of  worldliness  they  lapse  into 
the  practical  belief  that  there  is  none  other ;  and,  having  clearly  overcome  that — 
Bometimes  after  a  long  trial  of  physical  rather  than  spiritual  strength — they  imagine 
that  they  have  given  up  the  world,  and  that  their  contest  with  that  enemy,  at  all 
events,  is  at  an  end.  If  we  do  strip  off  our  ornaments  of  gold  and  cast  them  into  the 
fire,  we  must  take  heed  lest  we  worship  the  calf  into  which  they  are  molten. 
Another,  and  not  a  trifling  danger  of  these  false  tests  arises  from  the  fact  that  very 
many  of  those  who  use  them  are  among  the  best,  the  most  pious,  and  the  most  truly 
tmworldly  persons  on  earth.  Now,  when  such  persons  use  as  tests  of  victory  over  the 
•world  the  forsaking  of  those  two  or  three  courses  or  habits,  the  impression  conveyed 
to  the  thoughtless  votary  of  dissipation  is  this — "  These  amusements,  then,  are  what 
I  have  to  give  up ;  on  the  subject  of  these  is  the  main  difference  between  myself  and 
those  about  whose  piety  there  can  be  no  doubt.  Well,  I  shall  give  them  up  assuredly 
at  some  time,  as  many  have  done  before  me,  and  then  I  shall  stand  in  their  position." 
And,  as  time  and  change  of  circumstances  wiU  in  many  cases  bring  about  this 
resemblance,  they  leave  it  to  time  to  bring  about,  and  make  no  effort  to  overcome  a 
"world"  which,  as  they  have  been  accustomed  to  hear  it  described,  will  in  all 
probability  one  day  fly  away  of  its  own  accord.      III.  Precise  bules  upon  mattees 

INTBINSICAIiLT  INDrFFERENT,  BUT  CAPABLE  OF  BEING  MADE  OCCASIONS  OF  FOSTERING 
A  WORLDLY  SPIRIT,  ABB  TO  BE  AVOIDED,  BECAUSE  THET  GIVE  TO  THOSE  WHO  AT 
PRESENT  WANT  TO  BE  GUIDED  NEITHER  BT  THE  LETTER  NOB  THE  SPIRIT  A  FALSE 
IMPRESSION  AS   TO  WHAT   THAT  WORLD   IS   BT   THE  SUBJUGATION   OF  WHICH  WE  ARE  TOLD 

THE  CHILD  OF  GoD  IS  CHARACTERISED.  Before  you  come  to  be  Christians  you  must 
bear  far  stricter  tests  than  these.  Especially  in  these  cravings  for  excitement 
and  gaiety,  which  are  by  your  own  admissions  the  forms  in  which  the  world  is 
•  most  alluring,  and  because  they  are  so,  you  must  be  completely  changed.  But 
the  contest  does  not  end  there  or  then.  To  you  and  aU  of  us  it  ends  on  earth, 
and  while  we  live,  nowhere  and  never.  For  "  the  world "  is  not  a  time,  or  a 
place,  or  a  class  of  persons,  or  a  definable  course  of  acts,  or  a  definite  set  of 
amusements ;  it  is  a  system  pervading  every  place,  extending  from  age  to  age, 
tempting  us  in  all  our  occupations,  mixing  itself  with  all  our  thoughts, 
insinuating  itself  under  forms  the  most  unsuspected,  lurking  in  pursuits  the  most 
harmless — yea,  in  pursuits,  without  it,  the  most  holy — checking  aspirations 
the  most  noble,  sullying  affections  the  most  pure.  {J.  C.  Coghlan,  D.D.) 
The  glory  of  a  truly  good  man : — I.  He  has  the  highest  moral  pedigree.  In 
conventional  society  there  are  fools  who  pride  themselves  in  their  ancestry.  1.  In 
him  there  is  a  moral  resemblance  to  the  greatest  Being.  As  the  human  offspring 
partakes  of  the  nature  of  his  parent,  so  the  good  man  partakes  of  the  moral  character 
of  God,  a  character  loving,  pure,  just.  2.  Over  him  there  is  the  tenderest  care  of  the 
greatest  Being.  "  As  a  father  pitieth  his  children,"  &c.  3.  In  him  there  is  the  most 
loyal  devotion  to  the  greatest  Being.  He  loves  the  "  Most  High"  supremely,  con- 
stantly, practically.  II.  He  achieves  the  highest  moral  conquest.  He  overcomes 
the  world.  He  conquers  errors,  lusts  ;  he  overcomes  bad  habits  and  reforms  corrupt 
institutions.  {Homilist.)  Overcoming  the  world  : — I.  The  contest  with  the  world. 
It  is  assumed  to  be  universal.  None  can  avoid  it.  If  we  follow  Christ  we  must  resist 
the  world.  The  forms  in  which  this  warfare  must  be  maintained  are  many  and 
dangerous.  The  apostle  had  in  his  view  the  persecutions  which  believers  were 
required  to  encounter  in  his  day  from  the  world.  We  have  cause  to  be  thankful 
that  we  are  not  exposed  to  the  trials  of  those  times.    Even  supposing,  however,  that 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

our  danger  does  not  lie  in  this  direction,  it  may  still  be  great  in  another.  The  love 
of  money  may  eat  as  a  canker  into  the  soul.  It  may  tempt  to  practices  of  very 
doubtful  propriety.  It  may  harden  the  heart  against  the  claims  of  others.  Even 
the  enlightened  and  godly  man  finds  the  extreme  danger  of  this  subtle  enemy. 
It  is  a  principal  hindrance  to  his  growth  in  grace.  It  can  be  withstood  only 
by  a  most  determined  resistance.  II.  How  this  victory  mat  be  gained.  1. 
Regeneration.  "  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world."  There  is 
great  force  in  the  term  "  whatsoever."  It  refers  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul. 
So  far  as  that  prevails  there  is  a  power  and  principle  in  direct  antagonism  to  the 
world.  And  so  far  as  the  new  man  prevails,  it  overcometh  the  world.  Paul 
reiterates  the  same  sentiment  (Eom.  xii.  2).  He  takes  for  granted  that  unless  there 
be  this  transformation  of  mind,  there  will  be  conformity  to  the  world,  but  that  such 
transformation  will  overcome  it.  How  it  does  so  may  easily  be  shown.  (1)  The 
mind  is  then  enlightened.  It  sees  the  world  in  its  true  character.  (2)  The  conscience 
is  quickened.  There  is  the  utmost  jealousy  lest  the  world  should  obtain  the  place  of 
God.  (3)  The  heart  is  purified.  Thus  the  taste  is  rendered  pure  and  heavenly.  The 
world,  therefore,  cannot  please  nor  satisfy.  2.  Faith.  "This  is  the  victory,"  <fec. 
Show  how  faith  secures  such  a  blessed  issue.  (1)  ft  does  so  by  engaging  the  attention 
with  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  prominent  in  the  verse  before  us.  "He  believeth  that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God."  His  mind  becomes  thus  occupied  with  the  high  themes 
of  the  person  and  work  of  Christ.  In  comparison  with  them,  all  other  things  fall 
into  insignificance  in  his  esteem.  (2)  Again,  the  believer  is  much  strengthened  in 
these  elevated  views  by  observing  that  one  design  of  Christ's  salvation  is  to  secure  a 
victory  over  the  present  world.  (3)  Further,  he  is  encouraged  while  he  is  warned 
by  considering  the  example  of  Christ  and  of  those  who  have  been  conformed  to  Him. 
They  conquered,  and  so  may  he.  (4)  Finally,  his  faith  carries  him  into  close  and 
constant  intercourse  with  eternity,  and  thus  a  mighty  influence  is  brought  to  bear 
upon  him,  and  deaden  his  attachments  to  the  present  world.  It  is  of  the  very 
nature  of  faith  to  unveil  the  eternal  world.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  conflicts  and 
conquest  of  the  born  of  God  : — I.  The  subject  PRiNCiPALiiT  spoken  or,  the  born  of  God. 
This  doctrine,  however  ridiculed  by  some,  our  Saviour  preached  with  great  plainness, 
as  absolutely  necessary.  To  be  born  of  God  is  to  have  a  supernatural  principle  of 
spiritual  life  implanted  by  God  in  the  soul.  Concerning  this  principle  of  grace, 
whereby  a  dead  sinner  is  made  alive,  let  it  be  observed  that  it  is  infused  and  not 
acquired.  The  first  principle  or  spring  of  good  actions  may,  with  equal  reason,  be 
supposed  to  be  infused  into  us  as  Christians,  as  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the 
principle  of  reasoning  is  infused  into  us  as  men:  none  ever  supposed  that  the 
natural  power  of  reasoning  may  be  acquired,  though  a  greater  facility  or  degree 
thereof  is  gradually  attained.  Again,  as  in  nature  the  seed  produces  fruit,  and  in 
things  moral  the  principle  of  action  produces  action,  as  the  principle  of  reason 
produces  acts  of  reason,  so  in  things  spiritual  the  principle  of  grace  produces  acts  of 
grace.  And  this  principle  of  grace,  which  is  at  least  in  the  order  of  nature  antecedent 
to  any  act  of  grace,  is  the  immediate  effect  of  the  power  of  God.  But  the  words  here 
are  not  whosoever,  in  the  masculine  gender,  but  whatsoever,  in  the  neuter  ;  and  so 
may  with  as  much,  or  more  propriety,  be  applied  to  things  than  persons.  They  seem 
to  refer  to  the  inward  or  spiritual  embellishments  peculiar  to  the  man  of  God  as  a 
soldier  of  Christ.  As  the  Christian  is  one  born  of  God,  all  his  graces  are  born  so  too. 
To  instance  in  faith,  hope,  and  love,  the  cardinal  or  principle  and  most  leading  of 
them.  How  little  a  matter  soever  some  persons  make  of  believing,  as  if  they  had 
faith  at  their  command,  or  could  believe  at  pleasure,  the  Apostle  Paul  says  expressly 
that  "  Faith  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit,"  so  not  the  work  of  man.  True  Christian  hope  is 
also  of  Divine  original.  "  It  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  and  God,  even  oar 
Father,  who  giveth  us  a  good  hope,  through  grace"  (2  Thess.  ii.  16,  17).  And  that 
love  is  a  heaven-born  grace  nothing  can  be  more  clear  than  what  this  loving  apostle 
says,  "  Love  is  of  God,  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in 
him  "  (chap.  iv.  7,  16).  So  that  He  and  His  Spirit  may  properly  be  called  the  God, 
or  Spirit  of  faith,  hope,  and  love.  These  are  a  specimen  of  the  rest ;  for  as  these, 
BO  in  like  manner  the  spiritual  peace,  joy,  and  consolation  of  saints,  and  all  their 
other  graces,  are  born  of  God;  i.e.,  they  receive  their  birth,  rise,  and  first  beginning 
from  Him  ;  and  as  their  first  life  and  all  their  motion  is  from  Him,  He  only  can  put 
them  into  motion.  Thus  the  soldier  of  Christ  is  girded  of  God  Himself,  and  furnished 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  with  every  grace  that  is  needful  for  his  office  and  exercise.  U.  To 
what  is  said  or  predicated  of  the  subject  of  the  words — the  born  of  God.  It  refers  to 
HIS  HONOUR,  TO  OVERCOME  THE  WORLD.     Neither  the  gospel  of  giace  nor  the  graces  of 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  399 

the  gospel  are  given  in  vain  to  any  person  or  people.  The  world  is  the  theatre  of 
action,  or  field  of  battle.  1.  No  man,  as  a  descendant  of  the  first  Adam,  is  born  a 
Christian  or  a  saint,  but  a  sinner.  2.  Christians  are  soldiers  by  their  calling,  and 
their  life  is  a  continued  warfare.  3.  It  may  animate  Christians  as  soldiers  of  Christ, 
insomuch  as  all  their  armour  and  artillery  is  proved,  and  born  of  God.  His  Spirit 
has  formed  and  fitted  it  for  them.  4.  We  see  here  the  excellency  of  spiritual  grace. 
5.  To  preserve  their  humility  and  heighten  their  thankfulness  to  God  the  Spirit, 
Christians  should  always  remember  that  whatever  advantages  or  conquests  they 
gain  over  then-  spiritual  enemies  are  not  owing  to  their  wisdom,  power,  and  fortitude 
of  mind,  as  men,  but  to  the  instrumentality  of  their  graces.  III.  How  or  wheeebt 
THE  Christian's  honour  of  victory  is  attained;  and  it  is  by  his  faith — "And  this 
is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  The  gaieties,  pleasures, 
and  advantages  of  the  present  life  are  the  arms  with  which  the  world  has  slain 
its  thousands,  and  with  which  it  still  endeavours  to  delude  and  destroy  mankind ; 
but  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  detects  its  fallacy  and  defeats  its  purpose  on  believers. 
If  hope  wavers,  love  chills  and  loses  its  wonted  fervour,  or  patience ;  faith  brings 
in  new  succours  when  it  tells  them,  "  Yet  a  little  while,  and  He  that  shall  come 
will  come,  and  will  not  tarry"  (Heb.  x.  37).  In  a  word,  faith  is  the  enemy's 
killing  and  the  Christian's  conquering  grace.  {G.  Braithioaite,  M.A.)  The  icorld 
overcome  : — 1.  The  real  Christian,  in  his  way  to  heaven,  has  a  conquest  to  make, 
A  victory  to  win — he  must  overcome  the  world.  Why  is  this  ?  Because  the  world 
is  fallen  from  God.  Satan  is  its  prince  and  ruler ;  and,  therefore,  at  our  very 
baptism  we  have  vowed  to  renounce  it.  The  devil  finds  in  the  world  temptations 
suited  to  each  one  of  us.  One  is  tempted  by  riches  to  deny  his  God.  The  smile 
of  the  world  and  hope  of  its  favour  make  many  traitors  to  God ;  the  fear  of  its 
frown,  and  still  more  of  its  sneers,  keeps  many  from  confessing  Christ  before 
men.  II.  The  true  Christian  doth  gain  the  victory  over  all  :  for  "  whosoever  is 
born  of  God  overcometh  the  world."  Such  a  one  hath  that  within  him  which  is 
greater  than  the  world,  even  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  grace  of  God  enables  him  to 
persevere ;  to  get  the  better  from  day  to  day  of  his  own  evil  desires ;  to  resist  the 
world's  temptations.  III.  And  by  what  means  does  the  Christian  gain  the  victory? 
"  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  Not  as  though  there 
were  any  strength  in  ourselves ;  not  as  though  there  were  any  merit  in  our  faith ;  but 
by  crediting  His  testimony,  and  by  daring  to  act  upon  it,  we  obtain  knowledge,  and 
strength,  and  motives  which  make  us  conquerors.  Let  me  show  this  by  a  comparison. 
A  report  is  brought  that  in  a  distant  country  labour  is  wanted  and  high  wages  may 
be  gained ;  that  all  things  are  abundant  and  flourishing.  One  man  who  hears  the 
report,  though  he  is  able  to  go,  continues  where  he  is,  to  struggle  with  poverty. 
Another,  when  he  hears  it,  forthwith  sells  all  he  has,  removes  his  family,  crosses 
the  deep,  encounters  trials,  and  at  length  reaches  the  promised  land  of  plenty. 
Why  did  he  go  ?  Because  he  believed  ;  he  had  faith  in  the  report ;  and  his  strong 
beUef  made  him  overcome  all  obstacles.  So  it  is  with  that  far  higher  faith,  that 
gospel  faith  which  is  the  gift  of  God,  which  He  works  in  the  heart,  and  which 
receives  His  testimony  as  true.  Let  us  see  how  it  is  that  every  one  who  has  a  true 
faith  in  Christ  will  overcome  the  world.  1 .  It  is  because  the  believer  is  fully  convinced 
that  the  world  is  evil,  that  therefore  the  Son  of  God  came  to  redeem  him  from  its 
power,  and  to  bring  him  to  heaven  and  to  God.  2.  Again,  the  believer  knows  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  conquered  the  world,  not  for  Himself  but  for  His  followers,  and  that 
they  must  study  and  strive  to  be  sharers  in  His  victory.  3.  The  Christian  sees  by 
the  example  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  His  life  of  humiliation  and  self-denial,  and  yet  more 
by  His  bitter  sufferings  and  death,  that  the  world  is  to  be  renounced.  This  is  the 
lesson  of  His  Cross.  4.  Faith  teaches  the  Christian  that  the  Saviour  is  able  to  make 
all  grace  abound  towards  him.  5.  And  once  more,  it  is  by  faith  in  the  resurrection 
of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  in  His  exaltation  to  Heaven,  and  His  constant  inter- 
cession for  us  there,  that  we  are  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope;  to  an  inheritance 
incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away.  {E.  Blencowe,  3I.A.) 
This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith. — Faith's  conquest 
of  the  ivorld : — I.  What  did  St.  John  mean  by  the  "world"?  The  old  Greeks 
had  employed  the  very  word  which  St.  John  here  uses,  to  describe  the  created 
universe,  or  this  earth,  in  all  its  ordered  beauty ;  and  the  word  often  occurs  in  this 
sense  in  Scripture  (Rom.  i.  20;  Acts  xvii.  24;  2  Pet.  iii.  6).  But  neither  of  these 
senses  can  belong  to  the  word  in  the  passage  before  us.  This  material  world  is  not 
an  enemy  to  be  conquered ;  it  is  a  friend  to  be  reverently  consulted,  that  we  may 
know  something  of  the  Eternal  Mind  that  framed  it  (Psas.  xix.  1 ;  xxiv.  1).    Does  St. 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

John  then  mean  hy  the  world  the  entire  human  family — the  whole  world  of  men  ? 

"We  find  the  word,  undoubtedly,  used  in  this  sense,  also  in  the  Bible  (Matt.  v.  14 ; 

xiii.  38 ;  xviii.  7 ;  John  viii.  12  ;  viii.  26  ;  xii.  19  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  13).     This  use  of  the 

word  is  popular  as  well  as  classical :  it  is  found  in  Shakespeare  and  Milton ;  but  it  is 

not  St.  John's  meaning  in  the  present  passage.    For  this  world,  which  thus  comprises 

all  human  beings,  included  the  Christian  Church  and  St.  John  himself.     Whereas 

the  world  of  which  St.  John  is  speaking  is  plainly  a  world  with  which  St.  John  has 

nothing  to  do ;  a  world  which  is  hostile  to  all  that  he  has  at  heart ;  a  world  to  be 

overcome  by  every  one  that  is  born  of  God.     In  this  passage,  then,  the  world  means 

human  life  and  society,  so  far  as  it  is  alienated  from  God,  through  being  centred  on 

material  objects  and  aims,  and  thus  opposed  to  God's  Spirit  and  His  kingdom.   And 

^    this  is  the  sense  of  the  word  in  the  majority  of  cases  where  it  occurs  in  the  writings 

'     of  St.  John  (John.  vii.  7 ;  xiv.  17,  27,  30 ;  xv.  18,  19  ;  xvii.  9,  14 ;  1  John  ii.  15-17 ; 

V.  4,  19).     This  world,  according  to  St.  Paul,  has  a  spirit  of  its  own,  opposed  to 

the  Spirit  of  God ;  and  there  are  "  things  of  the  world  "  opposed  to  "  the  things  of 

God" :  and  rudiments  and  elements  of  the  world  which  are  not  after  Christ;  and 

there  is  a  "sorrow  of  the  world  that  worketh  death,"  as  contrasted  with  a  "  godly 

I     sorrow  unto  repentance,  not  to  be  repented  of  "  ;  so  that,  gazing  on  the  Cross  of 

'     Christ,  St.  Paul  says  "  that  by  it  the  world  is  crucified  to  him,  and  he  to  the 

I     world  " — so  utter  is  the  moral  separation  between  them.     To  the  same  purpose  is 

I    St.  James's  definition  of  true  religion  and  undefiled,  before  God  and  the  Father  ;  it 

I   consists  not  only  in  active  philanthropy,  but  in  a  man's  keeping  himself  unspotted 

J   from  the  world.     And  there  is  the  even  more  solemn  warning  of  the  same  apostle, 

/    "  that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  emnity  with  God."    II.  This  body  of  language 

shows  that  the  conception  of  the   WOKLD  as  human   life,   so  far  as  it  is  AlIENATEa) 
FROM  God,  is  one  of   the  most  prominent  and  DISTINCT  TRUTHS  BROUGHT  BEFORE  US 

m  THE  New  Testament.  The  world  is  a  living  tradition  of  disloyalty  and  disUke  to 
God  and  His  kingdom,  just  as  the  Church  is  or  was  meant  to  be  a  living  tradition  of 
faith,  hope,  and  charity;  a  mass  of  loyal,  affectionate,  energetic  devotion  to  the  cause 
of  God.  Of  the  millions  anf'  uiUions  of  human  beings  who  have  lived,  nearly  every 
one  probably  has  contributec  something,  his  own  little  addition,  to  the  great  tradition 
of  materialised  life  which  St  John  calls  the  world.  The  world  of  the  apostoUc  age 
was  the  Eoman  society  and  '  apire,  with  the  exception  of  the  small  Christian  Church. 
When  a  Christian  of  that  Jay  named  the  world,  his  thoughts  first  rested  on  the  vast 
array  of  wealth,  prestige^  and  power,  whose  centre  was  at  Eome.  Both  St.  Peter  in 
his  first  Epistle  (v.  13),  and  St.  John  in  the  Revelation  (xviii.  2),  salute  pagan  Rome 
as  Babylon ;  as  the  typical  centre  of  organised  worldly  power  among  the  sons  of 
;  men,  at  the  very  height  of  its  aUenation  from  Almighty  God.  The  world,  then,  of 
\J  the  apostolic  age  was  primarily  a  vast  organisation.  But  it  was  not  a  world  that 
could  last  (Eev.  xviii.  1,2,4, 5).  Alaric  the  Goth  appeared  before  Eome ;  and  the  city 
of  the  CsBsars  became  the  prey  of  the  barbarians.  The  event  produced  a  sensation 
much  more  profound  than  would  now  be  occasioned  by  the  sack  of  London.  The 
work  of  a  thousand  years,  the  greatest  effort  to  organise  human  life  permanently 
under  a  single  system  of  government,  the  greatest  civilisation  that  the  world  had 
known,  at  once  so  vicious  and  so  magnificent,  had  perished  from  sight.  It  seemed 
to  those  who  witnessed  it  as  though  life  would  be  no  longer  endurable,  and  that  the 
end  had  come.  But  before  the  occurrence  of  this  catastrophe,  another  and  a  more 
remarkable  change  had  been  silently  taking  place.  For  nearly  three  hundred  years 
the  Church  had  been  leavening  the  empire.  And  the  empire,  feeling  and  dreading 
the  ever-advancing,  ever- widening  influence,  had  again  and  again  endeavoured  to 
extinguish  it  in  a  sea  of  blood.  From  the  year  of  the  crucifixion,  a.d.  29,  to  the 
Edict  of  Toleration,  a.d.  313,  there  were  284  years  of  almost  uninterrupted  growth, 
promoted  by  almost  perpetual  suffering;  untU  at  last,  in  St.  Augustine's  language, 
the  Cross  passed  from  the  scenes  of  public  executions  to  the  diadem  of  the  Caesars. 
The  world  now  to  a  great  extent  used  Christian  language,  it  accepted  outwardly 
Christian  rules.  And  in  order  to  keep  this  world  at  bay,  some  Christians  fled  from 
the  great  highways  and  centres  of  life  to  lead  the  life  of  solitaires  in  the  Egyptian 
deserts ;  while  others  even  organised  schisms,  like  that  of  the  Donatists,  which,  if 
small  and  select,  relatively  to  the  great  Catholic  Church,  should  at  least  be  unworldly. 
They  forgot  that  our  Loi-d  had  anticipated  the  new  state  of  things  by  His  parables  of 
the  net  and  of  the  tares ;  they  forgot  that  whether  the  world  presents  itself  as  an 
organisation  or  as  a  temper,  a  Christian's  business  is  to  encounter  and  to  overcome 
it.  The  great  question  was  and  is,  how  to  achieve  this ;  and  St.  John  gives  us 
explicit  instructions.    "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  401 

faith."  III.  This  is,  I  say,  the  question  for  tjs  of  to-dat,  no  leas  than  for  our 
predecessors  in  the  faith  of  Christ.  For  the  world  is  not  a  piece  of  the  furniture  of 
bygone  centuries,  which  had  long  since  perished,  except  in  the  pages  of  oiu:  ancient 
and  sacred  books.  It  is  here,  around  and  among  us ;  hving  and  energetic,  and 
true  to  the  character  which  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  gave  it.  It  is  here,  in  our 
business,  in  our  homes,  in  our  conversations,  in  our  hterature ;  it  is  here,  awakening 
echoes  loud  and  shrUl  within  our  hearts,  if,  indeed,  it  be  not  throned  in  them.  Is 
the  world-temper  to  be  overcome  by  mental  cultivation  ?  We  live  in  days  when 
language  is  used  about  education  and  literature,  as  if  of  themselves  they  had  an 
elevating  and  transforming  power  in  human  life.  In  combination  with  other  and 
higher  influences  mental  cultivation  does  much  for  man.  It  softens  his  manners  ; 
it  tames  his  natural  ferocity.  It  refines  and  stimulates  his  understanding,  his 
taste,  his  imagination.  But  it  has  no  necessary  power  of  purifying  his  affections, 
or  of  guiding  or  invigorating  his  will.  In  these  respects  it  leaves  him  as  it  finds 
him.  And,  if  he  is  bound  heart  and  soul  to  the  material  aspects  of  this  present  life, 
it  will  not  help  him  to  break  his  bonds.  Is  the  world,  then,  to  be  overcome  by 
sorrow,  by  failure,  by  disappointment ;  in  a  word,  by  the  rude  teaching  of  experience  ?  \ 
Sorrow  and  failure  are  no  doubt  to  many  men  a  revelation.  They  show  that  the 
material  scene  in  which  we  pass  our  days  is  itself  passing.  They  rouse  into  activity 
from  the  depths  of  our  souls  deep  currents  of  feeUng ;  and  we  may  easily  mistake 
feeling  for  something  which  it  is  not.  Feeling  is  not  faith  ;  it  sees  nothing  beyond 
the  veU.  Feeling  is  not  practice ;  it  may  sweep  the  soul  io  gusts  before  it,  yet 
commit  us  to  nothing.  Feeling  deplores  when  it  does  not  resist ;  it  admires  and 
approves  of  enterprises  which  it  never  attempts.  Consequently,  self-exhausted,  in 
time  it  dies  back ;  leaving  the  soul  worse  off  than  it  would  be,  if  it  had  never  felt  so 
strongly ;  worse  off,  because  at  once  weaker  and  less  sensitive  than  before.  Certainly, 
if  the  world  is  to  be  overcome,  it  must  be,  as  St.  John  tells  us,  by  a  power  which 
lifts  us  above  it,  and  such  a  power  is  faith.  Faith  does  two  things  which  are 
essential  to  success  in  this  matter.  It  enables  us  to  measure  the  world ;  to  appraise- 
it,  not  at  its  own,  but  at  its  real  value.  It  does  this  by  opening  to  our  view  that  other! 
and  higher  world  of  which  Christ  our  Lord  is  King,'  r,nd  in  which  His  saints  and' 
servants  are  at  home ;  that  world  which,  unlike  this,  i  11  last  for  ever.  When  "the 
eyes  of  a  man's  understanding  are  thus  enUghtened  t  at  he  may  know  what  is  the 
hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  o*  his  inheritance  among  the 
saints,"  faith  enables  him  to  take  a  second  step.  Faith  is  a  hand  whereby  the  soul 
lays  actual  hold  on  the  unseen  realities^  and  so  learns  to  sit  loosely  to  and  detach 
itself  from  that  which  only  belongs  to  time.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  victory  of 
faith: — I.  The  Christian's  enemy,  the  world.  1.  The  tyranny  of  the  present. 
Worldliness  is  the  attractive  power  of  something  present,  in  opposition  to  something 
to  come.  In  this  respect,  worldliness  is  the  spirit  of  childhood  carried  on  inta 
manhood.  The  child  Uves  in  the  present  hour — to-day  to  him  is  everthing.  Natural 
in  the  child,  and  therefore  pardonable,  this  spirit,  when  carried  on  into  manhood,  is 
coarse — is  worldliness.  The  most  distinct  illustration  given  us  of  this,  is  the  case 
of  Esau.  In  this  worldliness,  moreover,  is  to  be  remarked  the  gamester's  desperate 
play.  There  is  a  gambling  spirit  in  human  nature.  Esau  distinctly  expresses  this: 
"  Behold  I  am  at  the  point  to  die,  and  what  shall  my  birthright  profit  me?  "  He 
might  never  live  to  enjoy  his  birthright ;  but  the  pottage  was  before  him,  present, 
certain,  there.  Now,  observe  the  utter  powerlessness  of  mere  preaching  to  cope 
with  this  tyrannical  power  of  the  present.  2.  The  tyranny  of  the  sensual.  I  call 
it  tyranny,  because  the  evidences  of  the  senses  are  aU  powerful,  in  spite  of  the 
protestations  of  the  reason.  The  man  who  died  yesterday,  and  whom  the  world 
called  a  successful  man — for  what  did  he  live  ?  He  lived  for  this  world — he  gained 
this  world.  Houses,  lands,  name,  position  in  society — all  that  earth  could  give  of 
enjoyments — he  had.  We  hear  men  complain  of  the  sordid  love  of  gold,  but  gold 
is  merely  a  medium  of  exchange  for  other  things:  gold  is  land,  titles,  name,  comfort 
— all  that  the  world  can  give.  3.  The  spirit  of  society.  The  spirit  of  the  world  ia 
for  ever  altering — impalpable ;  for  ever  eluding,  in  fresh  forms,  your  attempts  to 
seize  it.  In  the  days  of  Noah  the  spirit  of  the  world  was  violence.  In  Elijah's  day 
it  was  idolatry.  In  the  day  of  Christ  it  was  power  concentrated  and  condensed  in 
the  government  of  Rome.  In  ours,  perhaps,  it  is  the  love  of  money.  It  enters  in 
different  proportions  into  different  bosoms ;  it  is  found  in  a  different  form  in  contiguous 
towns ;  in  the  fashionable  watering-place,  and  in  the  commercial  city  :  it  is  this  thing 
at  Athens,  and  another  in  Corinth.  This  is  the  spirit  of  the  world — a  thing  in  my 
heart  and  yours :  to  be  struggled  against  not  so  much  in  the  case  of  others,  as  in 

26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

the  silent  battle  to  be  done  within  our  own  souls.  II.  The  victory  of  faith.  Faith 
is  a  theological  expression ;  yet  it  is  the  commonest  principle  of  man's  daily  life, 
called  in  that  region  prudence,  enterprise,  or  some  such  name.  It  is  in  effect  the 
principle  on  which  alone  any  human  superiority  can  be  gained.  Faith,  in  religion, 
is  the  same  principle  as  faith  in  worldly  matters,  differing  only  in  its  object.  The 
difference  between  the  faith  of  the  Christian  and  that  of  the  man  of  the  world,  or 
the  mere  ordinary  religionist,  is  not  a  difference  in  mental  operation,  but  in  the 
object  of  the  faith — to  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  the  peculiarity  of 
Christian  faith.  Do  you  think  that  the  temperate  man  has  overcome  the  world, 
1  who,  instead  of  the  short-lived  rapture  of  intoxication,  chooses  regular  employment, 
■  health,  and  prosperity  ?  Is  it  not  the  world  in  another  form,  which  has  his  homage  ? 
Or  do  you  suppose  that  the  so-called  religious  man  is  really  the  world's  conqueror  by 
being  content  to  give  up  seventy  years  of  enjoyment  in  order  to  win  innumerable 
ages  of  the  very  same  species  of  enjoyment?  Has  he  not  only  made  earth 
a  hell,  in  order  that  earthly  things  may  be  his  heaven  for  ever  ?  Thus  the 
victory  of  faith  proceeds  from  stage  to  stage ;  the  first  victory  is,  ^^JiS'LJi® 
present  is  conquered  by  the  future ;  the  last,  when  the  visible  and^'eterJiaTis 
despised  in  comparison  of  the  invisible  and  eternal.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
The  victory  of  faith : — I.  First,  the  text  speaks  of  a  great  victory — the  victory  of 
victories — the  greatest  of  all.  A  tough  battle,  I  warrant  you  ;  not  one  which  carpet 
knights  might  win ;  no  easy  skirmish ;  not  one  he  shall  gain,  who,  but  a  raw 
recruit  to-day,  put  on  his  regimentals,  and  foolishly  imagines  that  one  week  of 
service  will  ensure  a  crown  of  glory.  Nay,  it  is  a  life-long  war — a  fight  needing 
the  power  of  a  strong  heart.  1.  He  overcomes  the  world  when  it  sets  up  itself  as 
a  legislator,  wishing  to  teach  him  customs.  Men  usually  swim  with  the  stream  like 
a  dead  fish ;  it  is  only  the  living  fish  that  goes  against  it.  It  is  only  the  Christian 
who  despises  customs,  who  does  not  care  for  conventionalisms,  who  only  asks  him- 
self the  question,  "  Is  it  right  or  is  it  wrong  ?  If  it  is  right,  I  will  be  singular.  If 
there  is  not  another  man  in  this  world  who  will  do  it,  I  will  do  it.  I  care  not  what 
others  do  ;  I  shall  not  be  weighed  by  other  men ;  to  my  own  Master  I  stand  or  fall. 
Thus  I  conquer  and  overcome  the  customs  of  the  world."  2.  The  rebel  against  the 
world's  customs.  And  if  we  do  so,  what  is  the  conduct  of  our  enemy?  She 
changes  her  aspect.  "  That  man  is  a  heretic  ;  that  man  is  a  fanatic  ;  he  is  a  cant, 
he  is  a  hypocrite,"  says  the  world  directly.  She  lets  no  stone  be  unturned  whereby 
she  may  injure  him.  3.  "Well,"  saith  the  world,  "  I  will  try  another  style,"  and 
this,  believe  me,  is  the  most  dangerous  of  all.  A  smiling  world  is  worse  than  a 
frowning  one.  It  is  not  in  the  cold  wintry  wind  that  I  take  off  my  coat  of  righteous- 
ness and  throw  it  away ;  it  is  when  the  sun  comes,  when  the  weather  is  warm  and 
the  air  balmy,  that  I  unguardedly  strip  off  my  robes  and  become  naked.  Some  men 
cannot  live  without  a  large  amount  of  praise ;  and  if  they  have  no  more  than  they 
deserve,  let  them  have  it.  4.  Sometimes,  again,  the  world  turns  jailer  to  a  Chris- 
tian. Many  a  man  has  had  the  chance  of  being  rich  in  an  hour,  affluent  in  a 
moment,  if  he  would  but  clutch  something  which  he  dare  not  look  at,  because  God 
within  him  said,  "  No."  The  world  said,  "  Be  rich,  be  rich  " ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit 
said,  "No!  be  honest;  serve  thy  God."  Oh,  the  stern  contest  and  the  manly 
combat  carried  on  within  the  heart !  II.  But  my  text  speaks  of  a  great  birth. 
"  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world."  This  new  birth  is  the 
mysterious  point  in  all  religion.  To  be  born  again  is  to  undergo  a  change  so 
mysterious  that  human  words  cannot  speak  of  it.  As  we  cannot  describe  our  first 
birth,  so  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  describe  the  second.  At  the  time  of  the  new  birth 
the  soul  is  in  great  agony — often  drowned  in  seas  of  tears.  It  is  "  a  new  heart  and 
a  right  spirit";  a  mysterious  but  yet  an  actual  and  real  change!  Let  me  tell 
you,  moreover,  that  this  change  is  a  supernatural  one.  It  is  not  one  that  a  man 
performs  upon  himself.  It  is  a  new  principle  infused  which  works  in  the  heart, 
enters  the  very  soul  and  moves  the  entire  man.  III.  There  is  a  great  grace. 
Persons  who  are  born  again  really  do  overcome  the  world.  Who  are  the  men  that 
do  anything  in  the  world  ?  Are  they  not  always  men  of  faith  ?  Take  it  even  as 
natural  faith.  Who  wins  the  battle  ?  Why,  the  man  who  knows  he  will  win  it, 
and  vows  that  he  will  be  victor.  "  Never  was  a  marvel  done  upon  the  earth,  but  it 
had  sprung  of  faith ;  nothing  noble,  generous,  or  great,  but  faith  was  the  root  of  the 
achievement ;  nothing  comely,  nothing  famous,  but  its  praise  is  faith.  Leonidas 
fought  in  human  faith  as  Joshua  in  Divine.  Xenophon  trusted  to  his  skill,  and  the 
sons  of  Matthias  to  their  cause."  Faith  is  mightiest  of  the  mighty.  Faith  makes 
you  almost  as  omnipotent  as  God  by  the  borrowed  might  of  its  divirity.     Give 


CBAP.  v.]  I.  JOHN.  403 

us  faith  and  we  can  do  all  things.  I  want  to  tell  you  how  it  is  that  faith  helps 
Christians  to  overcome  the  world.  It  always  does  it  homoeopathically.  You  say, 
"That  is  a  singular  idea."  So  it  may  be.  The  principle  is  that  "  like  cures  like." 
So  does  faith  overcome  the  world  by  curing  like  with  like.  How  does  faith  trample 
upon  the  fear  of  the  world  ?  By  the  fear  of  God.  How  does  faith  overthrow  the 
world's  hopes?  "There,"  says  the  world,  "I  will  give  thee  this,  I  will  give  thee 
that,  if  thou  wilt  be  my  disciple.  There  is  a  hope  for  you ;  you  shall  be  rich, 
you  shall  be  great."  But  faith  says,  "  I  have  a  hope  laid  up  in  heaven ;  a  hope 
which  fadeth  not  away,"  and  the  hope  of  glory  overcomes  all  the  hopes  of  the 
world.  "Ah  !  "  says  the  world,  "why  not  follow  the  example  of  your  feUows?" 
"Because,"  says  faith,  "I  will  follow  the  example  of  Christ."  "Well,"  saya 
the  world,  "  since  thou  wilt  not  be  conquered  by  all  this,  come,  I  wiU  love 
thee;  thou  shalt  be  my  friend."  Faith  says,  "He  that  is  the  friend  of  this 
world  cannot  be  the  friend  of  God.  God  loves  me."  So  he  puts  love  against 
love,  fear  against  fear,  hope  against  hope,  dread  against  dread,  and  so  faith 
overcomes  the  world  by  like  curing  like.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  true  hero  : — 
I.  The  Chkistian's  powerful  foe.  The  "  god  of  this  world  "  seeks  to  "  blind  men's 
eyes,"  and  He  does  this  with  the  "man  born  of  God,"  chiefly  by  presenting  to  him 
the  world's  purest  good,  and  tempting  him  to  centre  his  affections  upon  that.  The 
constant  and  bitter  struggle  is  with  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  in  its  attempts 
to  assume  an  unlawful  and  a  wrong  position ;  the  most  arduous  contest  is  with 
earthly  good  in  its  attempts  to  win  back  his  wannest  affections.  II.  The  Christian's 
POWERFUL  WEAPON.  The  faith  spoken  of  in  the  text  has  its  foundation  in  the  belief 
of  the  Divine  testimony  respecting  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  the  being  habitually 
influenced  by  that  which  is  spiritual.  It  is  the  Cross  ever  present  and  trusted 
in  ;  heaven  ever  visible  and  longed  for.  The  world  points  below,  faith  above. 
The  world  influences  us  to  live  to  ourselves ;  faith,  to  live  to  Christ.  The 
world  would  confine  our  thoughts  to  time ;  faith  would  fix  them  on  eternity. 
III.  The  Christian's  peculiar  triumph.  That  faith  which  is  the  gift  of  God, 
in  its  feeblest  influence,  will  impart  to  the  soul  higher  hopes,  nobler  pursuits, 
and  warmer  affections  than  can  belong  to  this  world.  But  whilst  the  Christian 
thus  triumphs  over  the  world,  his  triumph  is  peculiar.  "  Who  is  he  that  over- 
cometh  the  world  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  None  but 
the  Christian  places  himself  in  opposition  to  the  world.  The  battle  of  life  indeed 
rages  everywhere  around.  Interest  clashes  with  interest,  and  passion  strives 
with  passion ;  but  it  is  not  against  the  world,  but  for  it.  And  not  only  is  the 
Christian  the  only  man  who  is  contending  against  the  influence  of  the  world,  but  he 
alone  possesses  the  means  for  such  a  contest.  {J.  C.  Rook.)  The  faith  that  over- 
Cometh : — I.  It  is  a  matter  of  some  consequence  for  a  soldier  to  be  aware  of  thb 
ENEMY  with  WHOM  HE  IS  CALLED  UPON  TO  CONTEND,  his  resources,  and  the  plans  which 
he  is  likely  to  resort  to  in  order  to  overcome  him.  There  is  less  danger  in  fighting 
with  an  enemy  who  can  be  seen,  however  powerful  and  determined  he  may  be,  than 
with  one  who  hides  himself  in  a  forest  and  lurks  in  inaccessible  regions.  This  ia 
a  harassing  kind  of  warfare,  which  is  always  intended  to  weary  out  and  exhaust 
those  against  whom  it  is  employed.  The  soldiers  of  the  Cross  have  little  ground  of 
complaint  on  this  head,  because  they  have  been  told  of  the  enemy  who  is  before 
and  around  them,  of  his  character,  and  of  the  artifices  to  which  he  is  certain  to 
resort.  U.  The  victory  which  is  promised  to  those  who  fight  so  as  to  overcome. 
The  victory  of  faith  over  the  world  differs  from  all  other  conquests,  which  indi- 
viduals or  armies  of  men  obtain  over  each  other.  When  men  quarrel,  and  resort 
to  the  tribunals  of  the  country  to  have  their  differences  settled,  the  litigant  who 
gains  the  cause  triumphs  over  his  opponent  and  inflicts  upon  him  serious  loss  either 
in  his  character  or  in  his  means,  or  both.  When  nations  have  recourse  to  war  to 
settle  their  disputes,  disasters,  losses,  physical  suffering,  and  many  evils  always 
follow  in  the  train  even  of  victory.  Such  are  the  victories  of  armies  over  each 
other,  but  such  is  not  the  character  of  the  victory  of  faith  which  the  children  of 
God  achieve  over  the  world.  No  treasure  is  wasted,  no  hves  are  lost,  and  no  suffering 
is  inflicted  upon  the  vanquished  enemy.  The  world  is  external  to  the  Christian 
combatant,  so  that  the  warfare  in  its  main  features  is  essentially  defensive,  the 
valour  of  faith  being  employed  to  repel  attacks  and  to  defeat  spiritual  aggression. 
Temptation  must  be  met  and  overcome  by  peculiar  tactics,  so  that  every  successful 
act  of  resistance  is  so  much  gained  toward  the  final  victory,  with  no  loss  to  the 
vanquished  and  with  every  gain  to  the  victor.  Victories  over  enemies  are  always 
followed  by  great  rejoicings,  which  drown  the  cry  of  suffering  and  cause  the  people 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

to  forget  their  previous  distresses  in  the  exultation  of  the  moment.  The  high 
song  of  eternity  can  only  be  chanted  by  the  saints  who  have  overcome  the  world, 
proved  their  valour  on  the  battle-field  of  spiritual  conflict,  and  received  the  guerdon 
of  victory  from  the  hands  of  the  Arbiter  of  the  destinies  of  the  living  and  the  dead. 
m.  The  instrument  by  which  this  qbeat  victory  is  to  be  obtained.  "  This  is  the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  Faith  is  one  of  the  simplest  of 
principles,  because  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  confidence  in  another,  which  never 
wavers  or  hesitates,  but  it  is  at  the  same  time  one  of  the  mightiest  which  can  enter 
into  the  soul.  The  power  which  is  ascribed  to  it  in  Scripture  is  almost  surpassing 
belief.  Faith  never  stops  to  estimate  the  nature  of  a  difficulty,  but  goes  straight 
forward  to  its  object  without  turning  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  Faith 
laughs  to  scorn  the  power  of  the  world.  (J.  B.  Courtenay,  31. A.)  Faith's 
victory  : — I.  The  Christian,  by  faith,  overcomes  the  temptations  of  the  world. 
II.  The  unkindness  of  the  world  a  Christian  overcomes  by  faith.  Under  this  head 
I  include  persecution,  reproach,  calumny,  treachery,  and  misrepresentation.  All  men 
are  exposed  to  these  more  or  less — Christians  not  excepted.  Nothing  so  sours  the 
temper  and  breaks  the  spirit,  throws  men  off  their  guard,  so  provokes  them  to 
revenge,  as  unkind,  unjust,  and  cruel  treatment.  Men  of  the  world  are  overcome 
by  it.  They  cannot  brook  an  insult — their  honour  is  touched,  their  pride  wounded. 
Faith  makes  a  Christian  conquer  here — faith  in  such  exhortations  as  these 
(Rom.  xii.  14,  17-21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  20-23).  HI.  The  calamities  of  the  world 
A  Christian  overcomes  by  faith.  Adversity  and  misfortune,  as  it  is  called,  will 
overtake  us  in  some  shape  or  other.  Men  destitute  of  rehgion,  who  have 
no  faith,  sink  beneath  the  weight  of  the  burden,  are  driven  to  despair,  break 
forth  into  loud  complaints  of  Providence.  1.  Let  those  persons  who  are  the 
friends  of  the  world  remember  they  are  the  enemies  of  God,  and  dying  so,  will 
be  condemned  with  it  at  last.  2.  Let  the  Christian  "  be  of  good  cheer."  Christ 
has  overcome  the  world  for  him,  and  through  faith  in  Him  he  shall  overcome  it  too. 
{Essex  Remembrancer.)  The  Christian's  victory  : — I.  The  persons  to  whom  this 
victory  belongs.  He  assigns  it  to  those  who  are  "  bom  of  God,"  and  are  "  believers 
in  Jesus  Christ."  Both  descriptions  apply  to  the  same  individuals.  1.  Eegenera- 
tion  introduces  us  into  the  new  world  of  grace — the  Christian  state.  While  such  is 
the  Christian's  state,  his  distinguishing  character  is  that  of  a  believer  in  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  Regeneration  allies  us  more  especially  to  the  Father ;  faith  to  the 
Saviour.  3.  Regeneration  is  the  pledge  of  our  victory  over  the  world,  and  faith  ia 
the  inBtmment  of  effecting  that  victory.  II.  Consider  the  victory  itself.  1. 
Christians  overcome  the  influence  of  the  world  as  an  example.  The  same  passion 
which  impels  us  to  seek  the  society  of  others,  impels  us  to  adopt  their  habits  and 
pursuits.  And  the  same  depravity  which  leads  one  class  of  men  to  set  an  evil 
example,  leads  another  to  copy  and  follow  it.  God,  however,  requires  our  imitation 
of  others  to  cease  whenever,  by  advancing,  it  would  resist  His  wUl.  2.  Christians 
overcome  the  spirit  of  the  world  as  a  guide.  "  Now,"  they  say,  "  we  have  received, 
not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God,  by  which  we  may  know  the 
things  which  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God."  3.  Christians  overcome  the  love  of 
the  world  as  a  portion.  Both  their  judgment  and  their  taste  respecting  it  are  com- 
pletely changed  by  regeneration  and  faith.  4.  Christians  overcome  the  fear  of 
the  world  as  an  adversary.  Born  of  God,  they  are  under  His  special  paternal 
protection ;  believing  in  Christ,  they  are  strong  in  Him,  and  in  the  power  of 
His  might ;  hence  the  world  has  no  more  terrors  than  it  has  claims  in  their  view. 
6.  Christians  overcome  the  hope  of  the  world  as  a  recompense  and  a  rest.  Reducing 
to  holy  and  habitual  practice  their  belief  of  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  life, 
and  "  knowing  that  they  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  more  enduring  substance," 
they  preserve  a  constant  anticipation  of  death  and  eternity,  and  say,  "  I  am 
ready  to  be  offered,  when  the  time  of  my  departure  is  come."  {H.  Lacey.) 
Faith's  victory  over  the  world  : — The  conquest  of  the  world  may  be  considered  the 
highest  object  of  human  ambition.  But  we  cannot  renounce  the  world  as  a  portion 
without  incurring  its  displeasure.  I.  The  circumstances  of  this  spiritual  wak- 
tare  vary  exceedingly  with  the  condition  of  the  world  and  of  each  individual. 
Sometimes  the  battle  is  fierce  and  dreadful ;  while,  at  other  times,  there  is  the 
appearance  of  a  truce.  This,  however,  is  always  a  deceitful  appearance.  On  the 
part  of  the  enemy  there  never  is  any  real  cessation  of  hostility ;  and  on  the  part  of 
the  Christian  there  should  be  none.  The  opposition  of  the  world  is  of  two  kinds  ; 
or  it  assumes  two  aspects,  of  a  very  opposite  nature.  The  first  is  an  aspect  of 
terror.     It  endeavours  to  alarm  him,  by  holding  out  the  prospect  of  losses  to  be 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  405 

sustained  of  things  naturally  desirable,  of  pains  to  be  endured  which  are  abhorrent 
to  our  nature,  and  does  not  merely  threaten  these  evils,  but  actually  inflicts  them, 
in  a  very  terrific  form.  There  is  another  aspect  which  the  world  assumes  in 
regard  to  religion.  It  does  not  always  frown,  but  sometimes  insidiously  smiles. 
These  are  the  temptations  which  are  more  dangerous  than  fires  and  gibbets.  And 
the  danger  is  greater  because  it  does  not  appear  to  be  danger.  No  apprehensions 
are  awakened.  Prosperity  and  indulgence  are  naturally  agreeable  to  every  one. 
At  this  point,  the  world  is  powerful,  and  the  best  of  men,  left  to  themselves,  are 
weak.  Indeed,  few  who  have  set  their  faces  Zionward,  have  escaped  unhurt  in 
passing  over  this  enchanted  ground.  II.  Having  shown  how  the  world  opposes  the 
Christian,  we  come  next  to  explain  how  the  Christian  gains  the  victory.  "  And 
this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  None  achieve  this 
great  victory  but  souls  "  born  of  God  " ;  for  none  beside  possess  a  true  faith. 
Genuine  faith  is  a  conviction,  or  full  persuasion  of  the  truth,  produced  by  the 
illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  evidence  on  which  this  faith  is  founded, 
being  the  beauty  and  excellence  of  the  truth  perceived,  cannot  but  be  operative ; 
for  it  is  impossible  that  the  rational  mind  should  see  an  object  to  be  lovely,  and  not 
love  it.  Such  a  faith  must,  therefore,  "  work  by  love  and  purify  the  heart,"  and  be 
fruitful  of  good  works.  It  will  only  be  necessary  to  bring  to  view  two  principles,  to 
account  for  the  power  of  faith,  by  which  it  achieves  this  great  victory.  The  first 
is,  that  our  estimation  of  the  value  of  objects  is  always  comparative.  The  child 
knows  nothing  which  it  esteems  more  valuable  than  its  toys  ;  but  when  this  child 
rises  to  maturity,  and  the  interesting  objects  of  real  life  are  presented  to  it,  the 
trifling  baubles  which  engaged  the  affections  in  childhood  are  now  utterly  disre- 
garded, and  considered  unworthy  of  a  moment's  thought.  The  other  principle  to 
which  I  alluded  is  this.  The  true  method  of  expelling  from  the  soul  one  set  of 
affections  is  to  introduce  others  of  a  different  nature  and  of  greater  strength. 
When  faith  comes  into  operation,  and  love  to  God  becomes  the  predominant 
affection,  there  is  not  only  a  great  change,  but  a  moral  transformation  of  the  soul, 
from  the  sinful  love  of  the  creature,  to  the  holy  love  of  the  Creator.  Now  the 
world  is  conquered.  Faith  working  by  love  has  achieved  the  victory.  {A.  Alexan- 
der, D.D.)  Faith's  victory  : — I.  Who  is  the  great  conqueror  of  the  world  ? 
It  is  not  he  who  out  of  a  restless  ambition  and  insatiable  thirst  for  glory  and 
empire  carries  his  victorious  arms  to  the  remotest  parts  of  the  earth,  but  the  man 
under  this  twofold  character :  1.  Who  hath  subdued  his  inclinations  and  appetites 
to  all  things  here  below,  and  moderated  his  affections  and  passions  about  them. 
2.  Who,  as  a  consequence  of  this,  will  not,  either  to  gain  the  world  or  to  keep  it, 
do  a  base  and  unworthy  action ;  whom  all  the  glories  of  the  world  cannot  tempt 
into  a  wicked  enterprise,  nor  all  its  oppositions  hinder  from  pursuing  virtuous 
ones.  n.  What  that  faith  is  that  overcomes  the  world.  Now  of  faith 
there  are  several  kinds  :  there  is  a  faith  grounded  on  probable  reason,  upon 
likely  and  promising  arguments,  which  yet  are  not  evident  nor  certain,  but 
may  possibly  prove  false,  though  they  seem  to  be  true ;  and  this  is  rather 
opinion  than  faith.  Again,  there  is  a  faith  grounded  on  evident  and  certain 
reason,  wherein  if  a  man's  faculties  themselves  are  to  be  trusted,  he  cannot 
be  mistaken ;  and  this  is  rather  knowledge  than  faith.  But  then  there  is 
a  faith  grounded  on  Divine  revelation,  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  this  is  properlj 
called  faith,  and  that  faith  that  overcomes  the  world :  to  wit,  an  hearty  belief  ol 
all  those  things  that  God  heretofore  by  His  prophets,  and  in  this  last  age  by  his 
Son,  hath  made  known  to  the  world.  III.  What  are  the  strengths  and  forces 
OF  faith  by  which  it  obtains  this  victory?  1.  The  Christian  faith  affords 
many  excellent  precepts  to  this  purpose  (1  John  ii.  15  ;  Matt.  vi.  19 ;  Col.  iii.  2 ; 
Eom.  xii.  2  ;  1  Cor.  vii.  31 ;  James  i.  27).  Precepts  of  that  direct  use  and  tendency 
to  the  ease  and  tranquillity,  to  the  honour  and  perfection  of  human  nature,  that, 
were  they  not  enforced  by  Divine  authority,  would  yet  be  sufficiently  recommended 
by  their  own  intrinsic  worth  and  excellency.  2.  The  Christian  faith  sets  before  us 
a  most  powerful  example,  that  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  who  voluntarily  deprived 
Himself  of  the  riches,  honours,  and  pleasures  of  this  world.  3.  The  Christian  faith 
assures  us  of  supernatural  assistances,  those  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  The  Christian 
faith  assures  us  of  most  glorious  rewards  after  the  conquest — rewards  so  far 
surmounting  all  that  this  world  can  pretend  to,  that  they  exceed  them  a  whole 
infinity,  and  will  outlive  them  an  eternity.  5.  The  Christian  faith  represents  to  us 
the  dismal  effects  and  consequences  of  being  overcome  by  the  world  ;  no  less  than  the 
loss  of  the  soul,  and  all  that  is  glorious  and  happy,  together  with  an  endless  state 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of   insupportable   torments.     IV.   If   the  forces   of   faith    abb   so  stbono  and 

NUMEROUS,    how   comes   IT   TO   PASS,  THAT  NOTWITHSTANDING   THEM,  FAITH  IS   80    OFTEN 

OVERCOME  BY  THE  WORLD?  1.  Becausc  OUT  faith  is  many  times  weak,  either 
through  the  shallowness  of  the  root  it  has  taken,  or  for  want  of  being  excited  by 
due  consideration.  2.  Because  it  is  many  times  corrupted ;  and  at  this  door  also 
are  we  to  lay  in  a  great  measure  the  many  shameful  overthrows  the  Christian 
receives  from  the  world,  his  corrupt  opinions  and  doctrines  ;  the  false  glosses  and 
expositions,  the  forgeries  and  inventions  of  men  have  usually  the  same  fatal 
influence  on  faith,  as  sickness  and  diseases  have  on  the  body  ;  they  soon  enfeeble 
and  dispirit  it,  by  degrees  taint  the  whole  mass,  and  so  alter  its  very  constitution, 
that  it  becomes  another  faith,  and  administers  to  other  purposes.  The  conclusion 
of  all  is  this :  that  since  it  is  faith  that  overcomes  the  world,  and  it  is,  through  the 
weakness  and  corruption  of  it,  that  it  so  often  miscarries,  that  we  should  use  our 
utmost  diligence  to  keep  our  faith  strong  and  vigorous,  pure  and  undefiled.  (S.  A. 
Freeman,  D.D.)  The  victory  of  faith : — 1.  In  the  world  all  seems  full  of  chance 
and  change.  One  man  rises,  and  another  falls,  one  hardly  knows  why  :  they 
hardly  know  themselves.  A  very  slight  accident  may  turn  the  future  of  a  man's 
whole  life,  perhaps  of  a  whole  nation.  What,  then,  will  help  us  to  overcome  the 
fear  of  chances  and  accidents?  Where  shall  we  find  something  abiding  and 
eternal,  a  refuge  sure  and  steadfast,  in  which  we  may  trust,  amid  all  the  chances 
and  changes  of  this  mortal  life  ?  In  that  within  you  which  is  born  of  God.  2.  In 
the  world  so  much  seems  to  go  by  fixed  law  and  rule.  Then  comes  the  awful 
question,  Are  we  at  the  mercy  of  these  laws  ?  Is  the  world  a  great  machine,  which 
goes  grinding  on  its  own  way  without  any  mercy  to  us  or  to  anything ;  and  are  we 
each  of  us  parts  of  the  machine,  and  forced  of  necessity  to  do  all  we  do  ?  Where 
shall  we  find  something  to  trust  in,  something  to  give  us  confidence  and  hope  that 
we  can  mend  ourselves,  that  self-improvement  is  of  use,  that  working  is  of  use, 
that  prudence  is  of  use,  for  God  will  reward  every  man  according  to  his  work  ?  In 
that  within  you  which  is  born  of  God.  3.  In  the  world  how  much  seems  to  go  by 
selfishness !  But  is  it  really  to  be  so  ?  Are  we  to  thrive  only  by  thinking  of 
ourselves?  No.  Something  in  our  hearts  tells  us  that  this  would  be  a  very 
miserable  world  if  every  man  shifted  for  himseK ;  and  that  even  if  we  got  this 
world's  good  things  by  selfishness,  they  would  not  be  worth  having  after  all,  if  we 
had  no  one  but  ourselves  to  enjoy  them  with.  What  is  that  ?  St.  John  answers — 
That  in  you  which  is  born  of  God.  4.  In  the  world  how  much  seems  to  go  by 
mere  custom  and  fashion  I  But  there  is  something  in  each  of  us  which  tells  us 
that  that  is  not  right ;  that  each  man  should  act  according  to  his  own  conscience, 
and  not  blindly  follow  his  neighbour,  not  knowing  whither,  like  sheep  over  a 
hedge ;  that  a  man  is  directly  responsible  at  first  for  his  own  conduct  to  God, 
and  that  "  my  neighbours  did  so  "  will  be  no  excuse  in  God's  sight.  What  is  it 
which  tells  us  this  ?  That  in  you  which  is  born  of  God ;  and  it,  if  you  will 
listen  to  it,  will  enable  you  to  overcome  the  world's  deceit,  and  its  vain  fashions, 
and  foolish  hearsays,  and  blind  party-cries ;  and  not  to  follow  after  a  multitude 
to  do  evil.  What,  then,  is  this  thing  ?  St.  John  tells  us  that  it  is  born  of  God ; 
and  that  it  is  our  faith.  We  shall  overcome  by  believing.  Have  you  ever  thought 
of  all  that  those  great  words  mean,  "Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  "? — That  He  who 
died  on  the  cross,  and  rose  again  for  us,  now  sits  at  God's  right  hand,  having 
all  power  given  to  Him  in  heaven  and  earth  ?  For,  think,  if  we  really  beheved  that, 
what  power  it  would  give  us  to  overcome  the  world.  1.  Those  chances  and  changes 
of  mortal  life  of  which  I  spoke  first.  We  should  not  be  afraid  of  them,  then, 
if  they  came.  For  we  should  believe  that  they  were  not  chances  and  changes  at 
all,  but  the  loving  providence  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  2.  Those  stern  laws  and 
rules  by  which  the  world  moves,  and  will  move  as  long  as  it  lasts — we  should  not 
be  afraid  of  them  either,  as  if  we  were  mere  parts  of  a  machine  forced  by  fate  to  do 
this  thing  and  that,  without  a  will  of  our  own.  For  we  should  believe  that  these 
laws  were  the  laws  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  If  we  believed  really  that  Jesus 
was  the  Son  of  God,  we  should  never  believe  that  selfishness  was  to  be  the  rule  of 
our  lives.  One  sight  of  Christ  upon  His  cross  would  tell  us  that  not  selfishness, 
but  love,  was  the  likeness  of  God,  the  path  to  honour  and  glory,  happiness  and 
peace.  4.  If  we  really  believed  this,  we  should  never  believe  that  custom  and 
fashion  ought  to  rule  us.  For  we  should  live  by  the  example  of  some  one  else : 
but  by  the  example  of  only  one — of  Jesus  Himself.  (C.  Kingdey,  M.A.)  Victory 
over  the  world : — I.  The  world,  in  Holy  Scripture,  is  the  creature  as  opposed  to 
the  Creator;  what  is  fleeting,  as  opposed  to  Him  who  alone  is  abiding;  what  is 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  407 

■weak,  as  opposed  to  Him  who  alone  hath  might ;  what  is  dead,  as  opposed  to  Him 
who  alone  hath  life ;  what  is  sinful,  as  separate  from  Him  who  alone  is  holy.  The 
•'  world  "  is  everything  short  of  God,  when  made  a  rival  to  God-  Since,  then,  God 
is  the  life  of  everything  which  liveth,  in  whatever  degree  anything  be  without 
God,  separate  from  God,  it  is  without  life  ;  it  is  death  and  not  life.  The  world, 
then,  is  everything  regarded  as  distinct  from  God,  beside  God ;  it  matters  not 
whether  they  be  the  things  of  the  sense  or  the  things  of  the  mind.  II.  What  is 
VICTORY  OVER  THE  WORLD?  Plainly,  not  victory  over  the  one  or  other  thing,  while 
in  others  people  are  led  captive ;  not  soundness  in  one  part,  while  another  is 
diseased ;  not  to  cultivate  one  or  other  grace  which  may  be  easier  to  us,  leaving 
undone  or  imperfect  what  to  us  may  be  more  difficult.  It  is  to  cut  off,  as  far  as  we 
may,  every  hold  which  everything  out  of  God  has  over  us.  And  this  struggle  must 
be  not  for  a  time  only,  but  perseveringly  ;  not  in  one  way,  but  in  all  ways ;  not  in 
one  sort  of  trials,  but  in  all :  whatever  temptations  God  permits  Satan  to  prepare 
for  us,  whatever  trials  He  Himself  bring  upon  us.  It  avails  not  to  be  patient  in 
sorrow  or  sickness,  if  we  become  careless  when  it  is  withdrawn ;  to  be  humble  to 
men,  if  we  become  self-satisfied  with  our  humility;  to  overcome  indolence,  if  we 
forget  God  in  our  activity.  God  be  thanked,  we  are  not  left  to  ourselves,  to  perish. 
Greater  is  He  that  is  in  us  than  he  that  is  in  the  world  ;  we  are  not  only  the  frail 
creatures  which  we  seem,  flesh  and  blood,  but  we  are  spirit,  through  the  indwelling 
Spirit ;  we  have  been  born,  not  only  of  the  earth,  but  "  from  above,"  by  a  heavenly 
birth,  of  God ;  and  so,  since  born  of  God,  we  are  stronger  than  the  world.  HI. 
This  is  "  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world,  our  faith,"  which  realiseth 
things  invisible,  looks  beyond  the  world.  So  that  we  must  beware  not  only  that  we  are 
in  earnest  striving,  but  striving  with  the  right  faith,  that  is,  with  the  faith  in  which 
we  were  baptized,  the  faith  in  the  Holy  and  Undivided  Trinity.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
Faith  conquering  the  world : — I.  What  is  the  true  notion  of  conquering  the 
WORLD  ?  Where  did  John  learn  the  expression  ?  It  comes  from  that  never-to- 
be-forgotten  night  in  that  upper  room,  where,  with  His  life's  purpose  apparently 
crushed  into  nothing,  and  the  world  just  ready  to  exercise  its  last  power  over  Him 
by  killing  Him,  Jesus  Christ  breaks  out  into  such  a  strange  strain  of  triumph,  and 
in  the  midst  of  apparent  defeat  lifts  up  that  clarion  note  of  victory : — "  I  have 
overcome  the  world !  "  He  had  not  made  much  of  it  according  to  usual  standards, 
had  He  ?  His  life  had  been  the  life  of  a  poor  man.  Neither  fame  nor  influence, 
nor  what  people  call  success  had  He  won,  judged  from  the  ordinary  points  of  view, 
and  at  three- and-thirty  is  about  to  be  murdered ;  and  yet  He  says,  "  I  have  beaten 
it  all,  and  here  I  stand  a  conqueror !  "  That  threw  a  flood  of  light  for  John,  and 
for  all  that  had  listened  to  Christ,  on  the  whole  conditions  of  human  life,  and  on 
what  victory  and  defeat,  success  and  failure  in  this  world  mean.  Following  in  the 
footsteps  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  poor  man,  the  beaten  man,  the  unsuccessful 
man  may  yet  say,  "I  have  overcome  the  world."  What  does  that  mean?  Well, 
it  is  buUt  upon  this, — the  world,  meaning  thereby  the  sum  total  of  outward  things, 
considered  as  apart  from  God — the  world  and  God  we  take  to  be  antagonists  to  one 
another.  And  the  world  woos  me  to  trust  to  it,  to  love  it ;  crowds  in  upon  my  eye 
and  shuts  out  the  greater  things  beyond ;  absorbs  my  attention,  so  that  if  I  let  it 
have  its  own  way  I  have  no  leisure  to  think  about  anything  but  itself.  And  the 
world  conquers  me  when  it  succeeds  in  hindering  me  from  seeing,  loving,  holding 
communion  with  and  serving  my  Father,  God.  On  the  other  hand,  I  conquer  it 
when  I  lay  my  hand  upon  it  and  force  it  to  help  me  to  get  nearer  Him,  to  get  like 
Him,  to  think  more  often  of  Him,  to  do  His  will  more  gladly  and  more  constantly. 
The  one  victory  over  the  world  is  to  bend  it  to  serve  me  in  the  highest  things — the 
attainment  of  a  clearer  vision  of  the  Divine  nature,  the  attainment  of  a  deeper  love 
to  God  Himself,  and  of  a  more  glad  consecration  and  service  to  Him.  That  is  the 
victory — when  you  can  make  the  world  a  ladder  to  lift  you  to  God.  H.  The  method 
BT  which  this  victory  OVER  THE  WORLD  IS  TO  BE  ACCOMPLISHED.  We  find,  according 
to  John's  fashion,  a  three-fold  statement  in  this  context  upon  this  matter,  each 
member  of  which  corresponds  to  and  heightens  the  preceding.  There  are,  speaking 
roughly,  these  three  statements,  that  the  true  victory  over  the  world  is  won  by  a  new 
life,  bom  of  and  kindred  with  God ;  that  that  life  is  kindled  in  men's  souls  through 
their  faith;  that  the  faith  which  kindles  that  supernatural  life,  the  victorious 
antagonist  of  the  world,  is  the  definite,  specific  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Son  of 
God.  The  first  consideration  suggested  by  these  statements  is  that  the  one 
■victorious  antagonist  of  all  the  powers  of  the  world  which  seek  to  draw  us  away 
from  God,  is  a  life  in  our  hearts  kindred  with  God,  and  derived  from  God.    God's 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  y. 

nature  is  breathed  into  the  spirits  of  mea  that  will  trust  Him  ;  and  if  you  wiU  put 
your  confidence  in  that  dear  Lord,  and  live  near  Him,  into  your  weakness  will  come 
an  energy  born  of  the  Divine,  and  you  will  be  able  to  do  all  things  in  the  might  of 
the  Christ  that  strengthens  you  from  within,  and  is  the  life  of  your  life,  and  the 
Boul  of  your  soul.  And  then  there  is  the  other  way  of  looking  at  this  same  thing, 
viz.,  you  can  conquer  the  world  if  you  will  trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  because  such  trust 
will  bring  you  into  constant,  living,  loving  contact  with  the  Great  Conqueror.  He 
conquered  once  for  all,  and  the  very  remembrance  of  His  conquest  by  faith  will 
make  me  strong — will  "teach  my  hands  to  war  and  my  fingers  to  fight."  He 
conquered  once  for  all,  and  His  victory  will  pass  with  electric  power  into  my  life  if 
I  trust  Him.  And  then  there  is  the  last  thought  which,  though  it  be  not  directly 
expressed  in  the  words  before  us,  is  yet  closely  connected  with  them.  You  can 
conquer  the  world  if  you  will  trust  Jesus  Christ,  because  your  faith  will  bring  into 
the  midst  of  your  lives  the  grandest  and  most  solemn  and  blessed  realities.  If  a 
man  goes  to  Italy,  and  lives  in  the  presence  of  the  pictures  there,  it  is  marvellous  what 
daubs  the  works  of  art,  that  he  used  to  admire,  look  when  he  comes  back  to  England 
again.  And  if  he  has  been  in  communion  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  has  found  out 
what  real  sweetness  is,  he  will  not  be  over-tempted  by  the  coarse  dainties  that  people 
eat  here.  Children  spoil  their  appetites  for  wholesome  food  by  sweetmeats ;  we 
very  often  do  the  same  in  regard  to  the  bread  of  God,  but  if  we  have  once 
really  tasted  it,  we  shall  not  care  very  much  for  the  vulgar  dainties  on  the 
world's  stall.  So,  two  questions : — Does  your  faith  do  anything  like  that  for 
you?  If  it  does  not,  what  do  you  think  is  the  worth  of  it?  Does  it  deaden 
the  world's  delights  ?  Does  it  lift  you  above  them  ?  Does  it  make  you 
conqueror  ?  If  it  does  not,  do  you  think  it  is  worth  calling  faith  ?  And  the 
other  question  is :  Do  you  want  to  beat,  or  to  be  beaten  ?  When  you  consult 
your  true  self,  does  your  conscience  not  teU  you  that  it  were  better  for  you  to 
keep  God's  commandments  than  to  obey  the  world?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  victory  of  faith  : — Among  the  many  figures  to  which  life  is  likened  in  the 
Bible  none  commends  itself  more  to  the  average  human  experience  than  that 
of  a  battle.  Life  goes  always  from  a  playground  to  a  battle-ground — from 
playing  soldiers  when  we  are  children  to  being  soldiers  when  we  are  men  and 
women.  We  may  be  having  easy  times  as  the  world  regards  us,  but  as  we 
regard  ourselves  we  are  conscious  of  more  or  less  fighting.  Ah !  the  life-battle 
is  a  thing  deeper  than  that  old,  old  question  of  "  What  shall  I  eat  and  drink, 
and  wherewithal  shall  I  be  clothed  ?  "  This  is  a  very  stupid  world.  Thousands 
of  years  have  been  impressing  on  us  the  real  significance  of  life,  disclosing  the  real 
conflict ;  and  still  men  measure  by  these  most  superficial  estimates  and  call  us 
victorious  or  defeated  in  proportion  as  we  get  or  fail  to  get  fat  lands  and  fair 
houses.  I  think  we  might  define  the  word  world,  as  the  Scriptures  use  it,  by 
these  three  words — self,  sin,  and  death.  Those  words  stand  for  the  three 
divisions  of  the  world  army.  That  is  the  kingdom  of  this  world.  Over  against 
it  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Against  self  is  God  ;  against  sin  is  holiness ;  against 
death  is  life.  You  see  how  the  ranks  of  this  battle  are  world-wide.  No  condition 
escapes  it.  No  soul  without  a  hindering  self,  without  sin,  without  the  shadow  of 
death.  What,  now,  is  the  victory  ?  I  said  self  was  the  first  of  the  three  divisions 
of  the  world.  What  is  a  victory  over  self  ?  There  is  and  has  always  been  a 
negative  Christianity  which  thinks  the  way  to  overcome  the  world  is  to  crush 
it — the  way  to  overcome  self  or  selfishness  is  to  crush  self.  It  is  a  barren 
victory.  You  have  left  only  a  wreck — as  in  ancient  warfare  they  made  a  desert 
by  killing  the  people  and  called  it  victoiy  I  Such  victories  defeated  Xerxes.  Rome 
was  wiser  :  she  conquered  people,  then  incorporated  them  into  her  own  life,  and  so 
had  their  strength  and  their  service.  And  the  only  way  to  win  a  useful  victory  over 
human  selfishness  is  to  get  self  to  be  an  ally  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  not  to  crush 
self — that  is  both  easy  and  useless ;  but  to  win  it  over  from  the  service  of  this  world 
to  the  service  of  God.  The  second  division  of  what  is  called  the  world  is  sin,  sin 
as  an  inner  experience  and  condition,  and  sin  as  an  outward  seduction  and  force. 
The  second  branch  of  the  victory,  then,  is  to  overcome  sin.  Here,  again,  we  may 
say  a  true  and  lasting  victory  over  sin  is  not  accomplished  by  repressive  measures, 
by  tying  it  down  and  crucifying  it,  by  casting  it  out  and  leaving  the  house  empty.  . 
Not  thus  is  the  devil  cast  out.  You  can  cast  him  out  in  the  passion  of  some  moral 
struggle,  you  can  drive  him  away ;  but  if  you  stop  there,  there  are  seven  others 
ready  to  come  back  with  him.  The  intemperate  man  renounces  his  cups,  but 
takes  no  partner  in  to  fill  the  vacant  place,  and  the  old  enemy  comes  back.     It 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  409 

is  not  a  victory ;  it  was  only  a  truce.  The  only  way  to  conquer  sin  is  by  filling  the 
heart  with  the  love  of  God.  Again,  we  need  a  victory  over  death  ;  not  for  the  last  I 
hour — that  spasm  is  soon  over.  The  fear  of  dying  is  seldom  a  fear  that  is  realised. 
But  that  bondage  of  which  the  apostle  speaks,  when  people  through  fear  of  death 
are  aU  their  life  long  in  slavery.  Oh,  for  a  sure  victory  over  that  dreary  part  of  this 
world !  The  shadow  of  our  mortaUty  we  cannot  escape.  It  is  constantly  flung 
across  our  path.  Nature  writes  it  before  us  in  flaming  colours  every  autumn  i 
day.  Here,  once  more,  we  cannot  win  a  victory  by  repression,  by  saying,  "Death' 
is  common,"  or  by  cultivating  stohdity.  The  only  battalion  you  can  effectively  set 
opposite  the  grim  spectre  on  life's  battlefield  is  the  battalion  of  a  new  life.  Death 
wih  have  no  dominion  then.  He  will  be  only  a  porter  to  open  for  us  a  gate  to  the 
enjoyment  of  our  life.  Now,  if  I  could  give  you  a  weapon  to  win  this  kind  of  ai 
victory  would  it  not  be  worth  while  ? — a  victory  that  would  give  new  power  to  youn 
selfhood,  that  would  hold  your  manhood  against  sin,  and  that  would  banish  death 
in  glory  as  sunlight  transfigures  a  cloud!  For  just  such  a  victory  the  apostle 
provides ;  the  weapon  is  faith.  Faith  is  making  a  real  connection  between  the 
soul  and  God ;  it  is  like  connecting-poles  in  a  battery,  our  negative  brought  to 
God's  positive.  Some  people  speak  of  faith  as  if  there  were  some  magic  potencyi 
in  it.  They  trouble  themselves  for  fear  their  faith  is  not  the  right  kind.  But  it  is  | 
not  the  quality  of  the  faith  that  gains  the  battle ;  it  is  dropping  into  God's  hand  I 
that  does  that.  (C  L.  Thomjison,  D.D.)  The  victory  over  the  world  : — We  do 
not  live  long  before  we  come  to  understand  that  it  has  pleased  God  so  to  order  things 
in  this  life,  that  no  worthy  end  can  be  attained  without  an  effort— without 
encountering  and  overcoming  opposition.  It  is  difficult  to  do  anything  that  is 
good ;  and  the  Christian  life  is  in  keeping  with  all  things  around  it.  If  we 
would  live  the  Christian  life,  if  we  would  reach  the  Christian's  home — there  ia 
no  other  course — we  must  "  overcome  the  world ! "  And,  first,  this  world  is  an 
obstacle,  needing  to  be  overcome — it  exerts,  that  is,  an  influence  which  we  must 
every  day  be  resisting  and  praying  against — just  in  this :  that  it  looks  so  solid  and 
so  real,  that  in  comparison  with  it,  the  eternal  world  and  its  interests  look  to  most 
men  as  though  they  had  but  a  shadowy  and  unsubstantial  existence.  The  supreme 
importance  of  the  life  to  come  is  the  doctrine  on  which  all  religion  rests :  but  though 
we  often  hear  and  repeat  the  words,  that  "  aU  on  earth  is  shadow,  all  beyond  is 
substance  " — how  fast  this  world  of  sense  grows  and  greatens  upon  us  again — while 
the  unseen  world  and  all  its  concerns  seem  to  recede  into  distance,  to  melt  into  air, 
to  fade  into  nothing !  And  what  is  there  that  shall  "  overcome  "  this  materialising 
influence  of  a  present  world  :  what  is  there  that  shall  give  us  the  "  victory"  over 
it ; — but  Faith — Faith  which  believes  what  it  cannot  see,  with  all  the  vividness  of 
sight  ?  It  is  too  much,  perhaps,  to  expect  that  the  day  should  ever  come  when,  for 
more  than  short  seasons  of  special  elevation,  we  shall  be  able  to  realise  the  unseen 
and  eternal  as  plainly  as  we  do  the  seen  and  temporal :  we  cannot  look  to  be  always 
so  raised  above  worldly  interests,  as  to  feel  that  not  what  we  grasp,  but  what  we 
believe,  is  the  true  reality  :  it  will  be  enough  if  we  carry  with  us  such  a  conviction 
as  shall  constrain  us  to  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness  "  : 
and  if  we  ever  do  so,  this  must  be  "  the  victory  which  shall  overcome  the  world, 
even  our  faith."  Next  we  remark  that  the  world  is  an  obstacle  in  our  Christian 
course,  because  its  cares,  business,  interests,  tend  strongly  and  directly  to  choke  the 
good  seed  of  religion  in  the  heart — to  fill  up  our  minds  so  completely  as  that  they 
shall  have  no  room  for  thoughts  of  eternity  and  salvation.  How  many  a  time  have 
you  knelt  down  in  your  closet  to  say  your  evening  prayer  ;  and  in  a  little  while  found 
that  some  worldly  anxiety  or  trouble  was  coming  between  you  and  your  God.  Only 
the  "  faith  that  overcometh  the  world  "  can  save  from  this.  Only  that  child-like 
confidence  in  our  Saviour's  love  and  wisdom  and  power,  which  trusts  everything  to 
Him — which  "  casts  all  our  care  upon  Him  " — and  so  feels  the  crushing  burden 
lifted  from  our  own  weak  hearts  !  Give  us  that  faith  ;  and  we  have  "  overcome  the 
world  "  :  it  is  our  tyrant,  and  we  are  its  slaves,  no  more  !  Give  us  that  faith,  not 
for  isolated  moments  of  rapture  only,  but  to  be  the  daily  mood  and  temper  of  our 
hearts :  and  then  we  shall  engage  without  fever  in  the  business  of  this  world,  as 
feeling  that  in  a  few  short  years  it  will  matter  nothing  whether  we  met  disappoint- 
ment or  success.  There  is  yet  another  sense  in  which  the  world  is  an  obstacle  to  4- 
our  Christian  hfe,  needing  to  be  overcome  by  faith.  As  you  know,  the  phrase  the 
world  is  sometimes  used  in  contrast  with  the  Church.  "  They  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  Taken  in  this  way,  the  world  means  all  human 
beings  who  are  without  the  Christian  fold  :  who  are  devoid  of  Christian  faith,  and 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of  Christian  ways  of  thinking  and  feeling.  And  you  know  well  that  on  the  most 
important  subjects  there  is  an  absolute  contrariety  between  the  doctrines  of  the 
Church  and  of  the  world :  and  many  a  believer  has  found  the  world's  frown  or  the 
world's  sneer  something  which  it  needs  much  faith  to  resist  and  to  overcome.  How 
cheaply  and  lightly  will  that  man  hold  ridicule  and  mockery  of  him  and  his  religion, 
who  realises  to  his  heart  that  the  all-wise  and  Almighty  God  thinks  upon  that 
Bubject  as  he  does :  who  realises  that  God  approves  the  course  he  follows,  whether 
man  does  or  no.  (A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  The  true  confession  of  faith  : — I.  How 
THE  yiCTORT  IS  GAINED.  "  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world." 
Beware  of  mere  outside  enlargement.  Accretion  is  not  increase.  But  where 
there  is  true  life,  you  have  growth  and  increase.  The  victory  of  vitality  is 
onward,  upward,  skyward,  heavenward.  Look  at  this  tree— a  poor  puny  twig, 
you  put  it  in  the  ground.  Yet  it  is  a  victor,  a  conqueror  proud  and  unbending ; 
the  very  earth  that  keeps  it  up  is  thrust  below  it  in  triumph.  One  of  the  mighty 
forces  of  the  universe  next  comes  meddling  with  it,  to  coerce  it  downward,  to 
overthrow  it.  Gravitation,  from  its  march  among  the  mazes  of  stellar  light, 
from  the  holding  up  in  its  great  hand  of  the  swinging  suns  in  yon  far-off  abyss, 
now  attacks  this  little  newcomer.  But  there's  life  in  the  attacked,  and  the  merest 
cell  of  protoplasm  is  greater  than  a  whole  universe  of  Jupiters  and  Saturns  and 
Btars  and  suns.  The  treeling  conquers.  Watch  it  rearing  its  tufted  little  head, 
upward  stretching,  upward  reaching,  upward  growing,  upward  in  spite  of  the  steady 
downward  puU  of  that  blind  nigh-infinite  force,  upward.  It's  a  marvel,  a  conquest, 
a  triumph,  an  overcoming  indeed.  This  shrublet  lives,  and  because  of  life  "  born 
of  God  "  it  conquers  and  overcomes.  Take  another  view-point,  for  I  wish  to  lead 
you  up  to  all  that  is  implied  in  the  phrase  "  born  of  God."  The  "  born  "  of  man, 
what  is  that  ?  Intellect,  idea,  mind,  soul,  thought.  Is  there  not  the  march  of  a 
conqueror  here  ?  "  No !  "  says  the  opposing  Firth  of  Forth  to  the  beseeching 
request  of  man  for  permission  to  cross,  and  it  stretches  out  the  broad  arm  of 
waves  and  waters  to  prevent  and  protest.  No?  but  the  "born"  of  man  says 
Yes,  and  Inchgarvie  bares  its  rocky  back  for  the  giant  piles,  and  the  great 
Bridge  in  levers  and  cantilevers  springs  in  mocking  triumph  from  shore  to 
shore,  and  the  roll  of  ordinary  traffic  now  heralds  the  conquest  in  a  daily  song. 
Ay,  wherever  you  look,  whatsoever  is  "  born "  of  man  overcometh,  rocks  rend, 
valleys  rise,  and  the  great  sea's  bosom  is  beaten  by  revolving  paddles  and  screws 
into  the  very  king's  highway.  This  is  the  victory,  born  of  man,  "  born  of  God, 
LIFE ! "  At  conversion  the  spiritual  principle  of  the  new  creation  starts  its  onward 
programme  of  evolution  to  the  full  stature  of  the  perfect  man  in  a  glorified  Christ. 
The  new  man  lives,  the  old  man  dies  and  disappears.  What  is  involved  must  be 
evolved,  and  the  Creator  has  pledged  Himself  to  it.  "  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God 
overcometh  the  world."  The  world  is  no  friend  to  grace.  It  threatens  and  frightens, 
annoys,  vexes,  and  checks.  It  may  deform  and  deface,  but  kill?  Never.  The 
Mugho  pinetree  shaken  by  the  headlong  winds,  just  thrusts  its  roots  more  deeply 
into  the  crevices  of  the  rock ;  the  threatening  vibrations  but  make  it  embrace  the 
cliff  and  imbed  itself  in  the  strong  Alpine  heart  all  the  more  firmly ;  it's  the  better 
for  all  the  blaud  and  bluster  of  the  storm.  So  if  your  soul  has  got  life,  the  merest 
atom,  the  minutest  cell,  the  feeblest  flicker,  the  faintest  breath,  it  will  grow  the 
higher  and  higher  for  these  assaults  of  Satan,  for  all  the  downward  pulling  of  the 
gravitation  of  the  pit.  II.  The  cebtainty  op  the  victory.  The  Calvary  is  over, 
the  great  battle  in  the  darkness  is  by,  the  devil  is  defeated,  but  it  is  yours  now  to 
pursue  and  to  keep  him  in  the  "  glorious  confusion "  of  flight.  It  is  yours, 
Christians,  to  be  after  the  fleeing  foe.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh 
the  world,  even  our  faith."  The  faith  here  referred  to  by  the  apostle  is  not 
so  much  an  attribute  of  our  poor  tired  bankrupt  hearts,  but  it  is  an  objective 
outside  thing,  in  fact,  just  an  outward  Creed  or  Confession.  It  is  the  fidei 
quae  and  not  the  fides  qua,  the  faith  believed  and  not  the  faith  believing. 
In  the  present  ebb  and  flow  of  religious  opinion  or  non-opinion,  a  creed  is  as 
necessary  to  the  Church  as  the  vertebral  column  to  the  human  body.  In  the 
storm  everything  else  may  go  by  the  board  ;  the  whole  cargo  may  lie  jettisoned  on 
the  surf,  but  one  thing  is  never  flung  over  the  gunwale  to  lighten  the  ship,  and  that 
is  the  compass.  The  binnacle  sticks  to  the  deck,  and  the  faithful  needle  points  on 
through  the  dash  of  the  storm  to  the  haven  of  safety  and  rest.  {John  Robertson.) 
Victory  over  the  world : — I.  Victory  or  overcoming  is  a  subjugation  or  bringing 
under  an  opposing  party  to  the  power  and  will  of  another.  And  this  victory  is  of 
two  kinds,  complete  and  perfect,  or  incomplete  or  imperfect.     1.  The  notion  of  a 


CHAP,  v.]  J.  JOHN.  411 

complete  victory  is  when  either  the  opposing  party  is  totally  destroyed,  or  at  least 
when  despoiled  of  any  possibility  of  future  resistance.  Thus  the  Son  of  God,  the 
captain  of  our  salvation,  overcame  the  world  (John  xvi.  33).  2.  There  is  a  victory, 
but  incomplete,  such  as  the  victory  of  the  Children  of  Israel  over  the  Canaanites. 
And  this  is  the  condition  of  the  Christian  militant  in  this  world.  II.  The  person 
exercising  this  act  of  victory  and  conquest,  he  that  is  born  of  God.  III.  The  thing 
upon  which  this  victory  is  obtained  and  conquest  made  is  the  world,  which  compre- 
hends in  its  latitude  a  double  world ;  the  world  within  us  and  the  world  without  us. 

1.  The  world  that  is  within  us  taketh  in  the  two  great  faculties  or  powers,  viz., 
(1)  The  passions  of  the  soul;  and  (2)  the  sensual  appetite;  both  these  are  in 
their  own  nature  good,  placed  in  us  by  the  wise  God  of  Nature,  for  most 
excellent  ends  and  uses.     Our  business  therefore  is  to  keep  them  in  subjection. 

2.  The  world  without  us  is  of  three  kinds.  (1)  The  natural  world,  which  ia 
the  work  of  Almighty  God,  is  most  certainly  in  itself  good ;  and  only  evil 
accidentally  by  man's  abuse  of  himself  or  it.  (2)  The  malignant  and  evil 
world,  the  world  of  evil  angels,  and  of  evil  men.  (3)  The  accidental,  or  more 
truly  the  providential  world  in  relation  to  man  and  his  condition  in  this  world, 
and  is  commonly  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  prosperous  or  adverse.  IV.  The  faith 
WHICH  thus  ovekcometh  THE  WORLD  is  nothing  else  but  a  deep,  real,  full  persuasion 
of  and  assent  unto  those  great  truths  revealed  in  the  Scriptures  of  God.  1.  What 
are  those  Divine  truths  which  being  really  and  soundly  believed,  doth  enable  the 
victory  over  the  world  ?  (1)  There  is  one  most  powerful,  wise,  gracious,  bountiful, 
just,  and  all-seeing  God,  the  author  of  all  being,  that  is  present  in  all  places,  knows 
our  thoughts,  our  wants,  our  sins,  our  desires,  and  is  ready  to  supply  us  with  all 
things  that  are  good  and  fit  for  us  beyond  all  we  can  ask  or  think.  (2)  This  most 
wise  and  just  and  powerful  God  hath  appointed  a  law  or  rule  according  to  which 
the  children  of  men  should  conform  themselves.  (3)  This  law  and  will  of  His  He 
hath  communicated  and  revealed  to  men  in  His  holy  Word,  especially  by  the 
mission  of  His  Son.  (4)  He  hath  given  unto  mankind,  in  and  through  Christ,  a 
full  manifestation  of  a  future  life  after  this  of  rewards  and  punishments,  and 
according  to  that  law  of  His  thus  manifested  by  His  Son  He  will,  by  the  same  Jesua 
Christ,  judge  every  man  according  to  his  works.  (5)  The  reward  of  faith  and 
obedience,  in  that  other  life  to  come,  shall  be  an  eternal,  blessed,  happy  estate  of 
soul  and  body  in  the  glorious  heavens,  and  in  the  presence  and  fruition  of  the  ever 
glorious  and  eternal  God.  (6)  The  punishment  of  the  rebellious  and  disobedient 
unto  His  will  and  law  of  God  thus  manifested  by  His  Son  shall  be  separation  from 
the  presence  of  God.  (7)  The  Son  of  God  hath  given  us  the  greatest  assurance 
imaginable  of  the  truth  of  this  will  of  God  by  taking  upon  Him  our  nature,  by  His 
miracles,  by  His  death  and  resurrection  and  ascension  into  glory,  and  by  His 
mission  of  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  into  His  apostles  and  disciples. 
(8)  God,  though  full  of  justice  and  severity  against  the  obstinate  and  rebellious,  yet 
is  full  of  tenderness,  love,  and  compassion  towards  aU  those  that  sincerely  desire  to 
obey  His  wiU,  and  to  accept  of  terms  of  peace  and  reconciliation  with  Him,  and  is 
ready  upon  repentance  and  amendment  to  pardon  whatsoever  is  amiss.  2.  As 
touching  the  act  itself,  it  is  no  other  than  a  sound,  real,  and  firm  belief  of  those 
sacred  truths.  He  that  hath  this  firm  persuasion  will  most  certainly  repent  of  his 
sins  past,  will  most  certainly  endeavour  obedience  to  the  wiU  of  God,  which  is  thus 
believed  by  him  to  be  holy,  just,  and  good.  V.  How  faith  ovebcometh  the  world, 
WHICH  TAKES  IN  THESE  TWO  CONSIDERATIONS.  1.  Touching  the  degree  of  the  victory 
that  faith  gives,  it  is  a  victory,  but  not  without  a  continued  warfare.  2.  Touching 
the  method  whereby  our  faith  overcometh  the  world.  (1)  In  general  the  great 
method  whereby  faifli  overcometh  the  world  is  by  rectifying  our  judgments  and 
those  mistakes  that  are  in  us  concerning  the  world  and  our  own  condition.  (2)  But 
I  shall  come  to  particulars,  and  foUow  that  track  that  is  before  given,  in  the  distri- 
bution of  the  world,  as  well  within  as  without  us,  and  consider  the  particular  method 
of  faith  in  subduing  them.  1.  As  for  our  passions.  (1)  Faith  directs  their  due 
placing  upon  their  objects  by  discovering  what  are  the  true  and  proper  objects  of 
them  out  of  that  large  and  comprehensive  law  of  God  which  present  them  as  such 
to  the  soul,  and  to  be  observed  under  the  pain  of  the  displeasure  of  the  glorious  and 
Almighty  God.  (2)  Upon  the  same  account  it  teacheth  our  passions  and  affections 
moderation  in  their  exercise,  even  about  their  proper  objects,  and  due  subordination 
to  the  supreme  love  a  man  owes  to  the  supreme  good,  God  Almighty.  (3)  Upon  the 
same  account  it  teacheth  us,  under  our  obligation  of  duty  to  Grod,  to  cut  ofE  and 
mortify  the  diseases  and  corruptions  of  passion,  as  malice,  envy,  revenge,  pride,  vain- 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

gl«ry,  ostentation.  2.  In  reference  to  our  desires.  (1)  Natural ;  it  teacheth  us  great 
moderation,  temperance,  sobriety.  As  touching  those  degenerate  and  corrupt  lusts, 
as  covetousness,  malice,  envy ;  faith  doth  first  of  all  in  general  show  us  that  they 
are  prohibited  by  the  great  Lord  and  Lawgiver  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  that  under 
severe  penalties ;  again,  secondly,  it  shows  us  that  they  are  the  great  depravers  of 
our  nature,  the  disturbers  of  the  peace,  security,  and  tranquillity  of  our  minds ; 
again,  thirdly,  it  shows  us  that  th§y  are  vain,  impertinent,  and  unnecessary  per- 
turbations, such  as  can  never  do  us  any  real  good,  but  feed  our  vain  imaginations 
with  deceits  instead  of  realities.  3.  I  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  world  without 
us,  as  that  which  possibly  is  here  principally  intended,  and  the  victory  of  the  Chris- 
tian by  his  faith  over  it,  and  first  in  relation  to  the  natural  world.  This  world  is  a 
goodly  palace  fitted  with  all  grateful  objects  to  our  senses,  full  of  variety  and 
pleasantness,  and  the  soul  fastening  upon  them  grows  careless  of  the  thoughts  of 
another  state  after  death,  or  to  think  of  the  passage  to  it,  or  making  provision  for 
it ;  but  to  set  up  its  hope  and  happiness,  and  rest  in  it,  and  in  these  delights  and 
accommodations  that  it  yields  our  senses.    Faith  overcometh  this  part  of  the  world — 

(1)  By  giving  us  a  true  estimate  of  it,  to  prevent  us  from  over-valuing  it.  (2)  By 
frequent  reminding  of  us  that  it  is  fitted  only  to  the  meridian  of  life,  which  is  short 
and  transitory,  and  passeth  away.  (3)  By  presenting  unto  us  a  state  of  future  happi- 
ness that  infinitely  surpasseth  it.  (4)  By  discovering  our  duty  in  our  walk  through  it, 
namely,  of  great  moderation  and  vigilancy.  (5)  By  presenting  unto  us  the  example 
of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  His  deportment  in  it  and  towards  it.  (6)  By  assur- 
ing us  that  we  are  but  stewards  unto  the  great  Lord  of  the  family  of  heaven  and 
earth  for  so  much  as  we  have  of  it,  and  that  to  Him  we  must  give  an  account  of  our 
stewardship.  (7)  By  assuring  us  that  our  great  Lord  and  Master  is  a  constant 
observer  of  all  our  deportment  in  it.  (8)  And  that  He  will  most  certainly  give  a 
reward  proportionable  to  the  management  of  our  trust  and  stewardship.  4.  As  to 
the  malignant  world  of  evil  men  and  evil  angels  ;  and  therein  first  in  relation  to  the 
evil  counsels  and  evil  examples,  that  solicit  or  tempt  us  to  the  breach  of  our  duty 
to  God.  The  methods  whereby  faith  overcometh  this  part  of  the  malignant  world 
are  these.  (1)  It  presents  unto  us  our  duty  that  we  owe  to  God  and  which  we  are 
bound  indispensably  to  observe  under  the  great  penalty  of  loss  of  our  happiness. 

(2)  It  presents  us  with  the  great  advantage  that  we  have  in  obeying  God,  above 
whatsoever  advantage  we  can  have  in  obeying  or  following  the  sinful  examples, 
counsels,  or  commands  of  this  world,  and  the  great  excess  of  our  disadvantage  in 
obeying  or  following  the  evil  examples,  or  counsels  of  the  world.  (3)  It  presents 
Almighty  God  strictly  observing  our  carriage  in  relation  to  these  temptations.  (4)  It 
presents  us  with  the  displeasure  and  indignation  of  the  same  God  in  case  we  desert 
Him,  and  follow  the  sinful  examples  or  counsels  of  men,  and  with  the  great  favour, 
love,  approbation,  and  reward  of  Almighty  God  if  we  keep  our  fidelity  and  duty  to 
Him.  (5)  It  presents  us  with  the  noble  example  of  our  blessed  Saviour.  (6)  It 
presents  us  with  the  transcendent  love  of  God  in  ffihrist  Jesus,  who,  to  redeem  us 
from  the  misery  of  our  natural  condition,  and  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  to 
make  us  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good  works,  chose  to  become  a  curse  and  die 
for  us,  the  greatest  obligation  of  love  and  gratitude  and  duty  imaginable.  And 
secondly,  as  to  the  other  part  or  scene  of  this  malignant  world  persecutions, 
reproaches,  scorns,  yea  death  itself,  faith  presents  the  soul  not  only  with  the  fore- 
going considerations,  and  that  glorious  promise,  "  Be  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will 
give  thee  a  crown  of  life,"  but  some  other  considerations  peculiarly  proper  to  this 
condition.  (1)  That  it  is  this  state  that  our  blessed  Saviour  hath  not  only  foretold, 
but  hath  annexed  a  special  promise  of  blessedness  unto.  (2)  That  there  have  gone 
before  us  a  noble  cloud  of  examples  in  all  ages,  yea,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation 
was  thus  made  perfect  by  suffering.  (3)  That  though  it  is  troublesome,  it  is  but 
short,  and  ends  with  death,  which  wiU  be  the  passage  into  a  state  of  incorruptible 
happiness.  3.  Concerning  the  third  kind  of  world,  namely,  the  providential  world, 
consisting  in  external  dispensations  of  adversity  or  prosperity.  And  first  concern- 
ing the  dark  part  of  the  world,  namely,  adversity,  as  casualties,  issues  of  wealth,  or 
friends,  sicknesses,  the  common  effects  whereof  are  impatience,  distrust,  murmuring, 
and  unquietness.  (1)  Faith  presents  the  soul  with  this  assurance,  that  all  external 
occurrences  come  from  the  wise  dispensation  or  permission  of  the  most  glorious 
God  ;  they  come  not  by  chance.  (2)  That  the  glorious  God  may,  even  upon  the 
account  of  His  own  sovereignty,  inflict  what  He  pleaseth  upon  any  of  His  creatures 
in  this  life.  (3)  That  yet  whatsoever  he  doth  in  this  kind,  is  not  only  an  effect  of 
His  power  and  sovereignty,  but  of  His  wisdom,  yea,  and  of  His  goodness  and  bounty. 


CHAP.  T.]  I.  JOHN.  413 

(4)  That  the  best  of  men  deserve  far  worse  at  the  hands  of  God  than  the  worst 
afflictions  that  ever  did  or  ever  can  befall  any  man  in  this  life.  (5)  That  there  have 
been  examples  of  greater  affliction  that  have  befallen  better  men  in  this  life :  witness 
Job.  (6)  That  these  afflictions  are  sent  for  the  good  even  of  good  men,  and  it  is 
their  fault  and  weakness  if  they  have  not  that  effect.  (7)  That  in  the  midst  of  the 
severest  afflictions,  the  favour  of  God  to  the  soul,  discovering  itself  like  the  sun  shin- 
ing through  a  cloud,  gives  light  and  comfort  to  the  soul.  (8)  That  Almighty  God 
is  ready  to  support  them  that  believe  in  Him,  and  to  bear  them  up  under  aU  their 
afflictions  that  they  shall  not  sink  under  them.  (9)  That  whatsoever  or  how  great 
soever  the  afflictions  of  this  life  are,  yet  faith  presents  to  the  beUever  something 
that  can  bear  up  the  soul  under  these  pressures,  namely,  that  after  a  few  years  or 
days  are  spent,  an  eternal  state  of  unchangeable  and  perfect  happiness  shaU  succeed. 

2.  As  to  the  second  part  of  this  providential  world,  namely,  prosperity,  which  in 
truth  is  the  more  dangerous  condition  of  the  two  without  the  intervention  of  the 
Divine  grace.  (1)  Faith  gives  a  man  a  true  and  equal  estimate  of  this  condition, 
and  keeps  a  man  from  over  valuing  it,  or  himself  for  it ;  lets  him  know  it  is  very 
uncertain,  very  casual,  very  dangerous,  and  cannot  outlast  this  life.  (2)  Faith 
assures  him  that  Almighty  God  observes  his  whole  deportment  in  it,  that  He  hath 
given  him  a  law  of  humility,  sobriety,  temperance,  fidelity,  and  a  caution  not  to 
trust  in  uncertain  riches,  that  he  must  give  an  account  of  his  stewardship  also. 
(3)  Faith  lets  him  know  that  the  abundance  of  wealth,  honour,  friends,  applause, 
success,  as  they  last  no  longer  than  this  short  transitory  life,  and  therefore  cannot 
make  up  his  happiness,  no  nor  give  a  man  any  ease  or  rescue  from  a  fit  of  the  stone 
or  colic ;  so  there  is  an  everlasting  state  of  happiness  or  misery  that  must  attend 
every  man  after  death.  {Sir  M.  Hale.)  The  ability  of  faith  to  overcome  the 
world  : — I.  The  mere  light  and  strength  of  nature  is  not  able  to  subdue  the 
WORLD.  1.  Before  we  can  readily  give  up  aU  that  is  dear  to  us  in  this  world,  we 
must  be  very  sure  of  something  better  in  the  next,  and  of  this  we  cannot  be 
sufficiently  assured  by  imassisted  reason.  2.  An  authoritative  rule  of  Mfe  was 
wanting  to  the  Gentile  world.  3.  A  sinner  by  the  light  of  nature  cannot  tell  what 
will  satisfy  for  sin.  4.  To  this  want  of  knowledge  we  add  want  of  strength  in  the 
natural  man  to  perform  his  duty  when  known.  'Tis  not  enough  that  we  have  eyes, 
but  we  must  have  strength  also  to  walk  in  the  way  that  is  set  before  us.  n.  The 
Christian  faith  is  perfectly  qualified  fob  this  end  ;  for  raising  a  true  believer 
above  aU  the  temptations  here  on  earth.  1.  The  evidence  given  for  the  truth  of  the 
Christian  faith.  2.  The  helps  and  encouragements  proposed  in  the  gospel  for  over- 
coming the  world.  {W.  Reeves,  M.A.)  Victorious  faith  : — I.  The  conquest 
ITSELF  "overcometh  tne  world."  We  mingle  among  men  of  the  world,  but  it  must 
be  as  warriors  who  are  ever  on  the  watch,  and  are  aiming  at  victory.     Therefore — 

1.  We  break  loose  from  the  world's  customs.  2.  We  maintain  our  freedom  to  obey 
a  higher  Master  in  aU  things.  We  are  not  enslaved  by  dread  of  poverty,  greed  of 
riches,  official  command,  personal  ambition,  love  of  honour,  fear  of  shame,  or  force 
of  numbers.  3.  We  are  raised  above  circumstances,  and  find  our  happiness  in 
invisible  things:  thus  we  overcome  the  world.  4.  We  are  above  the  world's 
authority.  Its  ancient  customs  or  novel  edicts  are  for  its  own  children :  we  do  not 
own  it  as  a  ruler  or  as  a  judge.  5.  We  are  above  its  example,  influence,^ and  spirit. 
We  are  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the  world  is  crucified  to  us.  6.  We  a?e  above  its 
religion.  We  gather  our  religion  from  God  and  His  Word,  not  from  human  sources. 
n.  The  CONQUERING  FUTURE.  "  Whatsoever  is  bom  of  God."  1.  This  nature  alone 
will  undertake  the  contest  with  the  world.  2.  This  nature  alone  can  continue  it. 
All  else  wearies  in  the  fray.  3.  This  nature  is  born  to  conquer.  God  is  the  Lord, 
and  that  which  is  born  of  Him  is  royal  and  ruling.  HI.  The  conquering  weapon — 
"  even  our  faith."  We  are  enabled  to  be  conquerors  through  regarding — 1.  The 
unseen  reward  which  awaits  us.     2.  The  unseen  presence  which  surrounds  us. 

3.  The  mystic  union  to  Christ  which  grace  has  wrought  in  us.  4.  The  sanctifying 
communion  which  we  enjoy  with  the  unseen  God.  IV.  The  speciality  of  it. 
"  This  is  the  victory."  1.  For  salvation,  finding  the  rest  of  faith.  2.  For  imita- 
tion, finding  the  wisdom  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God.  3.  For  consolation,  seeing 
victory  secured  to  us  in  Jesus.    Lessons :  1.  Behold  your  conflict — bom  to  battle. 

2.  Behold  your  triumph — bound  to  conquer.  (C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  Faith  the  secret 
of  world-victory : — A  survey  of  history  discovers  to  us  the  presence  of  a  constant 
law,  which  may  be  thus  described,  progress  through  conflict.  The  conflict  is  of  two 
kinds — physical,  as  where  one  nation  hurls  itself  against  another  in  war,  or  one 
party  seeks  to  overcome  another  by  sheer  force  of  numbers ;  and  moral,  where  the 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

battle  is  one  of  truth  against  error,  of  righteousness  against  injustice,  of  religion 
against  the  forces  of  ungodliness.  Corresponding  to  these  two  kinds  of  conflict  are 
two  kinds  of  victories — the  one  material,  where  present  success  is  often  on  the  side 
of  the  strongest  battalions ;  and  the  other  moral,  where  more  permanent  results 
are  achieved  by  gradually  transforming  men's  ideas,  by  substituting  better  institu- 
tions for  corrupt  and  defective  ones,  and  above  all,  by  making  men  themselves 
better.  Now  Christianity,  if  it  is  anything,  aims  at  being  a  world-conquering 
principle.  This  is  its  ultimate  aim,  but  it  has  a  nearer  aim,  which  is  really  the 
guarantee  for  its  accomplishing  the  wider  result.  Its  nearer  aim  is  to  give  the 
individual  in  his  own  spirit  the  victory  over  the  world,  to  implant  there  the  Divine 
principle  of  victory,  to  make  the  individual  himself  a  type  of  that  fuUer  victory 
which  is  yet  to  be  realised  in  society  as  a  whole.  I.  There  is  a  power  we  are  to 
overcome — the  world.  By  the  world,  in  John's  sense,  we  are  to  ■  understand  a  set 
of  principles,  the  principles  that  rule  and  operate  in  godless  society,  and  stamp  their 
character  on  its  thought,  habits,  and  life ;  or  rather,  it  is  society  itself,  viewed  as 
ruled  and  pervaded  by  these  principles,  and  for  that  reason  hostile  to  godliness. 
But  if  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the  world,  it  might  seem  as  if  the  task  of  overcoming 
it,  or  at  least  of  preventing  ourselves  from  being  overcome  by  it,  were  one  of  no 
great  difficulty.  We  might  be  tempted  to  despise  our  foe.  It  might  seem  as  if  all 
we  had  to  do  was  to  withdraw  from  the  world — not  to  mix  with  worldly  people,  not 
to  mind  their  opinion,  not  to  follow  their  example.  But  in  the  first  place  even  this 
is  not  so  easy  a  thing  to  do.  The  slave  of  the  world  may  think  himself  bound  to  it 
by  only  silken  ties  ;  it  is  when  he  tries  to  emancipate  himself  from  its  bondage  that 
he  finds  how  really  they  are  iron  fetters.  There  is,  for  example,  the  tyranny  of 
public  opinion.  How  few  have  the  courage  to  go  against  that  ?  There  is  the 
tyranny  of  fashion.  Is  it  so  easy,  in  circles  where  fashion  is  regarded,  to  emanci- 
pate oneself  from  its  imperious  mandates,  and  to  take  the  brave  Christian  stand 
which  duty  may  require.  There  is  the  power  of  old-established  custom.  What  a 
hold  there  is  in  that !  Most  difficult  of  all  to  escape  from  is  the  spirit  of  the  world. 
You  think  to  escape  from  the  world,  but  go  where  you  will  its  dark,  hostile  form 
still  confronts  you.  Thus  far  I  have  spoken  only  of  taking  up  a  defensive  attitude 
to  the  world — keeping  the  world  at  arm's  length — preventing  ourselves  from  being 
overcome  by  it.  We  must  feel,  however,  that  the  ringing  note  of  victory  in  our  text 
must  mean  far  more  than  this.  To  overcome  the  world  is  not  only  to  conquer  evil, 
but  to  establish  good.  And  though  the  effort  to  do  this,  as  regards  the  world  outside, 
may  sometimes  fail — though  the  world',  as  has  often  happened,  may  rise  up  against 
the  man  who  seeks  to  make  it  better,  and  may  crush  him  ;  still  is  he  the  real  victor 
who  has  refused  to  bow  his  knee  to  the  Baals  that  are  round  about  him,  for  in  his 
own  spirit  he  has  the  consciousness  of  having  been  able  to  stand  by  the  good,  and 
withstand  the  bad,  and  whatever  may  be  the  immediate  result  of  his  witness,  he 
knows  it  is  that  which  he  has  contended  for  which  shall  in  the  end  prevail. 
II.  What  is  the  power  by  which  we  are  to  overcome  it  ?  It  is,  the  apostle  says, 
*'  our  faith."  The  words  in  the  original  are  even  more  emphatic.  The  passage 
reads,  **  this  is  the  victory  that  hath  overcome  the  world,  even  our  faith."  In  the 
power  of  Christian  faith  the  victory  is  already  won.  Not  that  long  conflict  has  not 
still  to  be  carried  on,  but  in  principle,  in  spirit,  in  the  certainty  of  the  issue,  the 
battle  is  already  decided.  Beliefs — I  speak  here,  of  course,  of  real,  not  merely 
nominal  beliefs — are  the  most  potent  factor  in  human  life,  the  real  power  that 
make  and  shape  the  course  of  history.  The  first  apostles  were  men  with  beliefs, 
and  as  they  went  forth  speaking  out  the  beliefs  that  were  in  them,  it  soon  began  to 
be  said  of  them,  "  Lo,  these  men  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down  are  come 
hither  also."  Columbus  was  a  man  with  a  belief,  and  this  belief  of  his  gave  the 
world  a  new  continent.  Lord  Bacon  was  a  man  with  a  belief — belief  in  a  new 
method  of  science — and  his  belief  inaugurated  the  new  era  of  scientific  invention  and 
discovery.  The  early  political  reformers  were  men  with  beliefs,  and  some  of  the 
wildest  of  their  beliefs  have  already  become  accomplished  realities  of  legislation. 
To  have  in  you  a  belief  which  is  fitted  to  benefit  and  bless  your  fellow-men  is  to  be 
not  only  in  your  own  small  way  a  social  power ;  it  is  to  be  in  the  truest  sense  a 
benefactor  of  mankind.  But  what  is  this  belief  which  Christianity  implants  in  our 
hearts  which  has  these  wondrous  effects  ?  The  answer  is  given  in  the  next  verse, 
"  who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son 
of  God?"  Now,  of  course,  if  belief  in  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  were  only  belief  in 
a  theological  prdposition,  it  neither  would,  nor  could,  have  any  effect  of  the  kind 
alleged.    But  this  is  not  its  real  nature.    Belief  in  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  in  him 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  415 

who  truly  entertains  it,  is  not  belief  in  a  theological  proposition,  but  belief  in  a 
great  Divine  reality,  and  if  we  look  at  the  nature  of  that  reality  we  have  no  difficulty 
in  seeing  that  it  not  only  will  have,  but  must  have,  the  particular  virtue  here  ascribed 
to  it.  To  overcome  the  world,  or  in  plain  modern  words,  to  fight  successfully  the 
battle  of  good  against  evil,  there  are  at  least  necessary  these  conditions :  First  of  all 
we  must  have  firm  faith  in  the  reality  of  goodness — of  that  we  are  contending  for. 
In  the  next  place  we  must  have  the  firm  conviction  that  the  powers  working  on  the 
side  of  goodness  in  the  world  are  stronger  than  the  powers  that  can  be  arrayed 
against  them.  In  the  third  place,  we  must  know  ourselves  to  be  in  our  own  inmost 
life  linked  with  these  victorious  powers.  And  lastly,  as  the  outcome  of  all  this,  we 
must  have  undoubting  confidence  in  the  ultimate  triumph  of  our  cause.  These 
conditions  are  fulfilled  in  the  man  who  believes  from  the  heart  that  Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God.     {Jas.  Orr,  D.D.)         Faith's  victory  over  the  world  : — I.  What  it  is 

IN  THE  WORLD  THAT  THE  CHRISTIAN  HAS  TO  OVERCOME.      1.    ItS  allurCmentS.      The  WOlld 

holds  out  many  fair,  enticing  charms.  It  addresses  the  senses  and  imagination. 
Its  temptations  are  artfully  varied.  2.  Its  terrors.  II.  How  the  Christian's  faith 
ENABLES  him  TO  OBTAIN  THE  VICTORY  OVER  THE  WORLD.  1.  Faith  enables  the  Christian 
to  overcome  the  allurements  of  the  world — (1)  By  showing  him  the  vanity  and 
unsatisfying  nature  of  all  earthly  enjoyments.  (2)  By  pointing  out  to  him  the 
dangerous  consequences  of  the  unlawful  pursuits  of  worldly  men.  (3)  By  filling 
his  soul  with  those  pure  and  spiritual  delights  which  produce  a  disrelish  for  the 
perishing  pleasures  of  sin.  2.  Faith  enables  the  Christian  to  overcome  the  terrors  of 
the  world — (1)  By  the  gracious  supports  which  it  yields  under  every  trial.  (2)  By 
setting  before  him  the  example  of  the -great  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith. 
(3)  By  the  glorious  hopes  with  which  it  inspires  him.  Conclusion  :  1.  This  subject 
furnishes  us  with  a  rule  by  which  to  judge  whether  our  faith  be  genuine.  2.  The 
danger  of  worldly  prosperity.  Apt  to  produce  pride,  self-sufficiency,  forgetfulness 
of  God,  insensibility  to  spiritual  objects.  3.  The  benefit  of  sanctified  affections. 
They  aid  us  in  the  exercise  of  faith.  (D.  Black.)  The  victory  of  faith  : — I.  We 
notice  faith  as  the  power  for  overcoming  the  world.  II.  Faith  is  itself  a  victory. 
Simple  as  it  seems,  all  will  bear  witness  it  is  not  easy  to  possess  this  faith,  and  so 
says  the  direction  here  given.  It  is  a  victory.  Our  position  stands  like  this.  You 
have  hitherto  been  seeking  the  conquest  of  the  world  directly.  You  have  subdued 
your  lusts  by  turning  away  from  temptation,  and  they  have  smouldered  in  your 
hearts.  You  have  kept  from  sin  by  shunning  the  acquaintance  and  occasion  of 
open  violation.  Now,  says  Christ,  instead  of  doing  this,  you  must  bring  your  heart 
into  subjection  to  Me.  You  must  overcome  every  feeling  and  thought  which  lead& 
you  to  look  away  from  Me,  and  you  must  beheve  in  Me.  Again,  your  course  is  no! 
to  come  to  open  contest  with  the  world.  You  are  not  to  go  into  danger  so  that  you 
may  prove  your  strength.  But  you  are  to  wage  war  on  a  smaller  ground.  You  are 
to  contend  with  your  own  hearts,  as  they  would  lead  you  not  to  trust  on  that  which 
you  cannot  see,  or  on  that  which  you  cannot  perfectly  understand,  until  you  have 
that  childlike  confidence,  that  trust  on  Christ  which  shall  enable  you  to  make  your 
cause  the  cause  of  Jesus.  This  is  the  victory  of  faith.  That  the  possession  of  this 
faith  is  a  victory  I  purpose  now  to  show.  It  is  a  victory  over  self-assertion.  Self 
is  to  us  naturally  the  wisest,  the  most  important  of  all  beings.  Our  own  opinions 
are  always  the  best,  our  own  interests  always  those  which  we  most  keenly  look  after. 
Hence,  on  the  one  hand,  we  oppose  the  entrance  of  Christ  into  our  hearts,  because 
we  love  self.  We  form  our  own  opinions  and  we  act  upon  them ;  but  when  Christ 
takes  possession  we  are  no  longer  self-assertive  on  this  matter.  Thus  the  belief 
that  saves  is  a  victory  over  what  I  have  called  our  self-assertion.  Another  form  in 
which  self  appears  is  self-interest.  We  refuse  to  hear  and  to  receive  because  it  is 
against  our  supposed  interests  to  do  so.  We  shall  suffer  some  trouble,  or  lose  some 
preferment.  Full  of  self ;  how,  then,  can  Christ  find  admittance  ?  Dagon  must 
fall  before  the  ark  of  God  :  how  much  more  must  self  before  the  Son  of  God  !  It  is 
not  only  so,  but  self  will  fight  for  sole  possession.  Shall  I  mortify  myself,  inflict 
injury  on  myself  ?  So  we  reason,  and  so  we  oftentimes  drive  Christ  away.  This 
must  all  be  subdued  before  faith  comes.  To  obtain  an  entrance  into  so  well- 
protected  a  city,  demanding  forces  of  such  power  and  nature  may  well  be  called  a 
victory.  But  it  is  also  a  victory  over  the  natural  unbelief  of  the  heart.  There  is  a 
difficulty  in  receiving  spiritual  things.  The  natural  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy.  It 
is  as  though  the  choicest  music  were  played  to  charm  the  deaf,  or  the  utmost  skill 
exerted  to  please  the  blind  by  the  combination  of  colour.  Thus  it  is  that  men 
oppose  reason  and  faith,  as  though  the  man  who  had  reason  could  not  have  faith. 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  v. 

This  unbelief  must  go  before  a  man  can  receive  Christ.  All  this  pride  of  intellect, 
all  this  self-conceit  of  wisdom,  must  give  place  to  the  higher  and  nobler  attribute  of 
faith.  But  you  must  see  that  it  is  a  victory  not  won  by  man  alone.  Yes,  men  may 
believe ;  but  it  is  when  evidence  convinces.  The  Spirit  of  God  must  arouse  the 
dormant  soul.  III.  The  world  is  subjected,  ok  overcome,  by  this  victory.  It  is 
overcome  to  us  each  as  we  have  this  faith  in  our  Lord.  1.  The  strength  of  the 
world  over  us  lies  in  the  undue  value  which  we  set  on  sensuous  things.  Faith 
overcomes  the  world  by  opening  up  issues  and  pressing  claims  which  men  do  not 
feel  without  it.  2.  This  world  has  power  over  us  because  we  feel  so  dependent  on 
it.  When  a  man  is  called  on  to  leave  father  and  mother,  all  the  attractions,  the 
joys,  and  the  comforts  of  home  are  a  constraining  influence  to  keep  him  from  the 
sacrifice.  Ah !  but  faith  gives  the  man  something  higher  to  possess.  He  is  pro- 
vided for.  This  is  the  support  of  faith,  and  the  world  is  overcome.  3.  Other 
similar  reasons  could  be  given  for  the  victory  over  the  world,  all  of  them  fixed, 
centred  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  Take  Christ  away,  and  there  is  no  ground 
for  faith ;  but  whUe  Christ  lives  and  is  set  forth  before  men,  so  long  faith  can  keep 
her  hold,  and  overcome  the  world.  The  soul  makes  Christ's  work  its  own  ;  and  as 
He  overcame,  so  also  shall  all  the  faithful.  (H.  W.  Butcher.)  The  world  over- 
come by  faith : — There  is  a  sound  of  war  in  this  saying.  John,  apostle  of  love 
though  he  be,  has  not  that  solvent  charity  which,  under  an  affection  of  breadth, 
fails  in  rectitude,  and  comes  at  length  to  accept  things,  moraUy  the  most  opposite, 
as  equally  good.  I.  The  world,  what  is  it  ?  And  here  a  dozen  voices  are  ready 
with  a  definition,  which  commonly  is  an  abstract  of  personal  experience  or  opinion. 
The  most  opposite  things  have  been  described  as  worldly;  curiously,  men  have- 
agreed  to  condemn  worldliness,  but  they  have  not  agreed  what  the  thing  condemned 
really  is.  One  man,  having  no  sacred  reserves,  gives  himself  whoUy  to  the  pursuits 
of  this  life ;  by  diligence  and  energy  he  succeeds,  and  he  has  his  reward.  Another 
mingles  his  daily  work  with  some  other  pursuit ;  he  is  fond  of  pictures,  of  music, 
of  science,  or  what  not ;  and  yet  a  third,  as  he  thinks  favoured  by  his  circumstances, 
gives  himself  largely  to  the  enjoyments  of  life :  work  is  but  the  fringe,  the  web  of 
existence  is  made  up  of  pleasure.  After  the  lapee  of  years  let  these  men  compare 
notes ;  ask  each  his  opinion  of  the  others,  and  what  do  you  find  ?  You  find 
probably  that  they  have  a  sort  of  good-natured  contempt  for  one  another  as  having 
lived  in  a  vain  and  worldly  way.  Yes,  and  you  may  find  a  fourth  man,  who  has 
lived  a  more  austere  and  closely  ordered  life  than  any  of  the  rest,  equally  ready  to 
condemn  them  all  for  their  worldly  spirit.  Of  these  several  men  each  had  some- 
thing of  truth  in  his  opinion,  but  not  the  whole  truth,  nor  that  which  goes  to  the 
root  of  the  matter.  Worldliness  is  a  principle,  a  spirit,  which  can  take  this  shape 
or  that :  it  can  be  found  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  faring  sumptuously  every  day,  or 
in  the  rags  and  self-denials  of  the  anchorite.  The  world,  then,  may  lie  in  the  pre- 
dominance of  things  seen  and  temporal.  The  Bible  is  full  of  examples  of  this,  set 
out  for  our  learning  by  a  Divine  hand.  There  was  the  sunny-haired  Samson,  with 
a  high  commission  and  a  noble  energy,  forgetting  the  great  work  he  had  to  do  in 
the  indulgence  of  the  passion  of  the  moment ;  there  was  Esau,  who,  to  satisfy  the 
hunger  of  the  hour,  flung  away  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  When  Satan 
said  to  our  blessed  Lord,  "  All  these  things  will  I  give  Thee  if  thou  wUt  faU  down 
and  worship  me,"  he  pitched  the  temptation  upon  the  same  principle  ;  its  force  lay 
in  the  power  of  the  seen  and  temporal  to  obscure  the  unseen  and  eternal.  Worldli- 
ness lies  in  the  predominance  of  self,  that  inseparable  foe,  that  idol  of  the  heart 
which  men  carry  with  them  wherever  they  go.  The  world,  too,  is  found  in  the 
predominance  of  the  world  of  men,  that  care  for  human  opinion,  for  the  judgment 
of  our  fellows  which  brings  with  it  unreahty,  eye-service,  and  a  disregard  to  the 
supreme  will  of  God.  This  spirit  makes  men  at  once  cowardly  and  audacious, 
filling  them  with  the  fear  of  man  and  yet  making  them  regardless  of  the  fear  of 
God.  We  have  it  exemplified  in  Saul,  king  of  Israel,  that  strange  sad  union  of 
strength  and  weakness,  magnanimity  and  folly.  He  had  sinned  by  directly  dis- 
obeying the  Divine  command ;  but  when  he  hears  his  sentence  from  the  lips  of 
Samuel  he  grieves  over  the  dishonour  which  might  accrue  to  himself  far  more  than 
over  his  sin  against  the  Most  High  :  "  I  have  sinned,  yet  honour  me  now,  I  pray 
thee,  before  the  elders  of  Israel."  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees 
beUeved  on  Him  ?  "  that  is,  "  has  Christ  become  respectable  ?  have  the  fashionable 
party — the  men  in  power — accepted  Him  ?  If  they  have,  then  will  we,  but  not 
otherwise."  This  drew  from  our  Lord  the  strong  exclamation,  "  How  can  ye 
believe  which  receive  honour  one  of  another,  and  seek  not  the  honour  which  cometh. 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  417 

from  God  only  ?  "     This  form  of  worldliness  is  one  of  the  deadliest  enemies  of  the 
truth.    Everywhere  it  is  potent  to  keep  men  from  Christ.     U.  How  is  it  to  be 
ovEECOME  ?     This  is  a  pressing  question  for  every  one  who  thinks  seriously.     How 
is  it  to  be  kept  out  of  my  heart,  how  shall  I  be  kept  in  the  world  and  yet  not  of  it  ? 
"  This  is  the  victory,  even  our  faith."     This  meets  the  world,  not  in  any  particular 
form  of  it,  but  in  the  heart  where  its  real  root  is.     Take  this  principle,  faith  the 
world's  victor,  in  the  lower  sphere,  and  it  is  true.    Faith,  a  strong  over-mastering 
conviction,  even  though  a  poor  one,  has  a  wonderful  power  to  lift  men  above  the 
world,  above  themselves.     But  it  is  not  of  faith  in  a  general  way  that  John  speaks. 
It  is  of  "  our  faith,"  a  faith  born  of  God,  a  faith  that  lays  hold  of  Jesus  Christ,  a 
faith  that  works  by  love ;  it  is  faith  in  a  person,  that  is,  trust  in  Jesus  Christ.     This 
is  the  Divine  remedy  for  the  power  of  worldliness.     It  meets  the  love  of  the  world 
with  another  love,  a  mightier,  higher,  nobler  love — the  love  of  Jesus  Christ.     How 
wonderfully  this  great  principle  of  faith,  fixed  on  the  Saviour,  can  meet  each  of  the 
three  great  forms  of  worldliness  which  have  been  dehneated !     We  are  in  danger  of 
being  absorbed  in  the  present,  in  the  things  which  we  taste  and  touch  and  handle ; 
but  if  we  receive  Christ  into  our  hearts  what  do  we  get  with  Him  ?    Eternal  life, 
the  opening  prospect  of  glory,  honour,  immortahty.     He  enables  us  to  "  die  daUy," 
because  of  the  eternity  with  Christ  beyond  the  veil.     See,  too,  how  faith  in  Christ 
helps  a  man  to  conquer  himself  as  nothing  else  can.     The  ascetic,  who  proclaims 
upon  the  housetops  his  self-abnegation,  yet  worships  himself ;  but  when  a  man  can 
say,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  then  Christ  has  become  the  inmate 
of  that  heart  and  the  centre  of  that  life.    Again,  that  sensitiveness  to  human 
opinion,  that  love  of  praise,  can  be  put  under  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  because  in 
Him  we  have  brought  close  to  us  the  pure  atmosphere  of  heaven,  where  the  one  aim 
and  desire  is  to  obtain  the  approval  of  God.     Thus  everything  is  moved  up  into  a 
higher  sphere,  and  the  objects  of  life  are  seen  in  a  true  perspective.    But  this  is 
not  all,  for  us  in  our  weakness  and  guilt  and  cowardice,  there  is  another  side  to  this 
truth,  a  side  higher  than  that  which  lies  in  the  natural  action  of  faith.    For  the 
poorest,  weakest,  darkest  souls  that  with  much  trembling  lay  hold  of  Jesus  Christ, 
His  strength  is  pledged.     His  might  becomes  their  might.     A  man  who  soberly 
measures  the  forces  of  the  world  about  him,  who  has  any  experience  of  the  fickle 
shifting  nature  of  his  own  heart,  may  well  feel  how  helpless  he  is  to  overcome  the 
world.     Yes,  but  you  are  not  alone.     The  great  Captain  of  Salvation  will  fight  for 
you,  with  you,  in  you.    Finally,  it  is  only  those  who  overcome  the  world  by  faith 
who  know  rightly  how  to  use  it.     Look  at  the  Lord  Himself.     "  I,"  said  He,  "  have 
overcome  the  world."     He  gives  the  pattern  of  an  absolutely  unworldly  life,  and 
what  sort  of  life  was  His  ?     The  lilies  pleased  Him,  the  birds  sang  sweetly  to  Him» 
the  social  gathering  welcomed  Him,  the  children  climbed  fearlessly  upon  His  knee, 
sorrowful  faces  broke  into  sunshine  when  He  came.      He  used  the  world  as  not 
abusing  it.     Depend  upon  it  we  must  either  conquer  or  be  conquered — we  must  be 
the  slaves  of  the  world  or  its  masters.     Which  shall  it  be  ?     (-B.  Medley.)         The 
faith  which  overcomes  the  world  : — I.  Faith  is  the  divinely  appointed  medium  fob 
THE  CONVEYANCE  OF  God's  POWER  TO  US.     We  aic  joincd  to  Christ  by  faith  and  love 
both ;  but  let  us  now  distinguish  their  respective  functions.     The  first  breath  of  the 
Christian  life  is  faith ;  love  is  subsequent.     The  unalterable  condition  of  salvation 
is  faith,  not  love.     The  condition  required  for  Pentecostal  power  was  faith.     So  all 
the  gifts  of  God  are  according  to  our  faith.     But  here  is  the  distinction  :  faith  is 
the  receptive  attitude,  love  the  distributive.    Love  sacrifices,  faith  appropriates. 
Faith  is  before,  love  after  a  great  blessing.     They  form  really  the  same  wire  in 
complete  circuit,  but  faith  is  the  current  our  way,  love  the  return  to  God.     We  oan 
easily  penetrate  to  the  philosophy  which  makes  faith  the  medium  of  receiving.    It 
is  such  a  medium  between  man  and  man  of  that  which  belongs  to  spirit  and  cha- 
racter.    The  man  in  whom  I  beheve  influences  me  most  and  makes  my  character. 
I  may  love  another  far  more,  but  unless  I  also  give  my  confidence  to  Imn  or  have 
faith  in  him  he  does  not  mould  me.    Faith  in  this  marvellous  way  takes  the  being 
it  clings  to  into  our  innermost  nature  and  gladly  surrenders  to  him.     It  alone  truly 
expels  haughtiness  and  pride,  which,  whUe  they  exist,  make  it  impossible  to  save. 
With  no  more  faith  in  Him  than  in  Socrates  or  Seneca,  they  are  never  saved  nor  even 
sensibly  influenced  by  the  Spirit  of  Jesus.     Faith  alone,  and  there  is  no  substitute 
whatever,  completes  the  preparation  of  the  heart  for  Christ.    At  the  same  time  it 
gives  Him  most  agreeable  and  wondrous  honour.     Faith  is  the  coronation  of  Jesus 
in  the  heart.     Faith  is  the  only  basis  for  co-working  with  God.     Man  selects  a 
business  partner  whom  he  can  trust,  not  because  he  is  his  bosom  friend  nor  because 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

he  passionately  loves  him.  He  must  believe  in  him.  So  will  man  call  upon  God 
to  be  his  partner  in  all  the  affairs  of  life  only  when  he  has  faith.  And  all  our 
qualifications  for  co-operating  with  God  come  by  faith.  God's  great  workers  were 
all  men  of  mighty  faith.  II.  To  have  and  to  hold  such  faith  is  itself  an  inspir- 
ing VICTORY.  It  is  called  ' '  victory,"  faith,  and  its  abiding  in  the  soul  denotes  a 
complete  rout  of  self-sufficiency,  that  conceit  of  little  souls  and  that  real  delusion  of 
great  ones  ;  it  proclaims  that  the  reign  of  the  senses  and  of  sense-fettered  reason  is 
over !  The  man  of  faith  has  already  overcome  a  vast  world  within  himself,  which 
the  sinful  world  outside  had  made  by  hardening  and  blinding.  What  declarations 
there  are  concerning  this  faith  !  There  is  a  characteristic  of  that  faith  which  best 
pleased  Jesus  not  to  be  overlooked.  It  goes  beyond  express  promises  to  the  love  and 
the  power  of  God.  The  promises  are  in  human  language  painfully  inadequate. 
From  them  bold  faith  gathers  its  original  conceptions  of  Jesus,  and  here  the  Cen- 
turion and  the  Syrophenician  woman  distanced  all  the  Jews  and  saw,  the  one  the 
possibihties  of  Omnipotence,  the  other  the  fulness  of  love.  {C.  Roads.)  Victorious 
in  the  ivorld  by  faith  : — In  nature  you  will  find  a  wonderful  illustration  of  separation 
in  the  life  of  the  water-spider.  That  wonderful  little  creature  needs  air  to  breathe, 
as  we  do,  and  yet  it  lives  in  its  cocoon  under  water,  and  enjoys  life.  Why  is  this? 
Because  in  a  peculiar  way  it  takes  beneath  the  surface  supplies  of  fresh  air  with 
which  to  fill  its  cocoon,  and  just  breathes  an  atmosphere  of  its  own,  surrounded  all 
the  time  with  an  alien  element,  which,  if  it  rushed  in,  would  speedily  kill  the  little 
creature.  (F.  C.  Spurr.)  Soldiers  of  the  overcomer  : — Believers  !  forget  it  not  I 
You  are  the  soldiers  of  tne  overcomer.  (J.  H.  Evans.)  Faith  conquering  worldli- 
ness  : — His  mouth  will  not  water  after  homely  provisions,  that  hath  lately  tasted  of 
delicate  sustenance.  {J.  Trapp.)  Conquering  faith  : — A  believer  walketh  about 
the  world  as  a  conqueror.  He  saith  of  these  things  here  below,  as  Socrates  did 
when  he  came  into  a  fair,  and  saw  there  sundry  commodities  to  be  sold,  as  another 
said,  I  neither  have  these  things,  nor  need  them,  nor  care  for  them.  (Ibid.)  The 
nobility  of  faith  a  defence  : — Children  admire  gawds  and  gewgaws ;  but  let  a  noble- 
man that  hath  been  used  to  the  pomp  and  bravery  of  the  court,  pass  by  a  whole 
stall  of  such  toys  and  trifles,  he  never  casts  his  eye  towards  them.  (Ibid.)  Faith 
overcoming  the  world  : — When  a  traveller  was  asked  whether  he  did  not  admire  the 
admirable  structure  of  some  stately  building,  "  No,"  said  he,  "  for  I've  been  at 
Rome,  where  better  are  to  be  seen  everyday."  Oh,  believer,  if  the  world  tempt  thee 
with  its  rare  sights  and  curious  prospects,  thou  mayest  well  scorn  them,  having 
been,  by  contemplation,  in  heaven,  and  being  able,  by  faith,  to  see  infinitely 
better  delights  every  hour  of  the  day.  "  This  is  the  victory  which  overcometh 
the  world,  even  our  faith."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  6.  This  is  He  that  came  by  water  and  blood,  even  Jesus  Christ. — Christ 
coming  by  water  and  blood : — 1.  There  was  living  then  at  Ephesus  a  conspicuous 
and  enterprising  teacher,  whom  not  a  few  were  likely  to  regard  as  more  profound 
and  philosophical  than  St.  John,  who  himself,  very  probably,  looked  down  with 
superb  indulgence  on  the  aged  Galilean  as  pious  enough  in  his  simple  way,  but 
quite  uncultured,  without  any  speculative  ability, — with  crude  and  unspiritual  views 
of  God  and  the  universe,  and  wholly  unfit  to  interpret  Hebraic  ideas  to  men  who 
had  breathed  the  air  of  Gnostic  wisdom.  "  One  confusion,"  he  would  say,  "  which 
John  makes,  must  be  most  carefully  avoided :  you  must  draw  a  sharp  distinction 
between  '  Jesus '  and  '  Christ.'  '  Jesus '  was  simply  a  man  eminent  for  wisdom  and 
goodness,  but  not  supernaturally  born, — on  whom,  at  His  baptism,  a  heavenly  power 
called  '  Christ '  descended,  to  use  Him  as  an  instrument  for  revealing  truth  and 
working  miracles,  but  to  depart  from  Him  before  He  suffered  and  died."  Now 
St.  John  contradicts  this  absolutely.  He  insists  that  Jesus  is  Christ,  that  Jesus, 
who  is  Christ,  is  also  the  Son  of  God.  "  You  must,"  he  says  in  effect,  "  be  quite 
clear  in  your  minds  on  this  point;  Cerinthus  has  tried  to  break  up  one  Person  into 
two ;  you  must  keep  no  terms  with  that  theory  of  separation ;  you  must  hold  to  the 
truth  of  the  oneness.  This  one  Jesus  Christ  came  by  water  and  blood ;  that  is.  His 
Baptism  and  His  Passion  were  means  to  the  end  for  which  He  came.  The  self- 
same Person  who  stooped  to  the  waters  of  Jordan  gave  up  His  blood  to  be  shed  for 
us  on  Golgotha.  This  is  He,  the  one  indivisible  Christ,  in  whom  to  believe  is  to 
overcome  the  world."  2.  But  then  comes  in,  we  may  be  sure,  a  reference  to  under- 
lying spiritual  realities.  Water  and  blood,  in  connection  with  Christ,  could  not  but 
be  invested  in  St.  John's  mind  with  the  ideas  of  cleansing  and  of  propitiation,  as 
when  he  saw  the  gush  of  blood  and  water  from  the  side  of  the  sacred  body  he  was 


CHAP.  T.]  I.  JOHN.  419 

apparently  struck  with  a  combination  which  seemed  to  present  in  a  kind  of 
symbolical  unity  the  purifying  and  the  atoning  aspect  of  Christ's  work.  Many  will 
accept  Christ  as  a  peerless  model  of  conduct,  and  wiU  honestly  desire  to  guide  their 
lives  by  the  rule  of  His  ethical  teaching,  who  yet  recoil  from  the  mystery  of  what 
the  apostles  caU  "  propitiation,"  and  explain  away  the  emphasis  with  which  apostles 
attribute  virtue  to  His  "  blood."  And  yet  the  theory  which  reduces  the  Atonement 
to  a  signal  display  of  sympathy,  whereby  One  who  was  Himself  sinless  identified 
Himself  with  the  shame  and  misery  of  sinners  in  order  to  reclaim  them,  will  be 
found  to  impair  the  belief  in  our  Saviour's  personal  Divinity,  and  fails  to  account 
for,  or  to  justify,  the  mass  of  varied  language  by  which  Scripture  conveys  to  us  the 
significance  of  His  death.  No,  believe  it,  both  sides  of  truth  are  indispensable ;  our 
Lord  was  given  "  to  be  a  sacrifice " ;  and  also  to  be  "  an  example "  ;  and  the 
dependence  of  purification  on  the  Atonement  may  at  least  be  illustrated  by  the  order 
of  those  words,  "  forthwith  out  of  His  side  came  blood  and  water."  3.  But  yet  once 
more  :  when  we  hear  that  He  "  came  by  water  and  blood,"  it  is  well-nigh  impossible 
not  to  think  of  that  great  ordinance  in  which  water  is  made  the  "  eifectual  sign," 
that  is,  the  organ  or  instrument,  of  a  new  birth ;  and  of  that  still  greater  rite  which 
embodies  for  us,  in  a  concrete  form,  the  new  and  "  better  covenant,"  and  in  which, 
as  St.  Augustine  says,  we  "  drink  that  which  was  paid  for  us."  By  the  mercifully 
considerate  provision  of  Him  who  is  God  and  man  for  us  who  have  souls  and  bodies, 
the  sacraments  of  the  gospel,  with  their  outward  forms  and  inward  gifts,  are  the 
chief  means  whereby  His  purifying  and  propitiating  action  is  applied  to  those  on 
whose  behalf  He  came.  The  whole  thought,  then,  unfolds  itself  symmetrically ;  the 
events  of  Christ's  baptism  and  death  call  up  the  idea  of  His  twofold  spiritual 
activity,  which  again  presents  itself  in  close  revealed  connection  with  the  "  laver  " 
or  font  of  our  "  regeneration,"  and  with  the  cup  which  conveys  to  us  the  blood  of 
the  Great  Sacrifice,  and  which,  from  that  point  of  view,  may  naturally  be  taken  to 
represent  "  both  kinds "  of  the  Holy  Eucharist.  And  here,  too,  the  warning 
sentence  may  be  needed.  The  baptized  Churchman  who  is  not  a  communicant 
would  do  well  to  remember  that  Christ  came  not  with  water  only,  but  with  water 
and  blood.      {W.  Bright,  D.D.)  The  water  and  the  blood : — By  the  form  of  the 

expression,  "  not  by  water  only,"  it  is  implied  that  there  are  two  beliefs 
as  to  the  object  of  Jesus  Christ's  coming  into  the  world — one  of  them  going 
beyond  the  other,  and  taking  in  something  that  the  other  leaves  out.  There  were 
probably  those  then,  there  are  certainly  those  now,  who  would  have  no  difiiculty  in 
accepting  the  main  facts  of  Christ's  birth  and  biography,  would  admit  Him  to  be  a 
memorable  teacher,  a  reformer  of  society,  a  leader  among  moraUsts  and  philanthro- 
pists ;  but  they  would  allow  nothing  further  in  His  claims,  as  the  Head  of  the 
Church  or  the  Saviour  of  mankind.  They  would  probably  declare  that  nothing 
further  was  needed  to  make  men  all  that  they  ought  to  be.  But  they  were  wrong. 
Four  thousand  years  of  Jewish  and  Gentile  self-righteousness  had  proved  that  there 
is  no  self-recovering  power  in  humanity  alone.  First  the  "water."  Water  is  the 
emblem  of  spiritual  purification,  because  it  is  the  common  instrument  of  outward 
washing.  Our  Lord  Himself,  who  was  able  to  set  all  symbols  and  all  forms  aside 
if  He  chose,  went  down  into  the  water,  at  the  beginning  of  His  life's  work,  in  order, 
we  are  told,  that  He  might  fulfil  all  righteousness.  He  "  came  by  water."  "  Go 
teach  the  nations  of  the  earth  and  baptize  them"  with  water,  was  His  last 
commission,  when  His  work  was  done.  So  it  is  that  each  individual  Christian  Ufe, 
as  well  as  the  whole  body  of  Christ,  after  Him,  came  "  by  water."  Why  is  this? 
Because  one  great  part  of  our  Saviour's  work  is  to  puriiy  men's  lives.  He  was 
baptized  with  their  baptism,  and  they  with  His.  The  world  was  to  sneer  at  Him, 
and  spit  upon  Him,  in  spite  of  His  purity :  in  being  holy  for  them  He  will  also  be 
washed  with  them.  He  "  came  by  water."  Accordingly  one  great  part  of  the 
power  of  Christ  among  men,  through  the  gospel  and  the  Church,  is  the  cleansing 
away  of  moral  corruptions.  "  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself." 
Stains  on  the  hps,  the  hands,  the  habits ;  stains  on  social  courtesies,  domestic 
dispositions,  and  even  on  Church  observances ;  worst  of  all,  stains  on  the  sacred 
temple  walls  of  the  soul  itself — these  aU  have  to  be  washed  away.  Christ  came  to 
cleanse  His  followers  from  aU  unrighteousness.  He  "  came  by  water."  But  now 
shall  we  not  only  say,  "  This  is  true,"  but  shaU  we  go  on  to  say,  "  This  is  aU  that 
our  Saviour  gives  us,  and  this  is  the  whole  of  His  gospel :  Christianity  is  a  system 
of  moral  education  and  rehgious  improvement ;  nothing  more "  ?  "  This  is  He 
that  came  by  water  and  blood ;  not  by  water  only,  but  by  water  and  blood."  The 
daily  sacrifice  of  four  thousand  preparatory  years  had  presignified  it  to  a  waiting 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

world.  As  the  passion-flower  sprang  out  of  the  common  earth,  and  held  up  its 
bright  blossom  and  natural  image  of  the  iree  at  Calvary,  ages  before  the  real  Cross 
was  planted  in  its  soil,  so  the  passion-prom;  se  of  prophecy  bloomed  in  the  expectant 
faith  of  the  race  at  the  very  gates  of  Edf  n.  The  serpent  had  polluted  Paradise ; 
but  after  all,  the  woman's  seed  should  bruisi  the  serpent's  head.  Man  knew  from 
the  beginning  that  he  must  have  a  Saviour  to  look  to,  or  humanity  itself  would  die. 
Somewhere  among  the  sons  of  men  there  must  be  One  Perfect  Obedience,  One 
Sufficient  Sacrifice,  needing  not,  like  those  shadowy  sacrifices  which  prepared  the 
way,  to  be  often  offered,  but  "  once  offered."  Then  a  living  and  loving  faith  in  Him 
will  work  out  the  true  and  healing  life  in  every  believing  heart.  "  There  is  a 
fountain  opened  for  sin,  and  for  uncleanness  "  ;  but  it  is  not  a  water  fountain. 
Only  he  who  doeth  the  deeds  of  the  Law — so  it  reads — will  Uve  by  them.  Who  of 
us  has  done  them  ?  Where  are  we  then  if  there  is  "  water  only,"  example  and 
precept  only,  commandments  only,  sorrow  upon  sorrow  when  they  are  broken,  and 
the  breaking  repeated  stiU  ?  Among  the  most  remarkable  of  Overbeck's  striking 
series  of  pictures  illustrating  the  life  of  Jesus,  there  is  one  that  represents  Him  as  a 
Child  in  the  carpenter's  shop.  Like  other  children,  He  has  been  playing  with  the 
tools,  and  has  taken  up  the  saw.  A  look  of  solemnity  passes  over  His  radiant  face ; 
and  by  the  shadow  that  falls  on  the  floor  underneath  you  see  that  the  block  of  wood 
He  is  sawing  out  is  taking  the  shape  of  a  cross.  Joseph  looks  on  in  a  kind  of 
perplexed  reverence,  and  the  Virgin-mother  by  His  side  with  a  sad  admiration,  as  if 
Simeon's  prediction  were  already  beginning  to  have  its  accomplishment,  and  the 
sword  were  piercing  her  own  soul  also.  This  is  not  imagination;  it  is  rather 
interpretation.  The  artist  is  only  an  expositor  of  the  evangelist.  "  This  is  He  that 
came  by  water  and  blood."  From  the  outset  of  His  personal  ministry — as  it  had 
been  from  the  foundation  of  the  world — the  Saviour  was  pointing  to  the  sacrifice, — 
journeying  always  towards  Calvary.  Other  prophets  and  reformers  had  come  "  by 
water,"  preaching  purification  for  the  future.  He  alone  came  "  by  blood,"  giving, 
in  Himself,  atonement  for  past  and  future  both.  {Bp.  Huntington.)  Redemption 
by  hlood : — I.  This  is  He  that  came  by  water.  Our  Lord  came  from  GaUlee  to 
Jordan,  a  lengthened  journey,  for  the  purpose  of  being  baptized.  This  shows  the 
importance  of  the  ordinance.  JI.  This  is  He  that  came  by  blood — not  by  water 
ONLY,  but  by  water  AND  BLOOD.  The  manner  in  which  this  announcement  is  made, 
is  weU  fitted  to  impress  us  with  its  importance.  The  blood  is  noticed  with  peculiar 
emphasis.  Lnportant  as  it  was,  that  "  Christ  came  by  water,"  it  was  still  more  so 
that  "He  came  by  blood."  By  the  one  He  undertook  the  work,  but  by  the  other 
He  executed  it.     1.  Christ  came  by  blood  that  the  prophecies  might  be  fulfilled. 

2.  Christ  came  by  blood,   and  so  accomplished  the  design  of  the  ancient  law. 

3.  When  Christ  came  by  blood  He  secured  all  the  blessings  of  redemption  for  His 
people.  4.  When  He  came  by  blood  He  opened  up  a  way  of  access  for  the  sinner 
to  God  and  to  glory.  HI.  The  confirmation  of  the  Spirit's  testimony.  "And 
it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because  the  Spirit  is  truth."  The  witness 
of  the  Spirit  was  borne  to  Christ  during  the  whole  period  of  His  ministry.  But  the 
witness  of  which  the  text  speaks  points  to  that  which  was  borne  by  the  Spirit  after 
the  death  of  Christ.  It  began  with  His  resurrection.  He  was  "  quickened  by  the 
Spirit "  on  the  third,  the  appointed  day.  And  oh,  what  a  glorious  testimony  was 
borne  to  Him  then  (Col.  ii.  15 ;  Kom.  i.  4).  This  testimony  was  continued  in  His 
ascension.  During  His  sojourn  of  forty  days  on  earth,  subsequent  to  His 
resurrection,  Jesus  spoke  much  of  the  Spirit  to  His  disciples.  Then,  in  due  time, 
was  the  Spirit  poured  out  from  on  high.  On  the  Day  of  Pentecost  He  came  in 
"  a  rushingmighty  wind,  and  in  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire."  By  the  transactions 
of  that  day  the  triumphs  of  the  Saviour  were  manifested  to  all.  Nor  did  the  Spirit 
then  cease  His  testimony.  He  continued  and  increased  it  in  the  ministry  of  the 
apostles  (Mark  xvi.  20).  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  water  and  the  blood ;  or 
complete  purification : — The  design  of  Christ's  death  was  to  procure  both  the 
justification  and  sanctification  of  the  Church.  I.  The  first  part  of  this  design  is 
declared  by  St.  John,  in  this  epistle  (chap  i.  7).  Cleansing  is  a  term  which 
supposes  defilement;  and  sin  is,  in  Scripture,  represented  as  horribly  defiling, 
rendering  the  soul  impure,  odious,  and  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  is 
perfectly  pure  and  holy.  If  we  are  duly  sensible  of  our  sinful  defilement,  we  shall 
certainly  be  anxious  for  cleansing.  And  how  can  this  be  obtained  ?  The  tears  of 
repentance  will  not  wash  away  our  sins.  Nor  is  mere  reformation  and  moral 
improvement  sufficient.  But,  behold  the  Divine  provision  I  Behold  the  precious 
blood  issuing  from  the  wounded  side  of  the  Son  of  God !    The  blood  of  which  we 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  421 

speak,  procures  the  justification  of  all  who  believe.  We  are  said  to  be  "  justified 
through  faith  Ih  His  (Christ's)  blood  "  ;  elsewhere,  to  be  "  brought  nigh  by  His 
blood  "  ;  and  again,  to  be  "  redeemed  by  His  blood  "  ;  and  to  be  "  washed  from  our 
sins  in  His  blood."  But  it  is  "through  faith"  that  we  are  thus  justified;  Jesus 
Christ  is  "  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  "  :  but  it  is  "  through  faith  in  His  blood  "  ; 
it  must  be  received  by  every  man,  for  himself,  in  particular.  The  perfect  efficacy 
of  this  blood  is  frequently  expressed  in  Scripture  in  very  strong  terms  :  "  I  have 
blotted  out,"  saith  God,  "  thy  sins,  as  a  thick  cloud."  "  Though  your  sins  be  as 
scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow."  Yea,  saith  the  penitent  psalmist,  "  Wash 
me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow  "  ;  and  again,  "  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the 
west,  so  far  hath  He  removed  our  transgressions  from  us."  "  This  is  He  that  came 
by  blood."  H.  This  is  He  that  came  by  water.  This  signifies  a  second  blesssed 
effect  of  the  death  of  Christ,  the  sanctification  of  believers,  in  virtue  of  that  death. 
1.  It  is  by  the  mediation  of  Christ,  meritoriously.  We  owe  to  Jesus  Christ  the 
renovation  of  our  nature  in  the  image  of  God  ;  for  He  died  to  "bring  us  to  God  "  ; 
to  "  redeem  us  to  God "  (Eph.  v.  25,  27).  2.  It  is  through  faith  in  Christ, 
instrumentally.  3.  But  it  is  efficiently,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  believers  are 
sanctified.  4.  The  sanctification  of  believers  is  promoted  by  the  means  of  grace,  as 
rehgious  ordinances  of  Divine  appointment  are  properly  called.  5.  To  these 
we  may  add,  the  various  afflictions  with  which  God,  in  His  holy  providence, 
visits  His  people.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  reflect,  with  becoming  humiUty, 
on  our  natural  defilement.  2.  If  we  are  by  nature  thus  defiled,  how  necessary 
is  it  that  we  should  be  cleansed  ?  3.  Let  beUevers  in  Christ,  already  sancti- 
fied in  part,  still  look  to  Jesus  for  further  supplies  of  grace.  (G.  Burder.) 
And  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because  the  Spirit  is  truth. — Grounds 
of  faith  in  the  resurrection  : — It  is  natural  to  ask.  What  is  the  evidence  that  Christ 
did  really  rise  from  the  dead  ?  St.  John  says,  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth 
witness."  St.  John,  indeed,  is  speaking  immediately  of  that  faith  in  our  Lord's 
eternal  Sonship  which  overcomes  the  world.  But  since  the  resurrection  is  the  main 
proof  of  our  Lord's  Divinity,  it  follows  that  the  Spirit  must  also  bear  witness  to  the 
resurrection.  And  He  does  this  in  two  ways.  It  is  His  work,  that  those  historical 
proofs  of  the  resurrection  which  have  come  down  to  us,  and  which  address  them- 
selves to  our  natural  reasoning  faculties,  have  been  marshalled,  recognised,  pre- 
served, transmitted  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  He  bears  another  witness,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  by  His  action,  not  so  much  on  the  intelligence,  as  on  the  will  of  the 
believing  Christian.     I.  In  order  to  know  that  our  Lord  did  really  rise  from 

THE   DEAD,  WE    HAVE    TO    SATISFY   OURSELVES    THAT    THREE    DISTINCT   QUESTIONS    CAN   BE 

ANSWERED.  1.  Whether  Jesus  Christ  did  really  die  upon  the  Cross.  The  wonder 
is  not  that  He  died  when  He  did,  after  hanging  for  three  hours  in  agony,  but  that, 
after  all  His  sufferings  at  the  hands  of  the  soldiers  and  the  populace,  before  His 
crucifixion,  He  should  have  lived  so  long.  Yet  suppose  that  what  looked  like  death 
on  the  Cross  was  only  a  fainting-fit.  Would  He  have  survived  the  wound  in  His 
side,  inflicted  by  the  soldier's  lance,  through  which  the  blood  yet  remaining  in  His 
heart  and  the  water  of  the  pericardium  escaped  ?  But  suppose,  against  all  this 
evidence,  that  when  Jesus  was  taken  down  from  the  Cross,  He  was  still  living.  Then 
He  must  have  been  suffocated  by  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  and  Nicodemus  when  they 
embalmed  Him.  The  Jews  carefully  inspected  and  sealed  His  tomb :  they  had 
sentinels  placed  there  ;  and  were  satisfied  that  the  work  was  thoroughly  done.  To 
do  them  justice,  the  Jews  have  never  denied  the  reality  of  our  Lord's  death;  it  ia 
impossible  to  do  so,  without  paradox.  2.  Whether  the  disciples  did  not  take  our 
Lord's  dead  body  out  of  His  sepulchre.  (1)  They  would  not  have  wished  to  do  it. 
Why  should  they  ?  They  either  believed  that  He  would  rise  from  the  dead,  or  they 
did  not.  If  they  did  believe  it,  they  would  have  shrunk  from  disturbing  His  grave, 
as  from  an  act  not  less  unnecessary  than  profane.  If  they  did  not  believe  in  it,  and 
instead  of  abandoning  themselves  to  unreflecting  grief,  allowed  themselves  to  think 
steadily,  what  must  have  been  their  estimate  of  their  dead  Master  ?  They  must 
now  have  thought  of  Him  as  of  one  who  had  deceived  them,  or  who  was  Himself 
deceived.  On  either  supposition,  why  should  they  rouse  the  anger  of  the  Jews,  and 
incur  the  danger  of  swift  and  heavy  punishment  ?  (2)  But  had  they  desired,  they 
surely  would  not  have  dared  it.  Until  Pentecost,  they  were,  by  their  own  account, 
very  timid  men.  (3)  And,  once  more,  had  they  desired  and  dared  to  remove  our 
Lord's  body  from  its  grave,  such  a  feat  was  obviously  beyond  their  power.  The 
tomb  was  guarded  by  soldiers.  3.  The  amount  of  positive  testimony  which  goes  to 
show  that  Jesus  Christ  did  rise  from  the  dead.     (1)  The  witness  of  all  the  apostles. 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  y. 

They  gave  their  lives  in  attestation  of  this  fact.  Their  conduct  after  the  day  of 
Pentecost  is  throughout  that  of  men  whose  trustworthiness  and  sincerity  of  purpose 
are  beyond  dispute.  (2)  The  testimony  of  a  large  number  of  persons  besides  the 
apostles.  Take  the  case  of  the  three  thousand  converts  on  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
They  had  unrivalled  opportunities  for  satisfying  themselves  of  its  being  a  reality  or 
a  fiction.  Yet  at  the  risk  of  comfort,  position,  nay,  life,  they  publicly  professed  their 
belief  in  its  truth.  Or  consider  the  case  of  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  and  more 
persons  still  living  when  St.  Paul  wrote  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  who 
had  seen  the  risen  Jesus  on  one  occasion  during  the  forty  days.  Five  hundred 
persons  could  not  be  simultaneously  deluded.  Their  testimony  would  be  considered 
decisive  as  to  any  ordinary  occurrence,  where  men  wished  only  to  ascertain  the 
simple  truth.    II.  The  fokce  of  this  body  of  testimony  is  not  really  weakened 

BY  objections  WHICH  DO  NOT  DIRECTLY  CHALLENGE  IT,  AND  WHICH  TURN  ON  ACCES- 
SORY OR  SUBORDINATE  POINTS.  1.  For  instaucc,  it  is  said  that  the  evangehcal 
accounts  of  the  resurrection  itself,  and  of  our  Lord's  subsequent  appearances,  are 
difficult  to  reconcile  with  each  other.  At  first  sight  they  are  ;  but  only  at  first  sight. 
In  order  to  reconcile  them  two  things  are  necessary :  first,  patience,  and  secondly, 
a  determination  to  exclude  everything  from  the  narrative  which  does  not  lie  in  the 
text  of  the  Gospels.  The  differences  are  just  what  might  be  expected  in  four 
narratives  of  the  same  event,  composed  at  different  periods,  by  different  authors, 
who  had  distinct  sources  of  information  at  command.  Each  says  what  he  has  to 
say  with  blunt  and  simple  directness,  without  an  eye  to  the  statements  of  the 
others,  or  to  the  possible  comment  of  hostile  critics.  2.  It  is,  further,  objected  that 
the  resurrection  was  not  sufficiently  public.  Jesus  Christ  ought  to  have  left  His 
grave,  so  it  is  urged,  in  the  sight  of  a  crowd  of  lookers-on ;  and,  when  risen.  He 
ought  to  have  hastened  to  show  Himself  to  the  persons  least  likely  to  believe  in 
His  resurrection — to  the  Jews  at  large,  to  the  high  priests,  to  Pilate,  to  His 
executioners.  (1)  Here  it  is  obvious,  first  of  all,  that  the  guards  may  very  well 
have  seen  Jesus  leave  His  tomb.  Scripture  says  nothing  on  the  point.  But  they 
were  terrified,  almost  to  death,  at  the  sight  of  the  angel  of  the  sepulchre.  Any 
number  of  witnesses  who  had  been  present  would  have  been  as  much  frightened  as 
were  the  guards.  (2)  Nor  is  the  old  objection  of  Celsus,  that  Jesus  Christ  ought  to 
have  shown  Himself  to  the  Jews  and  to  His  judges  in  order  to  rebuke  their  unbehef, 
more  reasonable.  Had  He  appeared  to  the  chief  priests,  would  they  have  believed 
in  Him  ?  Would  they  not  have  denied  His  identity,  or  argued  that  a  devil  had  taken 
His  form  before  their  eyes,  just  as  of  old  they  had  ascribed  His  miracles  to  Beelze- 
bub ?  The  Jews  had  ample  opportunities  of  ascertaining  that  the  resurrection  was 
a  fact,  if  they  had  desired  to  do  so.  But  as  it  was,  they  were  not  in  a  mood  to  be 
convinced,  even  by  the  evidence  of  their  senses.  (3)  Far  deeper  than  these  objec- 
tions is  that  which  really  lies  against  aU  miracles  whatever,  as  being  at  variance 
with  that  conception  of  a  rigid  uniformity  in  the  processes  of  nature,  which  is  one 
of  the  intellectual  fashions  of  our  day.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  any  idea  of  natural 
law  which  is  held  to  make  a  miracle  impossible,  is  also  inconsistent  with  belief 
in  the  existence  of  God.  III.  Here,  then,  we  are  coming  round  to  the  point  from 
which  we  started.     For  it  is  natural  to  ask.  Why,  if  the  resurrection  can  be 

PROVED    BY    evidence    SO    GENERALLY   SUFFICIENT,  IT    WAS    AT    THE   TIME,  AND    IS  STILL, 

rejected  BY  A  GREAT  MANY  INTELLIGENT  MEN?  The  auswcr  to  this  natural  and 
legitimate  question  is  of  practical  importance  to  all  of  us.  There  can,  I  apprehend, 
be  no  sort  of  doubt  that  if  an  ordinary  historical  occurrence,  such  as  the  death  of 
Julius  Caesar,  were  attested  as  clearly  as  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord — not  more 
clearly,  nor  less — as  having  taken  place  nineteen  centuries  ago,  all  the  world  would 
believe  it  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  reason  why  the  resurrection  was  not  always 
beUeved  upon  the  evidence  of  those  who  witnessed  to  it  is,  because  to  believe  it  means, 
for  a  consistent  and  thoughtful  man,  to  believe  in  and  to  accept  a  great  deal  else. 
To  believe  the  resurrection  is  to  believe  implicitly  in  the  Christian  faith.  It  is  no 
mere  speculative  question  whether  Jesus  Christ  did  or  did  not  rise  from  the  dead  ; 
it  is  an  eminently  practical  one.  The  intellect  is  not  more  interested  in  it  than  the 
will ;  perhaps  it  is  even  less  interested.  The  real  difficulties  of  belief  lie,  generally 
speaking,  with  the  will.  And  nothing  is  more  certain,  I  may  add,  more  alarming, 
than  the  power  of  the  will  to  shape,  check,  promote,  control  conviction.  And  such 
is  the  power  of  the  will  that  it  can  give  effect  to  this  decision.  It  can  baulk  and 
thwart  the  action  of  the  intellect ;  give  it  a  perverse  twist,  and  even  set  it  scheming 
how  best  to  discredit  or  refute  the  truth  which  but  now  it  was  on  the  point  of 
accepting.     And  thus  we  may  understand  what  it  is  that  the  Spirit  does  to  produce 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  423 

faith.  He  does  not  set  aside  or  extinguish  the  operations  of  the  natural  reason  ; 
reason  too  is  a  guide  to  truth  which  God  has  given  us.  But  He  does  change  the 
temper,  or  the* direction  of  the  will.  And  thus  He  sets  the  reason  free  to  do  justice 
to  the  evidence  before  it.  It  is  thus  that  within  us  the  Spirit  beareth  witness.  The 
evidence  for  the  resurrection  was  not  stronger  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  than  it  was 
on  the  day  before.  But  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  made  it  morally  possible  for  three 
thousand  converts  to  do  that  evidence  something  like  justice,  ^d  now  we  can  see 
why  St.  Paul  makes  so  much  of  faith — especially  in  a  risen  Christ — in  his  great 
Epistles.  If  the  understanding  were  alone  concerned  there  would  be  no  more  reason 
for  our  being  justified  by  faith  in  a  crucified  and  risen  Christ  than  for  our  being 
justified  by  our  assent  to  the  conclusion  of  a  problem  in  Euclid.  It  is  because  the 
will  must  endorse  the  verdict  of  the  understanding,  and  so  must  mean  obedience  as 
well  as  assent,  that  "  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith ;  and  that  not  of  your- 
selves :  it  is  the  gift  of  God."  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  Spirit's  witness  to  Christ : 
— There  are  five  respects  in  which  that  Divine  agent  may  be  represented  as  bearing 
witness  to  Christ.  (1)  He  bore  witness  by  the  types  and  prophecies  of  the  Jewish 
dispensation — both  of  which  foretold  Christ's  advent,  character,  and  work.  (2)  He 
bore  witness  by  qualifying  Christ,  as  man,  for  His  mediatorial  offices  (Isa.  xi.  1-3). 
(3)  The  Spirit  bore  witness  to  Christ  by  the  signs  and  wonders  which  He  enabled 
the  apostles  to  perform  in  attestation  of  their  Divine  commission.  (4)  He  bears 
witness  to  Christ  in  that  Holy  Bible  which  so  clearly  and  impressively  unfolds  His 
glory  and  His  grace.  (5)  He  bears  witness  also  by  "  revealing  God's  Son  in  "  the 
soul — by  bringing  the  gospel  practically  to  bear  on  the  understanding,  the  con- 
science, and  the  heart.    (A.  S.  Patterson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  For  there  are  three  that  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. — The  Scriptural  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  not  repugnant 
to  sound  reason : — I.  I  shall  attempt  to  show  what  conceptions  the  Scripture  leads 
us  to  form  of  the  peculiar  mode  of  the  Divine  existence.  1.  The  Scripture 
leads  us  to  conceive  of  God,  the  first  and  supreme  Being,  as  existing  in  three  dis- 
tinct persons.  The  one  living  and  true  God  exists  in  such  a  manner  that  there  is  a 
proper  foundation  in  His  nature  to  speak  of  Himself  in  the  first,  second,  and  third 
person,  and  say  I,  Thou,  and  He,  meaning  only  Himself.  There  is  a  certain  some- 
thing in  the  Divine  nature  which  lays  a  proper  foundation  for  such  a  personal  dis- 
tinction. But  what  that  something  is  can  neither  be  described  nor  conceived. 
Here  lies  the  whole  mystery  of  the  Trinity.  2.  The  Scripture  represents  the  three 
persons  in  the  sacred  Trinity  as  absolutely  equal  in  every  Divine  perfection.  We 
find  the  same  names,  the  same  attributes,  and  the  same  works  ascribed  to  each 
person.  3.  The  Scripture  represents  the  three  equally  Divine  persons  in  the  Trinity 
as  acting  in  a  certain  order  in  the  work  of  redemption.  Though  they  are  abso- 
lutely equal  in  nature,  yet  in  office  the  first  person  is  superior  to  the  second,  and 
the  second  is  superior  to  the  third.  The  Son  acts  in  subordination  to  the  Father, 
and  the  Spirit  acts  in  subordination  to  the  Son  and  Father  both.  4.  The  Scripture 
teaches  us  that  each  of  the  Divine  persons  takes  His  peculiar  name  from  the  peculiar 
office  which  He  sustains  in  the  economy  of  redemption.  The  first  person  assumes 
the  name  of  Father,  because  He  is  by  office  the  Creator  or  Author  of  all  things,  and 
especially  of  the  human  nature  of  Christ.  The  second  person  assumes  the  name 
of  Son  and  Word,  by  virtue  of  His  incarnation,  and  mediatorial  conduct.  The 
third  person  is  called  the  Holy  Ghost,  on  account  of  His  peculiar  office  as  Sanctifier. 
6.  The  Scripture  represents  these  three  Divine  persons  as  one  God.  This  is  the 
plain  language  of  the  text.  The  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  are  three  in 
respect  to  their  personality,  and  but  one  in  respect  to  their  nature  and 
essence.  11.  This  Scriptural  account  of  the  mysterious  doctrine  of  the  sacred 
Trinity  is  not  bepugnant  to  the  dictates  of  sound  reason.  1.  The  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity,  as  represented  in  Scripture,  implies  no  contradiction.  There 
may  be,  for  aught  we  know,  an  incomprehensible  something  in  the  one  self- 
existent  Being  which  lays  a  proper  foundation  for  his  existing  a  Trinity  in  Unity. 
2.  If  it  implies  no  contradiction  that  the  one  living  and  true  God  should  exist  in 
three  persons,  then  this  mysterious  mode  of  the  Divine  existence  is  agreeable  to  the 
dictates  of  sound  reason.  We  cannot  suppose  that  the  uncreated  Being  should 
exist  in  the  same  manner  in  which  we  and  other  created  beings  exist.  And  if  He 
exists  in  a  different  manner  from  created  beings,  then  His  mode  of  existence  must 
necessarily  be  mysterious.  And  whoever  now  objects  against  the  Scripture  account 
of  the  sacred  Trinity  would  have  equally  objected  against  any  other  account  which 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

God  could  have  given  of  His  peculiar  mode  of  existence.     3.  The  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  as  represented  in  Scripture,  is  no  more  repugnant  to  the  dictates  of  sound 
reason  than  many  other  doctrines  which  all  Christians  believe  concerning  God.     It 
is  generally  believed  that  God  is  a  self -existent  Being,  or  that  there  is  no  cause  or 
ground  of  His  existence  out  of  Himself.    But  who  can  explain  this  mode  of  exist- 
ence, or  even  form  any  clear  conception  of  it  ?    It  is  generally  believed  that  God  is 
constantly  present  in  aU  places,  or  that  His  presence  perpetually  fills  the  whole 
created  universe.     But  can  we  frame  any  clear  ideas  of  this  universal  presence  of 
the  Deity  ?    It  is  generally  believed  that  God  is  the  Creator,  who  has  made  all 
things  out  of  nothing.     But  of  that  power  which  is  able  to  create,  or  produce  some- 
thing out  of  nothing,  we  can  form  no  manner  of  conception.     This  attribute  of  the 
Deity,  therefore,  is  as  really  mysterious  and  incomprehensible  in  its  operation  as 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.     (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)        And  there  are  three  that  bear 
witness  in  earth,  the  Spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood. — The  three-fold  witnesses 
on  earth  : — I.  The  Spirit  bears  witness.     The  Holy  Ghost  is  meant.     What  is 
the  permanent  testimony  which  He  bears  to  Christ  and  His  gospel  ?    The  Scriptures 
are  His  witness  to  Christ.     It  would  be  impossible  to  overrate  the  value  of  this 
testimony.    It  is  a  written  Word,  and  therefore  not  liable  to  change.    We  can  study 
it  in  a  way  altogether  diiTerent  from  the  attention  which  we  can  give  to  a  spoken 
discourse.     We  can  carry  it  with  us,  whither  we  go.     We  can  refresh  our  memory 
with  it  as  often  as  we  need  it.     Not  only,  however,  did  the  Scriptures  proceed  from 
the  Spirit  at  the  first,  but  they  have  been  preserved  by  Him  in  a  most  remarkable 
manner.     He  has  used  the  most  scrupulous  care  to  maintain  their  purity.     Nor 
does  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  cease  in  the  publication  and  preservation  of  the 
Scriptures.     He  continues  to  enlighten  men  in  the  knowledge  of  them,  to  impress 
their  hearts  by  the  belief  of  them,  and  to  bring  them  under  their  power.     But  how 
are  we  to  speak  of  the  testimony  itself  which  is  thus  borne  by  the  Spirit  to  Christ? 
Then  truly  the  words  are  verified,  "  He  shall  glorify  Me,  for  He  shall  receive  of 
Mine,  and  show  it  unto  you."     He  gives  the  soul  views  of  Christ  such  as  it  never 
entertained  before,  the  most  honourable  to  Him  and  assuring  to  it.     He  produces 
affections  towards  Him  such  as  never  existed   before,  the  most  ardent  and  self- 
denying.     He  causes  unreserved  submission  to  His  will,  so  that  it  is  either  borne 
with  patience  or  done  with  diligence.     II.  The  water  bears  witness  to  Christ. 

1.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  this  water  ?  There  is  only  one  use  of  water  in 
the  Christian  economy.  This  is  in  the  administration  of  baptism.  But  the  fact 
that  an  ordinance  is  made  to  be  a  witness  to  Christ  is  not  to  be  passed  unnoticed. 
It  resembles  the  Scriptures  in  being  permanent,  but  it  possesses  a  feature  peculiar 
to  itself.     It  is  a  testimony  to  the  eye,  and  by  it  to  the  understanding  and  heart. 

2.  What  is  the  amount  of  the  testimony  borne  by  the  water  of  baptism  ?  It  is  very 
simple,  yet  very  expressive.  In  this  ordinance  we  behold  reflected,  as  in  a  mirror, 
the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  is  a  standing  testimony  to  the  depravity  of  the  sinner.  If 
we  come  to  it  at  aU,  it  is  because  we  are  defiled.  At  the  same  time  the  efficacy  of 
cleansing  is  no  less  clearly  signified.  It  says,  here  is  a  fountain,  and  every  one  that 
washes  in  it  is  made  clean.  Nor  is  it  the  pardon  of  sin  only  that  is  figured  in 
baptism.  We  are  at  the  same  time  reminded  of  the  destruction  of  its  power.  A 
great  moral  change  is  made  to  pass  upon  the  soul  that  is  pardoned.  Pardon  is 
received  by  faith,  but  this  grace  is  ever  accompanied  by  regeneration.  III.  The 
BLOOD  IS  A  WITNESS  UNTO  Christ.  How  is  it  to  be  understood?  The  reference 
appears  to  be  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  a  lively  representation  of  the  death  of  Christ. 
1.  His  person  is  presented  to  our  faith  in  the  bread  and  wine.  They  are  emblems 
of  His  body,  of  its  reality,  that  He  was  truly  a  partaker  of  flesh  and  blood.  But  this 
fact  cannot  be  separated  from  His  original  and  higher  nature.  2.  Equally  clear  is 
the  representation  of  His  work.  It  is  testified  in  the  broken  bread.  That  calls  up 
the  fact  of  His  crucifixion.  3.  We  are  also  taught  how  we  are  saved  by  it.  Eating 
and  drinking  are  essential  to  the  preservation  of  life.  4.  But  these  exercises  are  not 
observed  by  us  singly  and  alone.  We  are  associated  with  others.  The  Lord's  table 
is  thus  the  emblem  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  There  is  at  it  the  interchange  of  a 
holy  and  heavenly  communion.  (Jas.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  Spirit,  and  the 
water,  and  the  blood : — We  dismiss,  without  any  misgiving,  the  clause  respecting 
the  heavenly  Trinity  from  1  John  v.  7.  The  sentence  is  irrelevant  to  this  context, 
and  foreign  to  the  apostle's  mode  of  conception.  It  is  the  Church's  victorious 
faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  vindicated  against  the  world  (ch.  v.  1-5),  that  the  writer 
here  asserts,  and  to  invoke  witnesses  for  this  "  in  heaven "  is  nothing  to  the 
purpose.     The  contrast  present  to  his  thought  is  not  that  between  heaven  and 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  425 

earth  as  spheres  of  testimony,  but  only  between  the  various  elements  of  the  testi- 
mony itself  (vers.  6-10).     (For  this  manner  of  combining  witnesses,  comp.  John  v. 
31-47 ;  viii.  13-18 ;  x.  25-38 ;  xiv.  8-13  ;  xv.  26,  27.)     The  passage  of  the  three 
heavenly  witnesses  is  now  admitted  to  be  a  theological  gloss,  which  crept  first  into 
the  Latin  manuscripts  of  the  fifth  century,  making  its  way  probably  from  the 
margin  into  the  text :  no  Greek  codex  exhibits  it  earlier  than  the  fifteenth  century. 
"  This,"  the  apostle  writes  in  ver.  6 — this  "Jesus  "  of  whom  we  "  believe  that  He  is 
the   Son  of  God"  (ver.  5) — "is  He  that  came  through  water  and  blood — Jesus 
Christ."    By  this  time  "  Jesus  Christ  "  and  "  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  "  had  become 
terms  synonymous  in  true  Christian  speech.     The  great  controversy  of  the  age 
turned  upon  their  identification.     The  Gnostics  distinguished  Jesus  and  Christ  as 
human  and  Divine  persons,  united  at  the  baptism  and  severed  on  the  Cross,  when 
Jesus  cried,  "  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "     St.  John  asserts,  therefore, 
at  every  turn  the  oneness  of  Jesus  Christ ;  the  beUef  that  "  Jesus  is  the  Christ"  he 
makes  the  test  of  a  genuine  Christianity  (ch.  v.  1 ;  comp.  ii.  22 ;  iii.  23  ;  iv.  2,  3, 
15).      The  name  thus  appended  to  ver.  6  is  no  idle  repetition;  it  is  a  solemn 
reassertion  and  reassumption  of  the  Christian  creed  in  two  words — Jesus  Christ. 
And  He  is  Jesus  Christ,  inasmuch  as  He  "  came  through  water  and  blosd — not  in 
the  water  only."      The  heretics  allowed  and  maintained  -  in  their  own  way  that 
Jesus  Christ  "  came  by  water "  when  He  received   His  Messianic   anointing  at 
John's  baptism,  and  the  man  Jesus  thus  became  the  Christ;  but  the  "coming 
through  blood"  they  abhorred.    They  regarded  the  death  of  the  Cross,  befalling  the 
human  Jesus,  as  a  punishment  of  shame  inflicted  on  the  flesh,  in  which  the  Divine 
or  Deiform  Christ  could  have  no  part.     Upon  this  Cerinthian  view,  the  Christ  who 
came  through  water  went  away  rather  than  came  through  blood  ;  they  saw  in  the 
death  upon  the  Cross  nothing  that  witnessed  of  the  Godhead  in  Jesus  Christ, 
nothing  that  spoke  of  Divine  forgiveness  and  cleansing  (eh.  i.  7,  9),  but  an  eclipse 
and  abandonment  by  God,  a  surrender  of  the  earthly  Jesus  to  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness.    The  simple  words,  "  that  came,"  are  of  marked  significance  in  this  context; 
for  "the  coming  One"  (6  ipxonevoQ,  Matt.  xi.  3;  John  i.  15,  27;  xi.  27;  Heb.  z. 
37  ;  Eev.  i.  4,  8,  etc.)  was  a  standing  name  for  the  Messiah,  now  recognised  as  the 
Son  of  God.     "He  that  came,"  therefore,  signifies  "He  who  has  assumed  this 
character,"  who  appeared  on  earth  as  the  Divine  Messiah ;  and  St.  John  declares 
that  He  thus  appeared  disclosing  Himself  through  these  two  signs — of  blood  as  well 
as  water.     So  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  inauguration  and  consummation  of 
Christ's  ministry,  were  marked  by  the  two  supreme  manifestations  of  His  Messiah- 
ship  ;  and  of  both  events  this  apostle  was  a  near  and  deeply  interested  witaess. 
When  he  speaks  of  the  Lord  as  "coming  through  water  and  blood,"  these  are 
viewed  historically  as  steps  in  His  glorious  march,  signal  epochs  in  the  continuous 
disclosure  of  Himself  to  men,  and  crises  in  His  past  relations  to  the  world ;  when 
he  says,  "  in  the  water  and  in  the  blood,"  they  are  apprehended  as  abiding  facts, 
each  making  its  distinct  and  Uving  appeal  to  our  faith.     This  verse  stands  in  much 
the  same  relation  to  the  two  sacraments  as  does  the  related  teaching  of  chs.  iii.  and 
vi.  in  St.  John's  Gospel.     The  two  sacraments  embody  the  same  truths  that  are 
symbolised  here.     Observing  them  in  the  obedience  of  faith,  we  associate  ourselves 
visibly  with  "  the  water  and  the  blood,"  with  Christ  baptized  and  crucified,  Uving 
and  dying  for  us.     But  to  see  in  these  observances  the  equivalents  of  the  water  and 
blood  of  this  passage,  to  make  the  apostle  say  that  the  water  of  baptism  and  the 
cup  of  the  Lord's  Supper  are  the  chief  witnesses  to  Him  and  the  essential  instru- 
ments of  our  salvation,  and  that  the  former  sacrament  is  unavailing  without  the 
addition  of  the  latter,  is  to  narrow  and  behttle  his  deciaiTition  and  to  empty  out  its 
historical  content.     Nearer  to  St.  John's  thought  Ues  the  inference  that  Christ  is 
our  anointed  Priest  as  well  as  Prophet,  making  sacrifice  for  our  sin  while  He  is 
our  guide  and  light  of  life.      To   the   virtue   of   His   life  and  teaching  must  be 
added  the  virtue  of  His  passion  and  death.     Had  He  come  "  in  the  water  "  only, 
had  Jesus  Christ  stopped  short  of  Calvary  and  drawn  back  from  the  blood-baptism, 
there  had  been  no  cleansing  from  sin  for  us,  no  witness  to  that  chief  function  of  His 
Christhood.     This  third  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God — the  baptism  of  the  Spirit 
following  on  that  of  water  and  of  blood,  a  baptism  in  which  Jesus  Christ  was  agent 
and  no  longer  subject — verified  and  made  good  the  other  two.     "  And  the  Spirit," 
he  says,  "  is  that  which  beareth  witness  "  {rb  jxaprvpovv,  "  the  witnessing  power  "j : 
the  water  and  the  blood,  though  they  have  so  much  to  say,  must  have  spoken  m 
vain,  becoming  mere  voices  of  past  history,  but  for  this  abiding  and  ever  active 
^Witness  (John  xv.  26;  xvi,  7-15).    The  Spirit,  whose  witness  comes  last  in  the 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

order  of  distinct  manifestation,  is  first  in  principle ;  His  breath  animates  the  whole 
testimony ;  hence  He  takes  the  lead  in  the  final  enumeration  of  ver.  8.  The 
witness  of  the  water  had  His  silent  attestation;  the  Baptist  "testified,  saying,  I 
have  seen  the  Spirit  descending  as  a  dove  out  of  heaven,  and  it  abode  upon  Him,"  &g. 
(John  i.  32,  33).  "It  is  the  Spirit,"  therefore,  "that  bears  witness";  in  aU  true 
witness  He  is  operative,  and  there  is  no  testifying  without  Him.  "  For  the  Spirit  ia 
truth,"  is  "  the  truth  " — Jesus  called  Him  repeatedly  "  the  Spirit  of  truth  "  (John 
xiv.  17  ;  XV.  26 ;  1  John  iv.  6  ;  comp.  John  iv.  23,  24) — truth  in  its  substance  and 
vital  power  is  lodged  with  Him ;  in  this  element  He  works  ;  this  effluence  He  ever 
breathes  forth.  Practically,  the  Spirit  is  the  truth ;  whatever  is  stated  in  Christian 
matters  without  His  attestation,  is  something  less  or  other  than  the  truth.  Such, 
then,  are  the  "three  witnesses"  which  were  gathered  "into  one"  in  the  Apostle 
John's  experience,  in  the  history  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  disciples  :  "  the  three  " 
he  says,  "  agree  in  one,"  or  more  strictly,  "amount  to  the  one  thing  "  (icai  ol  rptie 
tig  TO  ev  (laiv,  ver.  8)  ;  they  converge  upon  this  single  aim.  The  Jordan  banks, 
Calvary,  the  upper  chamber  in  Jerusalem  ;  the  beginning,  the  end  of  Jesus  Christ's 
earthly  course,  and  the  new  beginning  which  knows  no  end ;  His  Divine  life  and 
words  and  works.  His  propitiatory  death,  the  promised  and  perpetual  gift  of  the 
Spirit  to  His  Church — these  three  cohere  into  one  solid  and  imperishable  witness, 
which  is  the  demonstration  alike  of  history  and  personal  experience  and  the  Spirit 
of  God.  They  have  one  outcome,  as  they  have  one  purpose ;  and  it  is  this — viz. 
"  that  God  gave  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son  "  (ver.  11).  The  apostle 
has  indicated  in  vers.  6-8  what  are,  to  his  mind,  the  proofs  of  the  testimony  of 
Jesus — evidences  that  must  in  the  end  convict  and  "  overcome  the  world  "  (ver.  5). 
So  far  as  the  general  cause  of  Christianity  is  concerned  this  is  enough.  But  it 
concerns  each  man  to  whom  this  evidence  comes  to  realise  for  himself  the  weight 
and  seriousness  of  the  testimony  which  confronts  him.  So  St.  John  points  with 
emphasis  in  vers.  9  and  10  to  the  Author  of  the  threefold  manifestation.  "If  we 
receive  the  witness  of  men  " — if  credible  human  testimony  wins  our  ready  assent — 
"the  witness  of  God  is  greater."  The  declaration  of  the  gospel  brings  every  soul 
that  hears  it  face  to  face  with  God  (comp.  1  Thess.  ii.  13).  And  of  all  subjects  on 
which  God  might  speak  to  men,  of  all  revelations  that  He  has  made,  or  might  con- 
ceivably make,  to  mankind,  this,  St.  John  feels,  is  the  supreme  and  critical  matter 
— "the  testimony  of  God,  viz.,  the  fact  that  He  has  testified  concerning  His  Son." 
The  gospel  is,  in  St.  Paul's  words,  "  God's  good  news  about  His  Son."  God 
insists  upon  our  believing  this  witness ;  it  is  that  in  which  He  is  supremely  con- 
cerned, and  which  He  asserts  and  commends  to  men  above  all  else.  Let  the  man, 
therefore,  who  with  this  evidence  before  him  remains  unbelieving,  understand  what 
he  is  about;  let  him  know  whom  he  is  rejecting  and  whom  he  is  contradicting. 
"  He  has  made  God  a  liar  " — he  has  given  the  lie  to  the  All-holy  and  Almighty 
One,  the  Lord  God  of  truth.  This  apostle  said  the  same  terrible  thing  about  the 
impenitent  denier  of  his  own  sin  (ch.  i.  10) ;  these  two  denials  are  kindred  to  each 
other,  and  run  up  into  the  same  condition  of  defiance  toward  God.  On  the  other 
hand,  "  he  who  believes  on  the  Son  of  God,"  "  hearing  from  the  Father  and  coming  " 
to  Christ  accordingly  (John  vi.  45),  he  finds  "  within  himself  "  the  confirmation  of 
the  witness  he  received  (ver.  10a).  The  testimony  of  the  Spirit  and  the  water  and 
the  blood  is  no  mere  historical  and  objective  proof  ;  it  enters  the  man's  own  nature, 
and  becomes  the  regnant,  creative  factor  in  the  shaping  of  his  soul.  The  apostle 
might  have  added  this  subjective  confirmation  as  a  fourth,  experimental  witness  to 
the  other  three ;  but,  to  his  conception,  the  sense  of  inward  life  and  power  attained 
by  Christian  faith  is  the  very  witness  of  the  Spirit,  translated  into  terms  of  experi- 
ence, realised  and  operative  in  personal  consciousness.  "  The  water  that  I  will 
give,"  said  Jesus,  "will  be  within  him  a  fountain  of  water,  springing  up  unto  life 
eternal "  (John  iv.  14).  It  is  thus  that  the  believer  on  the  Son  of  God  sets  to  his 
Beal  that  God  is  true.  His  testimony  is  not  to  the  general  fact  that  there  is  life  and 
truth  in  Christ;  but  "  this  is  the  witness,  that  God  gave  to  us  life  eternal,  and  this 
life  is  in  His  Son  "  (ver.  11).  This  witness  of  God  concerning  His  Son  is  not  only 
a  truth  to  be  believed  or  denied,  it  is  a  life  to  be  chosen  or  refused ;  and  on  this 
choice  turns  the  eternal  life  or  death  of  all  to  whom  Christ  offers  Himself :  "  He 
that  hath  the  Son,  hath  life ;  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God,  hath  not  life  "  (ver. 
12).  Life  appears  everywhere  in  St.  John  as  a  gift,  not  an  acquisition ;  and  faith 
is  a  grace  rather  than  a  virtue ;  it  is  yielding  to  God's  power  rather  than  the 
exerting  of  our  own.  It  is  not  so  much  that  we  apprehend  Christ;  rather  He 
apprehends  us,  our  souls  are  laid  hold  of  and  possessed  by  the  truth  concerning 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  427 

Him.  Our  part  is  but  to  receive  God's  bounty  pressed  upon  us  in  Christ;  it  is 
merely  to  consent  to  the  strong  purpose  of  His  love,  and  allow  Him,  as  St.  Paul  puts 
it,  to  "work  in  us  to  wUl  and  to  work  on  behalf  of  His  good  pleasure "  (Phil.  ii.  13). 
As  this  operation  proceeds  and  the  truth  concerning  Christ  takes  practical 
possession  of  our  nature,  the  assurance  of  faith,  the  conviction  that  we  have 
eternal  life  in  Him,  becomes  increasingly  settled  and  firm.  Eothe  finely  says, 
"  Faith  is  not  a  mere  witness  on  the  man's  part  to  the  object  of  his  faith;  it  is  a 
witness  which  the  man  receives  from  that  object.  ...  In  its  first  beginnings  faith 
is,  no  doubt,  mainly  the  acceptance  of  testimony  from  without ;  but  the  element  of 
trust  involved  in  this  acceptance,  includes  the  beginning  of  an  inner  experience  of 
that  which  is  believed.  This  trust  arises  from  the  attraction  which  the  object  of 
our  faith  has  exercised  upon  us ;  it  rests  on  the  consciousness  of  a  vital  connection 
between  ourselves  and  that  object.  In  the  measure  in  which  we  accept  the  Divine 
witness,  our  inner  susceptibility  to  its  working  increases,  and  thus  there  is  formed 
in  us  a  certainty  of  faith  which  rises  unassailably  above  all  scepticism."  The  lan- 
guage of  St.  John  in  this  last  chapter  of  his  Epistle  breathes  the  force  of  a  spiritual 
conviction  raised  to  its  highest  potency.  For  him  perfect  love  has  now  cast  out  fear, 
and  perfect  faith  has  banished  every  shadow  of  doubt.  "  Believing  on  the  name  of 
the  Son  of  God,"  he  "  knows  that  he  has  eternal  life  "  (ver.  13).  With  him  the 
transcendental  has  become  the  experimental,  and  no  breach  is  left  any  more 
between  them.  {G.  G.  Findlay,  B.A.)  The  gospel  record  : — I.  The  view  here 
GIVEN  OF  THE  GOSPEL  TESTIMONY.  1.  Unspeakably  important.  2.  Exceedingly 
comprehensive.     3.  Pre-eminently  gracious.    4.  Remarkably  distinct  and  definite. 

II.    The    EVIDENCE    ADDUCED    IN    CONFIRMATION    OF    ITS    TRUTHS.        1.    The    VOiCC    frOm 

heaven.    2.  From  earth.    3.  Scripture  testimony.    4.  Personal  experience.    IH.  The 

CLAIMS    WHICH    IT    HAS,    AS    THUS    ESTABLISHED,    UPON    OUR    REGARDS.     ,  It    claimS    OUr 

earnest  attention  and  most  serious  study ;  but,  above  all,  it  claims  our  unwaver- 
ing faith.  This  is  the  main  point  which  is  here  set  forth.  1.  The  nature  of 
faith.  It  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  receiving  the  Divine  testimony,  especially 
concerning  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Its  reasonableness.  3.  Its  importance.  Through  it 
we  have  eternal  life.  4.  The  opposite  of  faith  is  unbelief — a  sin  most  heinous  in 
its  nature,  and  most  awful  in  its  results.  {Expository  Outlines.)  The  three  wit- 
nesses : — Christianity  puts  forth  very  lofty  claims.  She  claims  to  be  the  true  faith, 
and  the  only  true  one.  She  avows  her  teachings  to  be  Divine,  and  therefore 
infallible ;  while  for  her  great  Teacher,  the  Son  of  God,  she  demands  Divine 
worship,  and  the  unreserved  confidence  and  obedience  of  men.  Now,  to  justify 
such  high  claims,  the  gospel  ought  to  produce  strong  evidence,  and  it  does  so.  The 
armoury  of  external  evidences  is  well  stored  with  weapons  of  proof.  The  gospel 
also  bears  within  itself  its  own  evidence,  it  has  a  self -proving  power.  It  is  so  pure, 
so  holy,  so  altogether  above  the  inventive  capacity  of  fallen  man,  that  it  must  be  of 
God.  But  neither  with  these  external  or  internal  evidences  have  we  to  do  now,  but 
I  call  your  attention  to  the  three  witnesses  which  are  spoken  of  in  the  text,  three 
great  witnesses  still  among  us,  whose  evidence  proves  the  truth  of  our  religion,  the 
Divinity  of  our  Lord,  and  the  future  supremacy  of  the  faith.  I.  Oub  Lord  Himself 
WAS  ATTESTED  BY  THESE  THREE  WITNESSES.  If  you  will  caiefully  read  in  the  twenty- 
ninth  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Exodus,  or  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Book  of 
Leviticus,  you  will  see  that  every  priest  came  by  the  anointing  Spirit,  by  water,  and 
by  blood,  as  a  matter  of  type,  and  if  Jesus  Christ  be  indeed  the  priest  that  was  for 
to  come,  He  will  be  known  by  these  three  signs.  Godly  men  in  the  olden  times 
also  well  understood  that  there  was  no  putting  away  of  sin  except  with  these  three 
things  ;  in  proof  of  which  we  will  quote  David's  prayer,  "  Purge  me  with  hyssop  " 
— that  is,  the  hyssop  dipped  in  blood — "  and  I  shall  be  clean ;  wash  me  " — there  is 
the  water — "and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow";  and  then,  "Eestore  unto  me  the 
joy  of  Thy  salvation,  and  uphold  me  with  Thy  free  Spirit."  Thus  the  blood,  the 
water,  and  the  Spirit  were  recognised  of  old  as  necessary  to  cleanse  from  guUt,  and 
if  Jesus  of  Nazareth  be  indeed  able  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins,  He  must 
come  with  the  triple  gift — the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood.  Now  it  was  evidently 
so.  Our  Lord  was  attested  by  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  of  God  bore  witness  to  Christ 
in  the  types  and  prophecies,  "  Holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost "  ;  and  Jesus  Christ  answers  to  those  prophecies.  The  Spirit  abode  with 
our  Lord  all  His  life  long,  and  to  crown  all,  after  He  had  died  and  risen  again,  the 
Holy  Ghost  gave  the  fullest  witness  by  descending  in  full  power  upon  the  disciples 
at  Pentecost.  It  is  also  manifest  that  our  Lord  came  with  water  too.  He  came  not 
by  the  water  merely  as  a  symbol,  but  by  that  which  the  water  meant,  by  unsullied 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Y. 

purity  of  life.  With  Jesus  also  was  the  blood.  This  distinguished  Him  from  John 
the  Baptist,  who  came  by  water,  but  Jesus  came  "  not  by  water  only,  but  by  water 
and  blood."  We  must  not  prefer  any  one  of  the  three  witnesses  to  another,  but 
what  a  wonderful  testimony  to  Christ  was  the  blood  !  From  the  very  first  He  came 
with  blood,  for  John  the  Baptist  cried,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world  !  "  In  His  ministry  there  was  often  a  clear  testimony  to 
His  future  sufferings  and  shedding  of  blood,  for  to  the  assembled  crowd  He  said, 
"  Except  a  man  eat  My  flesh  and  drink  My  blood,  there  is  no  life  in  him"  ;  while 
to  His  disciples  He  spake  of  the  decease  which  He  should  shortly  accomplish  at 
Jerusalem.  However  pure  the  life  He  led,  had  He  never  died  He  could  not  have 
been  the  Saviour  appointed  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  The  blood  was  needed 
to  complete  the  witness.  The  blood  must  flow  with  the  water,  the  suffering  with 
the  serving.  II.  These  three  remain  as  standing  witnesses  to  Him  to  all  time. 
And  first,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  witness  at  this  hour  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  is  the 
truth,  and  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God.  By  His  Divine  energy  He  convinces 
men  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel ;  and  these  so  convinced  are  not  only  persons 
who,  through  their  education,  are  likely  to  believe  it,  but  men  like  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
who  abhor  the  whole  thing.  He  pours  His  influences  upon  men,  and  infidelity 
melts  away  like  the  iceberg  in  the  Gulf  Stream ;  He  touches  the  indifferent  and 
careless,  and  they  repent,  believe,  and  obey  the  Saviour.  Then,  too,  the  Spirit  goes 
forth  among  believers,  and  by  them  He  bears  witness  to  our  Lord  and  His  gospel. 
How  mightily  does  He  comfort  the  saints !  And  He  does  the  same  when  He  gives 
them  guidance,  enlightenment,  and  elevation  of  soul.  The  next  abiding  witness  in 
the  Church  is  the  water — not  the  water  of  baptism,  but  the  new  life  implanted  in 
Christians,  for  that  is  the  sense  in  which  John's  Master  had  used  the  word 
"water":  "The  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water 
springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  The  world's  conscience  knows  that  the  religion 
of  Jesus  is  the  religion  of  purity,  and  if  professed  Christians  fall  into  uncleanness 
the  world  knows  that  such  a  course  of  action  does  not  arise  out  of  the  religion  of 
Christ,  but  is  diametrically  opposite  to  it.  The  gospel  is  perfect,  and  did  we  wholly 
yield  to  its-sway  sin  would  be  abhorred  by  us,  and  slain  in  us,  and  we  should  live 
on  earth  the  life  of  the  perfect  ones  above.  The  third  abiding  witness  is  the  blood. 
The  blood  of  Christ  is  still  on  the  earth,  for  when  Jesus  bled  it  fell  upon  the  ground 
and  was  never  gathered  up.  O  earth,  thou  still  art  bespattered  with  the  blood  of 
the  murdered  Son  of  God,  and  if  thou  dost  reject  Him  this  will  curse  thee.  But,  0 
humanity,  thou  art  blessed  with  the  drops  of  that  precious  blood,  and  believing  in 
Him  it  doth  save  thee.  The  blood  of  Jesus,  after  speaking  peace  to  the  conscience, 
inflames  the  heart  with  fervent  love,  and  full  often  leads  men  to  high  deeds  of  con- 
secration, self-denial,  and  self-sacrifice,  such  as  can  scarce  be  understood  till  they 
are  traced  back  to  that  amazing  love  which  bled  upon  the  tree.  III.  This  triple 
tet  united  witness  is  peculiarly  forcible  within  believing  hearts.  John 
tells  us,  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself."  Now, 
these  three  witnesses  bear  testimony  in  our  souls  abidingly.  I  speak  not  of  years 
ago,  but  of  last  night,  when  you  prayed,  and  were  heard.  Did  not  the  Spirit  when 
He  helped  you  to  pray,  bear  witness  that  the  gospel  was  no  lie?  Was  not  the  answer 
to  your  prayer  good  evidence  ?  The  next  witness  in  us  is  the  water,  or  the  new  and 
pure  life.  Do  you  feel  the  inner  life?  You  are  conscious  that  you  are  not  what  you 
used  to  be,  you  are  conscious  of  a  new  life  within  your  soul  which  you  never  knew 
till  the  date  of  your  conversion,  and  that  new  life  within  you  is  the  Uving  and 
incorruptible  seed  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever.  Witnessing  within  us  is  also 
the  blood.  This  is  a  witness  which  never  fails,  speaking  in  us  better  things  than 
the  blood  of  Abel.  It  gives  us  such  peace  that  we  can  sweetly  live  and  calmly  die. 
It  gives  us  such  access  to  God  that  sometimes  when  we  have  felt  its  power  we  have 
drawn  as  near  to  our  Father  as  if  we  had  seen  Him  face  to  face.  And  oh,  what 
safety  the  blood  causes  us  to  enjoy  I  We  feel  that  we  cannot  perish  while  the 
crimson  canopy  of  atonement  by  blood  hangs  over  our  head.  Thus  I  have  tried 
to  show  that  these  three  witnesses  testify  in  our  souls ;  I  beg  you  now  to  notice 
their  order.  The  Spirit  of  God  first  enters  the  heart,  perhaps  long  before  the  man 
knows  that  such  is  the  case ;  the  Spirit  creates  the  new  life,  which  repents  and 
seeks  the  Saviour,  that  is  the  water ;  and  that  new  life  flies  to  the  blood  of  Jesus 
and  obtains  peace.  Having  observed  their  order,  now  note  their  combination. 
"These  three  agree  in  one,"  therefore  every  true  believer  should  have  the  witness 
of  each  one,  and  if  each  one  does  not  witness  in  due  time,  there  is  cause  for  grave 
suspicion.     IV.  These  witnesses   certify  to   us   the   ultimate   triumph  of  our 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  429 

KELiGioN.  Is  the  Spirit  working  through  the  gospel  ?  then  the  gospel  will  win  the 
day,  because  the  Spirit  of  God  is  almighty,  and  complete  master  over  the  reahn  of 
mind.  He  has  the  power  to  illuminate  the  intellect,  to  win  the  affections,  to  curb 
the  will,  and  change  the  entire  nature  of  man,  for  He  worketh  all  things  after  His 
own  pleasure,  and,  like  the  wind,  He  "bloweth  where  He  listeth."  Next,  the  gospel 
must  conquer,  because  of  the  water,  which  I  have  explained  to  be  the  new  life  of 
purity.  What  says  John  ?  "  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world." 
It  is  impossible  for  the  gospel  to  be  vanquished  so  long  as  there  remains  in  the 
world  one  soul  that  is  born  of  God.  Living  and  incorruptible  seed  abideth  for 
ever  !  Lastly,  the  gospel  must  spread  and  conquer  because  of  the  blood.  God,  the 
everlasting  Father,  has  promised  to  Jesus  by  covenant,  of  which  the  blood  is  the 
seal,  that  He  "  shall  see  His  seed.  He  shall  prolong  His  days,  and  the  pleasure  of 
the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  His  hand."  As  surely  as  Christ  died  on  the  Cross,  He 
must  sit  on  a  universal  throne.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  This  is  the  witness  of  God,  which  He  hath  testified  of  His  Son. — 
Faith,  and  the  loitness  upon  which  it  is  founded : — Faith  stands,  under  the  covenant 
of  grace,  in  a  leading  position  amongst  the  works  of  the  regenerate  man  and  the 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  promise  no  longer  stands  to  the  man  who  doeth 
these  things  that  he  shall  live  in  them,  else  we  were  shut  out  of  it,  but  "  the  just 
shall  live  by  faith."  God  nowbiddeth  us  live  by  believing  in  Him.  I.  First,  then, 
since  our  great  business  is  that  we  believe  God,  let  us  see  what  reason  we  have  for 
believing  Him.  I.  The  external  evidence  given  is  stated  in  the  first  verse  of  the 
text,  as  the  evidence  of  God  to  us,  and  it  is  prefaced  by  the  remark  that  "  we  receive 
the  witness  of  men."  We  do  and  must  believe  the  testimony  of  men  as  a  general 
rule ;  and  it  is  only  right  that  we  should  account  witnesses  honest  till  they  have 
proved  themselves  false.  Now,  God  has  been  pleased  to  give  us  a  measure  of  the 
witness  of  men  with  regard  to  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ.  We  have  the  witness  of  such 
men  as  the  four  evangelists  and  the  twelve  apostles.  We  have  the  witness  of  men 
as  to  the  facts  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  lived  and  died,  and  rose  again,  and 
ascended  into  heaven.  Further,  we  have  the  testimony  of  men  as  to  the  present 
power  of  that  same  Jesus  to  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  and  to  save  them  from  the 
power  of  sin.  From  the  first  day  when  our  Lord  was  taken  up  till  now  men  and 
women  have  come  forward,  and  have  said,  "  We  were  once  lovers  of  sin  ;  whatever 
our  neighbours  are,  such  were  we,  but  we  are  washed,  but  we  are  sanctified  ;  and  aU 
this  by  faith  in  Jesus."  Some  years  ago  there  went  into  a  Methodist  class  meeting 
a  lawyer  who  was  a  doubter,  but  at  the  same  time  a  man  of  candid  spirit.  Sitting 
down  on  one  of  the  benches,  he  listened  to  a  certain  number  of  poor  people,  his 
neighbours,  whom  he  knew  to  be  honest  people.  He  heard  some  thirteen  or  fourteen 
of  tiiese  persons  speak  about  the  power  of  Divine  grace  in  their  souls,  and  about 
their  conversion,  and  so  on.  He  jotted  down  the  particulars,  and  went  home,  and 
sat  down,  and  said  to  himself,  "  Now,  these  people  all  bear  witness,  I  will  weigh 
their  evidence."  It  struck  him  that  if  he  could  get  those  twelve  or  thirteen  people 
into  the  witness-box,  to  testify  on  his  side  in  any  question  before  a  court,  he  could 
carry  anything.  They  were  persons  of  different  degrees  of  intellect  and  education, 
but  they  were  all  of  the  sort  of  persons  whom  he  would  like  to  have  for  witnesses, 
persons  who  could  bear  cross-examination,  and  by  their  very  tone  and  manner 
would  win  the  confidence  of  the  jury.  "  Very  well,"  he  said  to  himself,  "  I  am  as 
much  bound  to  believe  these  people  about  their  religious  experience  as  about  any- 
thing else."  He  did  so,  and  that  led  to  his  beUeving  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with 
aU  his  heart.  Thus,  you  see,  the  testimony  of  God  to  us  does  in  a  measure  come 
through  men,  and  we  are  bound  to  receive  it.  But  now  comes  the  text :  "  If  we 
receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater."  God  is  to  be  believed  if 
all  men  contradict  Him.  "  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar."  Now,  what  is 
the  witness  of  God  with  regard  to  Christ  ?  How  does  He  prove  to  us  that  Jesus 
Christ  did  really  come  into  the  world  to  save  us  ?  God's  witnesses  are  three  :  the 
Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood.  God  says,  "  My  Son  did  come  into  the  world :  He 
is  My  gift  to  sinful  men  ;  He  has  redeemed  you,  and  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most them  that  come  unto  Me  by  Him  :  and  in  proof  that  He  is  so  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  been  given."  Then  the  water,  that  is  to  say,  the  purifying  power  of  the  gospel, 
is  also  God's  witness  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  If  it  does  not  change  men's 
characters  when  they  receive  it,  it  is  not  true.  But  as  God  everywhere,  among  the 
most  savage  tribes,  or  amongst  the  most  refined  of  mankind,  makes  the  gospel  to  be 
a  sacred  bath  of  cleansing  to  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  He  gives  another  witness 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

that  His  Son  is  really  Divine,  and  that  His  gospel  is  true.  The  blood  also  witnesses., 
Does  believing  in  Jesus  Christ  do  what  the  blood  was  said  to  do,  namely,  give  peace- 
with  God  through  the  pardon  of  sin  ?  Hundreds  and  thousands  all  over  the  world 
aflfirm  that  they  had  no  peace  of  conscience  tiU  they  looked  into  the  streaming  veins 
of  Jesus,  and  then  they  saw  how  God  can  be  just  and  yet  forgive  sin.  H.  I  come 
now  TO  THE  INTERNAL  EVIDENCE,  or  the  witness  in  us.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the 
Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself."  When  a  man  is  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  believe  that  God  cannot  lie,  he  inquires  what  it  is  that  God  says ;  and  he  hears 
that  atonement  has  been  made,  and  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  shall  have 
eternal  life.  He  sees  the  witness  to  be  good,  and  he  believes  it.  That  man  is  saved. 
What  happens  next  ?  Why,  this  man  becomes  a  new  creature.  He  is  radically 
changed.  "  Now,"  says  he  to  himself,  "  I  am  sure  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  for 
this  wonderful  change  in  me,  in  my  heart,  my  speech,  and  my  life,  must  be  of 
Divine  origin.  I  was  told  that  if  I  believed  I  should  be  saved  from  my  former  self, 
and  I  am.  Now,  I  know,  not  only  by  the  external  witness,  nor  even  because  of  the 
witness  of  God,  but  I  have  an  inner  consciousness  of  a  most  marvellous  birth,  and 
this  is  a  witness  in  myself."  The  man  then  goes  on  to  enjoy  great  peace.  Looking 
alone  to  Jesus  Christ  for  pardon,  he  finds  his  sins  taken  from  him,  and  his  heart  is 
unburdened  of  a  load  of  fear,  and  this  rest  of  heart  becomes  to  him  another  inward 
witness.  As  the  Christian  thus  goes  on  from  strength  to  strength  he  meets  with 
answers  to  prayer.  He  goes  to  God  in  trouble.  In  great  perplexity  he  hastens  to 
the  Lord,  light  comes,  and  he  sees  his  way.  He  wants  many  favours,  he  asks  for 
them,  and  they  are  bestowed.  "  He  that  believeth  hath  the  witness  in  himself  "  ; 
and  there  is  no  witness  like  it.  Except  the  witness  of  God,  which  stands  first,  and 
which  we  are  to  receive,  or  perish,  there  is  nothing  equal  to  the  witness  within  your- 
self. Many  a  poor  man  and  woman  could  illuminate  their  Bibles  after  the  fashion 
of  the  tried  saint  who  placed  a  "  T.  and  P."  in  the  margin.  She  was  asked  what  it 
meant,  and  she  replied,  "  That  means  '  Tried  and  proved,'  sir."  Yes,  we  have  tried 
and  proved  the  Word  of  God,  and  are  sure  of  its  truth.  III.  How  ake  we  tbeatino 
THE  WITNESS  OF  GoD  ?  For  it  is  written  in  our  text,  "  He  that  believeth  not  God 
hath  made  Him  a  Uar ;  because  he  believeth  not  the  witness  that  God  witnessed  of 
His  Son."  Now,  are  we  believing  the  witness  of  God  ?  Do  you  unconverted  people 
beUeve  that  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  you  ?  Then  you  must  be  insane  if  you  do 
not  seek  to  escape  from  that  wrath.  If  you  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  saves  from  sin, 
and  gives  to  the  soul  a  treasure  far  beyond  all  price,  you  will  make  all  speed  to 
obtain  the  precious  boon.  Is  it  not  so  ?  He  who  believes  in  the  value  of  a  gift  will 
hasten  to  accept  it,  unless  he  be  out  of  his  mind.  Methinks  I  hear  one  say,  "  I 
would  believe  if  I  felt  something  in  my  heart."  You  will  never  feel  that  something. 
You  are  required  to  believe  on  the  witness  of  God,  and  will  you  dare  to  say  that  His 
evidence  is  not  sufiicient  ?  If  you  will  beUeve  on  the  Divine  testimony  you  shall 
have  the  witness  within  by  and  by,  but  you  cannot  have  that  first.  The  demand  of 
the  gospel  is,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  believe  upon  God's  testimony." 
What  testimony  do  you  want  more  ?  God  has  given  it  you  in  many  forms.  By  His 
inspired  book ;  by  the  various  works  of  His  Spirit,  and  by  the  water  and  the  blood 
in  the  Church  all  around  you.  Above  all,  Jesus  Himself  is  the  best  of  witnesses, 
BeUeve  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  bath  the 
■witness  In  himself. — The  inward  witness  of  faith  ; — Testimony  and  experience  consti- 
tute two  separate  and  independent  grounds  of  faith.  That  we  may  have  full  confi- 
dence in  the  skill  of  a  physician,  it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  have  seen  him, 
or  have  personally  witnessed  any  of  the  cures  effected  by  him.  Our  faith  may  rest 
simply  on  the  testimony  of  competent  witnesses.  But  there  is  also  a  faith  that 
grounds  itself  on  our  own  personal  experience.  The  physician  whom  we  first 
employed,  because  he  was  recommended  to  us  by  others,  may  now  receive  our 
confidence  from  what  we  have  ourselves  seen  and  felt  of  his  skill.  Our  faith  in  him 
began  with  testimony,  but  now  it  has  become  independent  of  it.  The  general  order 
of  God's  moral  government  is,  first  belief,  afterwards  experience.  We  must  begin 
by  using  testimony,  not  by  rejecting  it ;  by  cherishing  not  a  proud  and  sceptical, 
but  a  childlike  and  confiding  spirit.  The  gospel  of  Christ  comes  to  us  in  the  form 
of  Divine  testimony.  We  may  have  witnessed  its  effects  upon  others.  We  may 
have  heard  them  telling  with  joyful  accents  what  it  has  done  for  their  souls.  But 
this,  too,  is  testimony;  very  weighty  and  valuable  when  accompanied  by  such  a  life 
as  convinces  us  of  its  sincerity,  but  still  only  human  testimony,  with  its  usual  alloy 
of  error  and  imperfection.  It  cannot  convey  to  us  an  adequate  apprehension  of  the 
blessedness  and  power  of  faith  in  Christ,  any  more  than  a  description  of  light  can 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  431 

be  a  substitute  for  seeing  the  sun  shining  in  his  strength.  To  understand  fully 
how  worthy  the  gospel  is  of  our  acceptance,  we  must  feel  its  efficacy.  But  this  we 
cannot  till  we  have  received  it.  Our  reception  of  it,  then,  must  rest  on  God's  testi- 
mony. After  that,  we  shall  have  both  the  outward  and  the  inward  witness  of  its 
truth.  It  is  reasonable,  therefore,  when  God  calls  upon  men  to  repent  and  believe 
the  gospel,  that  He  should  furnish  them  with  clear  evidence  that  it  is  His  gospel, 
and  no  invention  of  man.  This  He  has  done  from  the  beginning.  Our  Saviour  did 
not  ask  His  hearers  to  receive  Him  as  the  Son  of  God,  without  first  furnishing  them 
with  many  "infallible  proofs"  of  His  Divine  mission  (John  v.  31,  x.  37,  v.  36). 
This  outward  evidence  which  Jesus  furnished  of  His  Messiahship  left  all  who 
rejected  Him  without  excuse.  But  to  those  who  received  Him  in  faith  and  love 
there  was  a  higher  testimony  (Matt.  xvi.  17).  The  man  who  has  received  the  gospel 
in  faith  and  love  knows,  from  his  own  experience,  that  it  satisfies  all  the  wants  of 
his  spiritual  nature,  and  must  therefore  be  true ;  since  it  is  inconceivable  that  the 
soul  should  be  nurtured  by  error,  and  kept  by  it  in  a  vigorous  and  healthful  condi- 
tion, as  that  the  body  should  thrive  on  poison.  I.  The  gospel  quiets  the  con- 
science, AND  THAT  ON  KEASONABLE  GROUNDS.  The  moment  the  soul  apprehends  the 
mighty  truth  that  God  has  manifested  Himself  in  the  flesh ;  that  in  the  person  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  true  God  has  taken  into  union  with  Himself  a  true 
human  nature,  and  in  this  nature  has  borne  the  curse  of  the  law  in  our  stead,  it 
cries  out  with  joy—"  This  it  what  I  need ;  a  propitiation  of  infinite  worth  to  meet 
the  immeasurable  guilt  of  my  sin."  II.  The  gospel  gives  the  victory  over  the 
INWARD  POWER  OF  SIN.  Of  the  grcatuess  and  difficulty  of  this  work  the  careless  and 
light-minded  have  no  conception.  But  let  one  who  has  gained  some  true  know- 
ledge of  the  Divine  law  as  a  spiritual  rule  for  the  regulation  of  the  inner  man  set 
himself  in  earnest  to  the  work  of  obeying  it  inwardly  as  well  as  outwardly,  and  he 
will  soon  make  distressing  discoveries  of  his  moral  impotence  ;  an  impotence  which 
lies  not  in  the  absence  or  defect  of  any  of  those  faculties  which  are  necessary  to 
qualify  him  to  render  to  God's  law  perfect  obedience,  but  only  in  his  free  guilty 
preference  of  earthly  above  spiritual  good.  To  emancipate  him  from  this  bondage 
to  indwelling  sin,  and  raise  him  to  holiness  and  communion  with  God,  he  needs 
help  from  above.  Here  the  gospel,  in  the  fulness  of  its  grace,  comes  to  his  relief.  It 
offers  him  the  all-sufficient  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  illumine  his  dark  mind, 
cleanse  his  polluted  soul  from  the  defilement  of  sin,  strengthen  his  weakness,  and 
give  him  a  victory  over  the  world.  III.  The  gospel  restores  the  soul  to  com- 
munion WITH  God.  Lessons :  1.  Only  they  who  receive  the  gospel  can  fully  appre- 
hend the  evidence  of  its  truth.  2.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  put  himself  in  such  an 
attitude  that  he  cannot  judge  rightly  of  the  evidence  by  which  the  gospel  is  supported. 
3.  Our  assurance  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  is  intimately  connected  with  the  growth 
of  our  piety.  (E.  P.  Barrows,  D.D.)  The  inward  witness  : — I.  How  come  we  to 
be  believers  ?  You  know  how  faith  arises  in  the  heart  from  the  human  point  of 
view.  We  hear  the  gospel,  we  accept  it  as  the  message  of  God,  and  we  trust  our- 
selves to  it.  So  far  it  is  our  own  work ;  and  be  it  remembered  that  in  every  case 
faith  is  and  must  be  the  act  of  man.  But,  having  said  that,  let  us  remember  that 
the  Godward  history  of  our  believing  is  quite  another  thing,  for  true  faith  is  always 
the  gift  of  God  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit  brings  us  to 
perform  the  act  of  faith  by  which  we  are  saved ;  and  the  process  is  after  this 
manner,  though  varying  in  different  individuals  :  1.  We  are  brought  attentively  to 
hsten  to  the  old,  old  story  of  the  Cross.  2.  Further,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  also  pleased 
to  make  us  conscious  of  our  sinfulness,  our  danger,  and  our  inability,  and  this  is  a 
great  way  towards  faith  in  Christ.  3.  Moreover,  while  attentively  hearing,  we 
perceive  the  suitability  of  the  gospel  to  our  case.  We  feel  ourselves  sinful,  and 
rejoice  that  our  great  Substitute  bore  our  sin,  and  suffered  on  its  account,  and  we 
say,  "  That  substitution  is  full  of  hope  to  me ;  salvation  by  an  atonement  is  precisely 
what  I  desire  ;  here  can  my  conscience  rest."  4.  There  is  but  one  more  step,  and 
that  is,  we  accept  Jesus  as  set  forth  in  the  gospel,  and  place  all  our  trust  in  Him. 
5.  When  the  soul  accepts  the  Lord  Jesus  as  Saviour,  she  believes  in  Him  as  God : 
for  she  saith,  "  How  can  He  have  offered  so  glorious  an  atonement  had  He  not  been 
Divine  ?  "  This  is  why  we  believe,  then,  and  the  process  is  a  simple  and  logical 
one.  The  mysterious  Spirit  works  us  to  faith,  but  the  states  of  mind  through  which 
He  brings  us  follow  each  other  in  a  beautifully  simple  manner.  II.  How  know  we 
THAT  believers  ABE  SAVED  ?  for  that  secms  to  be  a  grave  question  with  some.  God 
declares  in  His  Word,  even  in  that  sure  Word  of  testimony,  whereunto  ye  do  well 
to  take  heed  as  unto  a  light  that  shineth  in  a  dark  place,  that  every  believer  in  Jesus 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

Christ  is  saved.  Again,  we  know  on  the  authority  of  Scripture  that  believers  are 
saved,  because  the  privileges  which  are  ascribed  to  theln  prove  that  they  are  in  a 
saved  condition.  John  goes  to  the  very  root  of  every  matter,  and  in  chapter  i.  12 
he  tells  us,  "  As  many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons 
of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  His  name."  Once  again,  the  whole  tone  of 
Scripture  regards  the  believer  as  a  saved  man.  "  Believers  "  is  a  common  synonym 
for  saints,  for  sanctified  persons ;  and  truth  to  say  the  Epistles  are  written  to 
believers,  for  they  are  written  to  the  Churches,  and  Churches  are  but  assemblages 
of  beUevers.  HI.  How  do  we  know  that  we  are  believers  ?  It  is  clear  that  if 
we  are  behevers  we  are  saved,  but  how  do  we  know  that  we  are  believers  ?  First  of 
all,  as  a  general  rule,  it  is  a  matter  of  consciousness.  How  do  I  know  that  I  breathe? 
How  do  I  know  that  I  think  ?  I  know  I  do,  and  that  is  enough.  Faith  is  to  a  large 
extent  a  matter  of  consciousness.  I  beUeve,  and  if  you  ask  me  how  I  know  it  I 
reply,  "  I  am  sure  I  do."  Still  there  is  other  evidence.  How  do  I  know  that  I  am 
a  believer  ?  Why,  by  the  very  remarkable  change  which  I  underwent  when  I 
believed  ;  for  when  a  man  believes  in  Jesus  Christ  there  is  such  a  change  wrought 
in  him  that  he  must  be  aware  of  it.  Things  we  never  dreamed  of  before  we  have 
realised  now.  I  remember  one  who  when  he  was  converted  said,  "  WeU,  either  the 
world  is  new  or  else  I  am."  This  change  is  to  us  strong  evidence  that  faith  is  in 
us,  and  has  exercised  its  power.  We  have  further  evidence  that  we  believe,  for  our 
affections  are  so  altered.  The  believer  can  say  that  the  things  he  once  loved  he  now 
hates,  and  the  things  he  hated  he  now  loves ;  that  which  gave  him  pleasure  now 
causes  him  pain,  and  things  which  were  irksome  and  unpleasant  have  now  become 
delightful  to  him.  Especially  is  there  a  great  change  in  us  with  respect  to  God. 
We  know,  also,  that  we  beheve  because  though  very  far  from  perfect  we  love  holi- 
ness and  strive  after  purity.  And  we  know  that  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ 
because  now  we  have  communion  with  God ;  we  are  in  the  habit  of  speaking  with 
God  in  prayer,  and  hearing  the  Lord  speak  with  us  when  we  read  His  Word.  We 
know  that  we  have  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus  because  we  have  over  and  above  all 
this  a  secret  something,  indescribable  to  others,  but  wellknown  by  ourselves,  which 
is  called  in  Scripture  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  for  it  is  written,  "The  Spirit 
Himself  also  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  bom  of  God."  There 
comes  stealing  over  the  soul  sometimes  a  peace,  a  joy,  a  perfect  rest,  a  heavenly 
deliciousness,  a  supreme  content,  in  which,  though  no  voice  is  heard,  yet  are  we 
conscious  that  there  is  rushing  through  our  souls,  like  a  strain  of  heaven's  own 
music,  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  closing,  let  me  ask.  Do  you  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ  or  no  ?  If  thou  believest  thou  art  saved ;  if  thou  believest  not  thon 
art  condemned  already.  Let  me  next  ask,  are  any  of  you  seeking  after  any  witness 
beyond  the  witness  of  God  ?  If  you  are,  do  you  not  know  that  virtually  you  are 
making  God  a  liar  ?     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  internal  witness : — I.  It  includes  a 

CONSCIOUSNESS    OP   THE   EXISTENCE   OF  FAITH   IN   OUR    OWN   MINDS.        What    is    faith? 

"  The  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  It  draws 
aside  the  curtain  which  hides  the  eternal  world  from  view.  It  gives  reality,  in  our 
apprehensions,  to  the  future  condition  of  rational  and  immortal  beings.  It  causes 
us  to  Uve  under  the  influence  of  things  unseen  by  the  eye  of  sense  and  that  are 
eternal.  It  is  a  grace,  because  it  is  the  gift  of  God,  produced  in  the  soul  by  the 
operation  of  His  Spirit.  It  is  a  saving  grace,  because  wherever  it  is  produced 
salvation  is  its  concomitant  result.  Can  it  be  said  that  these  are  exercises  which 
elude  our  observation  ?  Surely,  if  we  can  be  conscious  of  any  thing  that  passes  within 
us,  we  may  and  ought  to  be  conscious  of  the  existence  and  operation  of  faith.     II. 

By  THE  EXERCISE  OF  FAITH  THE  EXPERIENCE  OF  THE  BELIEVER  IS  MADE  TO  HARMONISE 
WITH  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  THE  DiVINE  WORD,  80  THAT  THE  INTERNAL  WITNESS  IS  CON- 
FIRMED AND  STRENGTHENED.  Our  Lord  has  said,  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he 
shall  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God."  As  we  act  upon  it  we  find 
it  to  be  true.  This  statement  admits  of  a  very  extensive  illustration.  Every 
doctrine  of  the  Divine  Word  may  be  included  in  it.  IH.  The  effects  and  con- 
comitants   OF    FAITH    ARE     A     CONSTANT    AND    GROWING    TESTIMONY    TO    ITS    REALITT. 

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  faith  produces  a  complete  revolution  in  the  soul. 
Our  views  undergo  an  entire  change.  God,  and  self,  and  sin,  and  holiness,  and 
salvation,  and  time,  and  eternity,  are  seen  in  a  new  light.  Now,  is  a  work  such  as 
this  to  be  maintained  in  the  soul  without  the  consciousness  of  the  subject  of 
it?  It  must  be  most  strange  if  it  be  so.  Of  all  mysteries  and  miracles 
that  is  certainly  one  of  the  greatest.  Surely  if  it  be  unobserved  we  should 
fear    it  does  not  exist.      If    the  sun   shines  we  behold   his   light.      "  He  that 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  433 

believeth   in   God   hath   the  witness   in  himself."      (J.   Morgan,  D.D.)  The 

witness  in  oneself: — A  Christian  minister  should  often  press  upon  his  hearers 
the  difference  between  historical  and  saving  faith,  and  entreat  them  to  take  heed 
lest,  to  the  ruin  of  the  soul,  they  confound  things  which  are  so  essentially  distinct. 
The  historical  faith  requires  nothing  but  what  are  popularly  called  the  evidences  of 
Christianity ;  and  a  volume  from  Paley  or  Chalmers  gathering  to  a  point  the 
scattered  testimonies  to  the  Divine  origin  of  our  religion,  suffices,  with  every  inquir- 
ing mind,  to  produce  a  conviction  that  the  Bible  is  no  "  cunningly-devised  fable." 
But  saving  faith,  whilst  it  does  not  discard  the  evidences  which  serve  as  outworks  to 
Christianity,  possesses  others  which  are  pecuUar  to  itself ;  and  just  as  historical  faith 
being  seated  in  the  head,  the  proofs  on  which  it  rests  address  themselves  to  the  head,  so 
saving  faith  being  seated  in  the  heart,  in  the  heart  dwell  the  evidences  to  which  it 
makes  its  appeal.  The  character  to  which  the  apostle  refers  here  is  unquestionably 
that  of  a  true  believer  in  Christ,  one  who  believes  to  the  saving  of  the  soul,  and  not 
merely  with  the  assent  of  the  understanding.  The  Messiahship  of  Jesus  is  a  kind 
of  centre  whence  emanate  those  various  truths  through  belief  in  which  we  become 
raised  from  the  ruins  of  the  Fall ;  and  no  man  can  have  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ, 
the  Anointed  of  God,  except  so  far  as  he  has  faith  in  the  life-giving  doctrines  which 
He  was  anointed  to  proclaim.  No  correct  estimate  can  be  formed  of  sin  unless  we 
measure  its  enormity  by  the  greatness  of  the  satisfaction  which  was  required  for  its 
pardon.  And  only  so  far  as  the  heinousness  of  sin  is  discovered  can  the  fearfulness 
be  felt  of  our  condition  by  nature ;  and  therefore  we  may  justly  maintain  that  he  alone 
understands  rightly  the  fall  of  man  who  understands  rightly  the  evil  of  transgression. 
But  external  testimony  wiU  never  satisfy  us  of  this  evil ;  whereas  he  who  "  believes 
on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himseif  "  to  the  immensity  of  sin,  for  he  has 
in  himself  a  vigorous  perception  of  the  mysterious  and  awful  things  of  the  atone- 
ment. Sin  is  beheld  through  the  wounds  of  the  Saviour;  and,  thus  beheld,  its 
lightest  acting  is  discerned  to  be  infinitely  dishonouring  to  God  and  infinitely 
destructive  to  man.  But  it  is  "  in  himself  "  that  the  believer  finds  the  witness.  Faith 
brings  Christ  into  his  heart ;  and  then  the  mysteries  of  Calvary  are  developed  ;  and 
the  man  feels  his  own  share  in  the  crucifixion ;  feels,  as  we  have  already  described, 
that  his  own  sins  alone  were  of  guilt  enough  to  make  his  salvation  impossible  with- 
out that  crucifixion.  And  if  such  internal  feeUng  be  the  necessary  accompani- 
ment, or  rather  a  constituent  part,  of  saving  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  it  not 
undeniable  that  "  he  who  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself  " 
to  the  heinousness  of  sin ;  in  other  words,  "  hath  the  witness  in  himself  "  to  the  ruin 
consequent  on  transgression  ?  We  hasten  to  the  second  and  perhaps  more  obvious 
truth — namely,  that  "  he  that  beheveth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  him- 
self "  to  the  rescue  perfected  by  redemption.  We  enter  not  now  on  any  proof  of 
this  indissoluble  coimection  between  simple  faith  and  active  zeal.  We  refer  to 
beMeving  experience  ;  we  appeal  to  its  records.  Has  it  not  always  been  found  that 
the  strongest  faith  is  accompanied  by  the  warmest  love ;  and  that  in  the  very  pro- 
portion in  which  the  notion  has  been  discarded  of  works  availing  to  justification, 
have  works  been  wrought  as  evidences  and  effects  of  justification  ?  The  believer 
feels  and  finds  the  truth  of  this  "  in  himself."  His  whole  soul  is  drawn  out 
towards  God.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Christian  consciousness  as  a  witness  : — ^We 
acquire  knowledge  by  different  witnesses.  There  is — 1.  The  witness  of  the  senses. 
2.  The  witness  of  testimony.  All  history  is  but  a  collection  of  human  testimony 
regarding  past  events.  3.  The  witness  of  logic.  There  is  a  class  of  truths,  a  species 
of  knowledge  which  we  reach  by  conclusions  drawn  from  known  facts.  4.  The  witness 
of  consciousness.  Consciousness  assures  us  of  thereaUty  of  all  our  mental  impulses 
and  states.  The  text  brings  under  our  notice  the  witness  of  Christian  consciousness. 
I  offer  three  remarks  concerning  this  witness.  I.  It  is  the  most  important  of 
ALL  WITNESSES.  Why  is  it  the  most  important  ?  Because  it  bears  witness  to  the 
most  momentous  realities.  1.  The  truth  of  the  gospel.  Fully  acknowledging  the  value 
of  other  evidences  in  favour  of  Christianity,  such  as  that  of  history,  prophecy, 
miracle,  and  success,  none  are  to  be  compared  in  value  to  that  of  consciousness.  The 
gospel  "commends  itself  to  every  man's  conscience."  This  is  the  witness  that 
gives  to  the  majority  of  believers  in  Christianity  their  faith.  2.  The  soul's  interest 
in  the  gospel.  H.  It  is  the  most  incontboveetible  of  all  witnesses.  The 
'  evidence  of  the  senses,  which  often  deceive ;  of  human  testimony,  which  is  fallible ; 
of  logic,  which  often  errs,  is  all  controvertible.  Doubts  may  be  raised  at  all  the 
statements  of  these  witnesses.  But  what  consciousness  attests  is  at  once  placed 
beyond  argument,  beyond  debate,  beyond  doubt.    It  never  lies,  it  never  mistakes. 

28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  y. 

What  consciousness  attests,  lives,  despite  the  antagonism  of  all  philosophy  and 
logic.     The  verities  attested  by  consciousness  burn  as  imperishable  stars  in  the 
mental  hemisphere  of  the  mind.     "  One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  I  was  blind, 
now  I  see."      III.   It  is  the  most  AVArLABLE  of  all  witnesses.     In  some  cases, 
logic,  through  the  natural  feebleness  of  the  understanding,  and  in  other  cases, 
through  the  lack  of  data,  without  which,  however  naturally  strong,  it  cannot  speak, 
is  not  always  available  even  with  its  feeble  testimony.     But  the  witness  of  con- 
sciousness is  always  in  the  court.     The  availableness  of  the  witness,  it  must  be 
remembered,  depends  upon  the  possession  of  personal  Christianity.     If  we  have  it 
not,  consciousness  cannot  attest  it.     Have  we  this  witness?    It  is  no  transient 
phenomenon.     It  is  a  Paraclete  that  comes  to  abide  with  him  for  ever.     (Homilist.) 
Evidences  of  personal  piety : — I.    Conversion.      Here  we  must  begin   in   all   our 
inquiries  after  religion.     11.  HrrMiLiTY.     III.  Faith.     IV.  Pbater.  Without  prayer 
a  man  cannot  have  "  the  witness  in  himself "  that  he  is  the  subject  of  true  piety. 
V.  Love.  The  man  that  would  know  whether  he  be  a  true  Christian  must  search 
for  evidences  of  supreme  love  to  God  and  Christ,  and  love  to  the  people  of  God  for 
His  sake.    VI.  Hatred  of  sin.    VII.  Holiness  of  life.    Essential  as  the  evidences 
of  the  heart  are  to  prove  a  man  a  Christian,  none  of  them  can  be  considered  as 
genuine  unless  they  are  corroborated  by  the  outward  conduct.  {Essex  Remembrancer.) 
The  believer's  "ivit7iess  in   himself": — I.  The  declaration — "he    that    believeta 
on  the  Son  of  God,  hath  the  witness  in  himself."     "  The  witness  "  of  what?     I 
do  not  understand  it  to  be  the  same  as  that  which  we  meet  with  in  the  eighth  of  the 
Eomans,  "  The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  children 
of  God."    I  think  "the  witness"  here  is  to  the  truth  connected  with  the  former 
verse — "If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater ;  for  this 
is  the  witness  of  God,  which  He  hath  testified  of  His  Son."     The  declaration  of 
the  text,  then,  amounts  to  this :   that  he  that  truly  believes  on  the  Son  of  God 
hath  internal  proof  that  God's  Word  is  true.     If  we  take  it  in  its  most  general 
view,  it  is  so.   He  reads  in  that  book  declarations  concerning  man,  as  a  guilty,  lost, 
ruined,  weak,  helpless  creature  ;  and  he  that  believeth  hath  inward  witness  that  it 
is  so.  But  especially  does  it  refer  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  great  sum  and  substance 
of  the  gospel.     The  believer  in  Him  has  internal  witness    "  that  Jesus    is   the 
Christ."     II.  How  is  it  that  he  has  it  ?    It  is  a  thing  altogether  spiritual.     It  is 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     If  you  ask  by  what  it  is  that  He  conveys  it,  I  answer, 
by  faith.     "Faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not 
seen."    A  man  does  not  really  know  a  truth  till  he  believes  it ;  a  man  does  not 
really  know  Christ,  till  he  believes  in  Him.    It  is  faith  that  gives  body  to  the  truth  ; 
it  is  faith  that  reveals  Christ  to  the  soul  of  man.     But  do  you  ask  what  it  is  that 
confirms  it  ?    A  man  sees  what  effects  it  produces,  a  man  observes  the  consequences 
of  it.     He  has  been  working  hard  for  righteousness,  and  he  has  the  revelation  of 
Christ  and  His  righteousness  to  pacify  his  conscience.     And  if  you  ask  in  what 
school  it  is  that  the  Lord  the  Spirit  teaches  a  man  and  instructs  him,  I  answer, 
in  the  school  of  experience.    "  In  His  Word  I  read  it ;  in  the  experience  of  my  soul 
I  know  it."    III.  The   qualities  that   mark  this  inward  witness.    Beloved,  it 
is    a   Scriptural   witness.      The    Spirit   of    God    uses    His  Word    as   the    great 
medium  of  all  consolation  and  all  sanctification.     Not  that  He  is  to  be  limited 
by   us ;    who   shall    say  what   direct  communication  He  may  have  with  us  ?     I 
dare  not  deny  it.     But  it  must  be  tested  by  the  Word  of  God.     Bring  it  to  the 
Word  of  truth ;  if  it  be  of   God,   it  will  stand  the  test  of  truth  ;  for   all  truth 
is  to   be   tried   by   its  own   test,   and  whatever  comes  from   God  must  be  that 
which  leads  to   God.     (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)         The   true  position   of  the   witness 
within : — Here    then — I.    Believing    on    the    Son    of    God    comes    before    the 
INNER  witness.     "  He  that   believeth   on   the   Son   of  God  hath   the   witness  in 
himself  "  ;  he  believes  before  he  has  that  witness,  and  it  is  only  as  a  believer  that 
he  obtains  it.     1.  The  basis  of  faith  is  the  testimony  of  God  concerning  His  Son — 
the  testimony  of  God  as  we  find  it  in  Holy  Scripture.     Dare  we  ask  more  ?     We 
must  not  go  about  to  buttress  the  solid  pillar  of  Divine  testimony.     2.  Note  that 
the  words  which  follow  our  text  assure  us  very  solemnly  that  the  rejection  of  this 
basis,  namely,  God's  own  testimony,  involves  the  utmost  possible  guilt.     "  He  that 
believeth  not  God,  hath  made  Him  a  liar;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record 
which  God  gave  of  His  Son."     3.  Now,  this  basis  of  faith  is  abundantly  sufficient. 
If  we  were  not  alienated  from  God,  we  should  feel  this  at  once.     4.  Now,  though 
this  basis  is  sufficient,  the  Lord,  knowing  our  unbelief,  has  been  pleased  not  to  add 
to  it,  but  to  set  it  before  us  in  a  graciously  amplified  manner.     He  says,  "  There 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  435 

are  three  which  bear  witness  in  earth,  the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood,  and 
these  three  agree  in  one."  There  is  the  witness  of  the  Spirit.  Instead  of  miracles 
we  have  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost:  men  quickened  from  death  in  sin,  hearts 
renewed,  eyes  enlightened,  souls  regenerated — these  are  the  standing  witnesses  of 
God  in  the  Church  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  Then,  there  is  the  witness  of  the 
water.  By  the  water  I  understand  the  spkitual  life  which  abides  in  the  Church — 
the  life  and  the  cleansing  which  God  gives  to  behevers.  Then  there  is  the  blood — 
a  third  witness — that  blood  of  atonement  which  brings  peace  to  the  guilty  conscience, 
and  ends  the  strife  within.  There  is  no  voice  like  it  to  beheving  ears.  Beyond 
this  evidence,  the  hearer  of  the  gospel  may  expect  nothing.  What  more  can  he 
need  ?  What  more  can  he  desire  ?  If  you  refuse  Christ  upon  the  witness  of  God, 
you  must  refuse  Him  outright,  for  other  witness  shall  never  be  given  unto  those 
who  beUeve  not  upon  the  solenm  testimony  of  God.  5.  And  let  me  say  that  this 
basis  which  has  been  so  graciously  amplified  in  the  triple  witness  of  the  Spirit,  the 
water,  and  the  blood,  has  this  to  commend  it,  that  it  is  everlasting  and  immutable. 
6.  Now,  the  faith  which  will  not  and  cannot  rest  on  this  basis  is  evidently  no  faith 
in  God  at  all,  but  a  proud  resolve  to  demand  other  evidence  than  His  word. 
"Well,"  saith  one,  "but  suppose  I  were  to  see  a  vision,  I  should  then  beheve." 
That  is  to  say,  you  would  believe  your  vision,  but  that  vision  would,  in  all  proba- 
bihty,  be  the  result  of  a  fevered  brain,  and  you  would  be  deceived.  "  Oh,  but  if  I 
could  hear  a  voice,  then  I  could  beheve."  That  is  to  say,  you  refuse  the  sure  word 
of  testimony  in  the  Bible,  and  will  only  believe  God  if  He  will  condescend  to  indulge 
your  whims.  Voices  which  you  might  think  you  heard  are  not  to  be  depended  upon, 
for  imagination  easily  creates  them.  7.  Let  me  tell  those  of  you  who  will  not 
believe  in  God  till  you  get  a  certain  experience,  or  sign,  or  wonder  to  be  added 
to  God's  word,  that  those  of  His  people  who  have  been  longest  walking  by 
faith  have  to  come  back  full  often  to  the  first  foundation  of  faith  in  the  outer 
witness  of  God  in  His  Word.  Whether  I  am  saint  or  sinner,  there  standeth  the 
word,  "  He  that  beheveth  in  Him  is  not  condemned."  I  do  beheve  in  Him 
and  I  am  not  condemned,  nor  shaU  all  the  devils  in  hell  make  me  think  I  am, 
since  God  has  said  I  am  not.  On  that  rock  my  faith  shall  stand  unshaken,  come 
what  may.  JI.  The  inner  witness  naturally  follows  upon  faith.  "  He  that 
beheveth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself."  1.  It  is  quite  impossible 
that  the  inner  witness  should  precede  faith.  If  you  refuse  to  believe  God's  word 
how  can  you  think  that  the  Spirit  will  bear  witness  of  anything  in  you  except  it  be 
to  your  condemnation  ?  There  must  be  faith  going  before,  and  then  the  witness 
will  follow  after.  2.  But  be  it  remembered  especiaUy  that  a  man  may  have  the 
witness  within  him  and  sometimes  he  may  not  perceive  it.  Now,  what  is  this 
witness  within  ?  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Saviour  of  sinners — that 
is  the  main  point  to  be  witnessed.  First  the  Spirit,  after  we  have  beheved,  bears 
witness  in  our  soul  that  it  is  so,  because  we  perceive  that  the  Spirit  has  led  us  to 
beheve  in  Jesus,  and  has  given  us  repentance ;  the  Spirit  has  renewed  us,  the  Spirit 
has  made  us  different  from  what  we  were.  Then  the  water  bears  witness  within  us 
— that  is  to  say,  we  feel  a  new  hfe.  Thirdly,  the  precious  blood  within  our  souls 
bears  further  witness,  for  then  we  rejoice  before  God  as  cleansed  by  the  blood  from 
aU  sin.  Now  we  have  confirmatory  witness  within  our  spirits,  given  not  because 
we  demanded  it,  but  as  a  sweet  reward  and  gracious  privilege.  We  should  never 
have  received  it  if  we  had  not  beheved  first  on  the  naked  word  of  God,  but  after 
that  the  witness  flows  naturaUy  into  the  heart.  And  what  if  I  were  to  speak  of 
growing  hoUness  of  character,  of  increased  conformity  to  Christ's  image  ?  Do 
not  these  form  a  good  inner  witness  ?  What  if  I  were  to  speak  of  growing  strength, 
so  that  the  things  we  dare  not  once  attempt  we  now  accomplish  with  ease,  or  of 
growing  patience  under  tribulation.  Either  of  these  would  be  noble  proofs.  HI. 
This  inner  witness  is  exceedingly  excellent.  1.  Because  it  is  very  plain  and 
easy  to  be  understood.  Numbers  of  you  have  never  read  "  Butler's  Analogy,"  and 
if  you  were  set  to  study  it  you  would  go  to  sleep  over  it.  Never  mind,  you  may 
have  an  unanswerable  "  analogy  "  in  your  own  souls.  2.  That  is  another  point 
of  its  excellence — that  it  is  unanswerable.  A  man  is  told  that  a  certain  medicine 
is  mere  quackery,  "  See  here,"  says  he,  "it  healed  me."  What  do  you  say  to 
such  an  argument  ?  You  had  better  let  the  man  alone.  So  when  a  Christian  is 
told  that  the  gospel  is  all  nonsense  he  rephes,  "  It  saved  me.  I  was  a  man 
of  strong  passions,  and  it  tamed  me,  and  more."  What  can  you  say  to  such  facts? 
Why,  nothing.  3.  Such  argument  as  this  is  very  abiding  in  its  results.  A  man 
who  has  been  transformed  by  the  gospel  cannot  be  baffled,  because  every  day  his 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

argument  is  renewed,  and  he  finds  fresh  reasons  within  himself  for  knowing  that 
what  he  believed  is  true.  Such  argument  is  always  ready  to  hand.  Sometimes  U 
you  are  challenged  to  a  controversy  you  have  to  reply,  "  Wait  tiU  I  run  upstairs 
and  consult  a  few  books,"  but  when  the  evidence  is  personal — "  I  have  felt  it,  I 
know  it,  I  have  tasted  it,  handled  it " — why  you  have  your  argument  at  your 
fingers'  ends  at  aU  times.  4.  Such  witness  as  this  gives  a  man  great  boldness.  He 
does  not  begin  to  conceal  his  opinions,  or  converse  with  his  neighbour  with  an 
apologetic  air,  but  he  is  positive  and  certain.     IV.  Excellent  as  this  inner  witness 

is,    IT    MUST    NEVER   BE    PUT    IN    THE    PLACE     OF    THE    DiVINE    WITNESS    IN    THE    WoRD. 

Why  not?  Because  it  would  insult  the  Lord,  and  be  contrary  to  His  rule  of 
salvation  by  faith.  Because,  moreover,  it  is  not  always  with  us  in  equal  clearness, 
or  rather,  we  cannot  equally  discern  it.  If  the  brightest  Cliristian  begins  to  base 
his  faith  upon  his  experience  and  his  attainments,  he  will  be  in  bondage  before 
long.  Build  on  what  God  hath  said,  and  not  upon  your  inward  joys.  Accept 
these  precious  things  not  as  foundation  stones,  but  as  pinnacles  of  your  spiritual 
temple.  Let  the  main  thing  be  —  "I  believe  because  God  hath  spoken." 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  evidetitial  importance  of  the  irmer  witness  : — AU  the 

objective  witness  is  crowned  and  perfected  when  it  passes  inwardly  into  the 
soul,  into  the  heart  and  life — when  the  believer  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness 
in  himself.  The  evidential  importance  of  the  inner  witness  is  well  stated  by  Baxter. 
"I  am  now  much  more  apprehensive  than  heretofore  of  the  necessity  of  well 
grounding  men  in  their  religion,  and  especially  of  the  witness  of  the  indwelling 
Spirit ;  for  I  more  sensibly  perceive  that  the  Spirit  is  the  great  witness  of  Christ 
and  Christianity  to  the  world.  And  though  the  folly  of  fanatics  tempted  me  long 
to  overlook  the  strength  of  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  whilst  they  placed  it  in  a 
certain  internal  affection  or  enthusiastic  inspiration,  yet  now  I  see  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  another  manner  is  the  witness  of  Christ  and  His  agent  in  the  world.  The 
Spirit  in  the  prophets  was  His  first  witness ;  and  the  Spirit  by  miracles  was  the 
second ;  and  the  Spirit  by  renovation  and  sanctification,  illumination  and  consola- 
tion, assimilating  the  soul  to  Christ  and  heaven,  is  the  continued  witness  to  all  true 
believers.  And  therefore  ungodly  persons  have  a  great  disadvantage  in  their 
resisting  temptations  to  unbelief."  {Ahp.  W.  Alexander.)  Believing  and  know- 
ing : — Two  and  two  make  four — that  is  mathematics ;  hydrogen  and  oxygen  in 
certain  proportions  make  water — that  is  science ;  Christ  and  Him  crucified  is  the 
power  and  wisdom  of  God  for  salvation — that  is  revelation.  But  how  do  you  know  ? 
Put  two  and  two  together  and  you  have  four  ;  count  and  see.  Put  hydrogen  and 
oxygen  together  and  you  have  water  ;  taste  and  prove.  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved ;  believe  and  thou  shalt  know.  The  last  is  as  clear 
a  demonstration  as  the  others.  (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  He  that  believethnot 
Ood  hath  made  Trim  a  liar ;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of 
His  Son. — Rejecting  the  Divine  testimony  ; — I.  The  sin  of  rejecting  Christ  is  vert 

AGGRAVATED,  SEEING   IT   18  AN    OFFENCE    AGAINST    GOD.       *'  He    that    believeth  HOt  God 

hath  made  Him  a  liar ;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of  His 
Son."  The  language  is  fearfuUy  strong.  "  He  hath  made  Him  a  liar."  Strong, 
however,  as  it  is,  it  is  only  calling  the  sin  by  its  right  name.  God  has  borne  witness 
to  His  Son  in  every  way  that  ought  to  satisfy  the  most  scrupulous  mind.  It  is  the 
testimony  of  God  Himself  which  they  withstand.  Therefore  are  they  charged  with 
virtually  pronouncing  His  testimony  false.  Our  Lord  presents  the  subject  in  the  verj 
same  light,  denouncing  the  sin  of  unbelief  with  equal  severity,  and  exposing  its  enor- 
mity by  tracing  it  up  to  the  deep-seated  love  of  sin  in  the  heart  (John  iii.  18,  19). 
"  Because  their  deeds  are  evil."  There  lies  the  secret  of  opposition  to  Christ  and  His 
gospel.  It  is  fhe  love  of  sin.  "Every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh 
to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved."  II.  Sdch  conduct  is  distinguished 
AS  much  by  folly  as  by  sin,  considering  the  nature  and  value  of  that  which  is 
rejected.  "  And  this  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this 
life  is  in  His  Son."  1.  Eternal  life.  How  are  we  to  describe  it?  It  comprehends  all 
the  blessedness  which  man  is  capable  of  enjoying  in  this  life,  and  in  that  which  is 
to  come.  The  lowest  idea  we  can  attach  to  it  is  the  remission  of  all  our  sins.  The 
sentence  of  death  which  on  their  account  has  been  passed  upon  us  is  removed. 
What  an  unspeakable  blessing  1  Great,  however,  as  such  a  blessing  is,  it  is  accom- 
panied by  another,  greater  and  better.  This  is  "  acceptance  in  the  beloved."  Not 
merely  is  there  deliverance  from  condemnation,  but  admission  to  favour.  The  two 
blessings  arise  out  of  the  same  source,  and  that  is  union  with  Christ.  On  the 
ground  of  His  atonement  we  are  at  once  freed  from  death  and  crowned  with  life. 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  437 

Nor  is  this  all.  The  same  prolific  source  yields  another  blessing,  which  is  never  sepa- 
rated from  pardon  and  acceptance.  The  dead  soul  is  at  the  same  time  quickened 
and  made  alive  unto  God.  The  eyes  are  opened  to  see  the  vileness  of  sin  and 
the  beauty  of  holiness.  The  ears  are  unstopped  to  hear  the  voice  of  God  in  His 
Word  and  works.  The  tongue  is  unloosed  to  speak  with  Him  in  prayer,  and  for 
Him  to  man.  The  hands  are  emancipated  to  engage  in  His  service.  And  the  feet 
are  turned  into  His  ways,  and  run  in  the  paths  of  His  commandments.  The 
blessings  of  life  are  now  enjoyed.  There  is  activity  with  all  its  healthful  exercises. 
There  is  purity,  with  all  its  peace  and  prosperity.  There  is  enjoyment,  with  all  its 
precious  treasures.  In  the  measure  in  which  spiritual  life  is  restored,  we  are  made 
like  unto  God.  To  consummate  this  blessedness,  the  stamp  of  eternity  is  put  upon 
it.  2.  The  source  from  which  this  blessing  is  represented  to  proceed  is  calculated 
greatly  to  enhance  and  recommend  it.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  3.  Farther,  not  only 
has  the  apostle  described  the  blessedness,  and  the  source  from  which  it  comes,  but 
the  very  channel  through  which  it  is  conveyed  to  us.  "  This  life  is  in  His  Son." 
The  design  of  this  announcement  is  at  once  to  instruct  and  encourage  us.  It  seems 
to  contemplate  the  mind  awakened  by  such  a  blessedness  as  was  proposed  to  it, 
and  inquiring  where  shall  I  find  it?  To  such  a  one  it  is  said,  go  unto  Jesus.  III. 
It  is  inexcusable,  seeing  it  may  be  so  simply  and  effectually  secured. 
"  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life  ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not 
life."  To  "  have  the  Son  "  is  identified,  in  the  text  itseK,  with  believing  on  Him. 
We  may  have  Christ  and  eternal  life  in  Him  simply  by  believing.  This  is  the 
constant  testimony  of  the  Divine  Word.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life." 
So  soon  as  we  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  we  are  put  in  possession  of  life.  This 
is  true  of  all  the  blessings  contained  in  it.  But  how  solemn  is  the  alternative ! 
"  He  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life."  He  cannot  have  pardon,  for 
"  without  the  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission."  He  cannot  have  favour,  for,  "  if  a 
man  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all."  He  cannot 
have  holiness,  for,  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  And 
he  cannot  be  an  heir  of  glory,  for  Jesus  hath  said,  "  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth, 
and  the  life ;  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
A  solemn  impeachment  of  unbelievers : — It  is  always  well  for  every  man  to  know 
exactly  what  he  is  at.  On  the  sea  of  life  the  oftener  we  take  observations  as  to  our 
longitude  and  latitude  the  better.  I  believe  there  is  such  a  thing  as  pitying  sinners 
and  comforting  them  till  they  consider  themselves  to  be  no  longer  blameworthy, 
and  even  regard  themselves  as  unhappy  people  who  deserve  sympathy.  I.  The 
sinner's  inability  to  believe  dissected.  He  pleads  that  he  cannot  believe.  He 
often  says  this,  and  quiets  his  conscience  with  it.  Let  me  take  your  unbelief  to 
pieces  and  show  why  it  is  that  you  cannot  believe.  1.  The  inability  of  many  of 
you  lies  in  the  fact  that  you  do  not  care  to  think  about  the  matter  at  aU.  You 
give  your  mind  to  your  business,  your  pleasure,  or  your  sin :  you  dream  that  there 
is  time  enough  yet  to  think  of  heavenly  things,  and  you  think  them  to  be  of 
secondary  importance.  Many,  however,  say,  "  Oh,  yes,  I  believe  the  Bible,  I 
believe  it  is  God's  book,  I  believe  the  gospel  to  be  God's  gospel."  Why,  then, 
do  you  not  believe  in  Jesus  ?  It  must  be  because  you  do  not  think  the  gospel 
message  important  enough  to  be  obeyed  ;  and  in  so  doing  you  are  giving  God  the 
lie  practically,  for  you  tell  Him  that  your  soul  is  not  so  precious  as  He  says  it 
is,  neither  is  your  state  so  perilous  as  He  declares  it  to  be.  2.  A  second  reason 
of  the  sinner's  inability  to  believe  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  gospel  is  true.  "  No," 
you  reply,  "  that  is  precisely  why  we  would  beUeve  it."  Yes,  but  what  does  Jesus 
say  in  John  viii.  45  ?  When  religious  impostures  have  arisen,  the  very  men  who 
have  heard  the  gospel  from  their  youth  up,  and  have  not  received  it  because  it  ia 
true,  have  become  dupes  of  imposition  at  once.  The  truth  did  not  suit  their 
nature,  which  was  under  the  dominion  of  the  father  of  lies,  but  no  sooner  was  a 
transparent  lie  brought  under  their  notice  than  they  leaped  at  it  at  once  like  a  fish 
at  a  fly.  The  monstrous  credulity  of  unbelief  amazes  me !  3.  There  are  persona 
who  do  not  receive  the  gospel  because  it  is  despised  among  men.  Sinner,  this  ia 
no  small  offence,  to  be  ready  to  accept  the  verdict  of  your  feUow-men,  but  not  ready 
to  accept  the  declaration  of  your  God.  4.  Many,  however,  do  not  receive  the  gospel 
because  they  are  much  too  proud  to  believe  it.  The  gospel  is  a  very  humbling  thing. 
5.  Another  reason  why  men  cannot  believe  God's  testimony  concerning  Jesus  lies  in 
the  holiness  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel  proclaims  Jesus,  who  saves  men  from  their 
sins,  but  you  do  not  want  that.  II.  The  nature  of  the  sin  of  unbelief,  in  that 
it  makes  God  a  liar.    Those  are  guilty  of  this  sin  who  deny  that  Jesus  is  the 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap,  v. 

Messiah,  the  promised  Saviour,  the  Son  of  God.  When  a  man  says  that  Jesus  is 
not  God,  and  the  Father  says  He  is,  the  lie  direct  is  given  ;  but,  as  I  believe  there 
are  very  few  of  that  kind  of  unbelievers,  I  will  leave  such  persons  and  pass  on.  A 
poor  trembling,  weeping  sinner  comes  to  me,  and  amongst  other  things  he  says, 
"  My  sins  are  so  great  that  I  do  not  believe  they  can  be  pardoned."  I  meet  him 
thus.  God  says,  "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,"  &c.  "  But,  sir,  my  sin  is  very 
great  indeed."  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 
"But  my  transgressions  have  been  exceedingly  aggravated."  "Let  the  wicked 
forsake  his  way,"  &q.  "  Sir,  I  cannot  believe  it."  Stand  up,  then,  and  tell  the  Lord 
so  in  the  plainest  manner.  Another  will  say,  "  Oh,  but  my  heart  is  so  hard  I 
cannot  believe  in  the  power  of  God  to  make  a  new  man  of  me  and  deUver  me  from 
the  love  of  sin."  Yet  God  declares  in  His  Word,  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give 
them,"  &c.  In  many  there  exists  a  doubt  about  the  willingness  of  God  to  save.  They 
say,  "  I  believe  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  does  blot  out  sin,  but  is  He  willing  to 
pardon  me?"  Now,  listen  to  what  Jehovah  says:  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I 
have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but  had  rather  that  He  turn  unto 
Me  and  live."  "Alas,"  cries  one,  "  my  ground  for  doubt  is  deeper;  I  hear  that 
God  can  pardon,  regenerate,  and  all  that,  and  I  believe  it,  but  then  I  cannot  see 
that  any  of  this  is  for  me.  I  do  not  see  that  these  things  are  meant  for  me."  Listen, 
then,  to  what  God  says,  "Ho  every  one  that  thirsteth,"  &c.  You  adroitly  reply, 
"  But  I  do  not  thirst."  More  shame  for  you,  then  !  Listen  again,  "  Come  imto  Me 
all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  "  But  I  do  not 
labour."  Do  not  lalx  v  ?  How  do  you  get  your  living  ?  I  am  sorry  for  you  if 
you  are  such  a  lazy  man  that  you  have  no  labour.  That  text  includes  every 
labouring  man  and  every  heavy  laden  man  under  heaven.  Listen  yet  again, 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  Does  not  that  invite  every  living  man  who  is 
willing  to  come?  If  you  say,  "I  am  not  willing,"  then  I  leave  you,  for  you  confess 
that  you  are  unwilling  to  be  saved,  and  that  is  exactly  what  I  am  trying  to  prove — 
you  cannot  believe  because  you  are  unwilling  to  do  so.  Yet  hear  me  once  again. 
Jesus  has  said  to  His  disciples,  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  creature ;  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  Are  you  a 
creature  ?  "  Yes,  I  am  a  creature."  Well,  man,  God  has  put  it  as  plain  as  it  can 
be  put  that  the  gospel  is  to  be  preached  to  you,  and,  therefore,  it  has  a  relation 
to  you.  Would  God  send  it  to  you  to  tantalise  you  ?  When  you  say,  "It  is  not 
for  me,"  you  give  God  the  lie.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  but  I  cannot  see  how  simply 
trusting  in  Christ,  and  believing  God's  witness  of  Him,  would  save  my  soul."  Are 
you  never  to  believe  anything  but  what  you  can  see,  and  how  are  you  to  see  this 
thing  till  you  have  tried  it  ?  The  faith  which  is  commanded  in  the  gospel  is  faith 
in  the  record  which  God  has  given  concerning  His  Son,  a  faith  which  takes  God 
at  His  word.  Believe,  then,  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  have  believed  God 
to  be  true :  refuse  to  trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  unless  you  get  some  other  evidence 
beyond  the  witness  of  God,  and  you  have  practically  said  that  God's  testimony  is 
not  enough,  that  is  to  say,  you  have  made  God  a  liar.  III.  The  execration  of 
THIS  SIN.  To  disbelieve  God  is  a  sin  indeed  1  It  was  the  mother  sin  of  all,  the 
door  by  which  all  other  evil  came  into  the  world.  Oh,  accursed  unbelief  I  How  can 
the  absolutely  true  submit  to  be  charged  with  falsehood?  This  sin  of  making 
God  a  liar  I  do  pray  you  look  at  it  very  solemnly,  for  it  is  a  stab  at  God  Himself. 
Then,  remember,  this  unbelief  insults  God  on  a  very  tender  point.  He  comes  to 
the  guilty  sinner  and  says,  "  I  am  ready  to  forgive."  The  sinner  says,  "  I  do 
not  believe  Thee."  "  Hear  Me,"  says  the  Lord.  "  What  proof  do  you  ask  ?  See, 
I  have  given  My  only-begotten  Son — He  has  died  upon  the  tree  to  save  sinners." 
••  Still  I  do  not  believe  Thee,"  says  the  unbeliever.  Now,  what  further  evidence 
can  be  given  ?  Infinite  mercy  has  gone  its  utmost  length  in  giving  the  Saviour  to 
bleed  and  die :  God  has  laid  bare  His  inmost  heart  in  the  wounds  of  His  dying 
Son,  and  still  He  is  not  believed.  Surely  man  has  reached  the  climax  of  enmity 
to  God  in  this  :  nothing  proves  the  utter  baseness  of  man  so  much  as  this  refusal 
to  believe  his  God,  and  nothing  proves  so  much  the  greatness  of  almighty  grace  as 
that  God  should  after  all  this  condescend  to  work  faith  in  a  heart  so  depraved. 
rV.  The  fate  of  the  unbelievbr.  If  this  man  continues  to  say  he  cannot 
believe  God,  and  that  Christ  is  not  to  be  trusted,  what  will  happen  to  him?  I 
wonder  what  the  angels  think  must  befall  a  being  who  calls  God  a  liar?  They  see 
His  glory,  and  as  they  see  it  they  veil  their  faces,  and  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy"; 
what  horror  would  they  feel  at  the  idea  of  making  God  untrue  !  The  saints  in 
heaven  when  they  see  the  glory  of  God  fall  down  on  their  faces  and  adore  Him.   Ask 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  439 

them  what  they  think  must  happen  to  those  who  persist  in  calling  God  a  liar,  and 
a  liar  in  the  matter  of  His  mercy  to  rebels  through  Jesus  Christ.  As  for  me,  I 
cannot  conceive  any  punishment  too  severe  for  final  unbelief.  Nothing  on  earth 
or  in  heaven  can  save  you  except  you  believe  in  Jesus.  Not  only  will  the  unbeliever 
be  lost,  but  he  will  be  lost  by  his  unbelief.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  He  that 
beheveth  not  is  condemned  already."  Why?  "Because  he  hath  not  believed  on 
the  Son  of  God."  Has  he  not  committed  a  great  deal  else  that  will  condemn  him? 
Oh,  yes,  a  thousand  other  sins  are  upon  him,  but  justice  looks  for  the  most  flagrant 
offence,  that  it  may  be  written  as  a  superscription  over  his  condemned  head,  and  it 
selects  this  monster  sin  and  writes  "  condemned,  because  he  hath  not  believed  on 
the  Son  of  God."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  immorality  of  unbelief: — The  sources 
of  our  knowledge  are  various.  I  know  that  the  sun  shines  because  I  see  it  shine. 
The  man  who  has  travelled  most  widely  has  seen  but  a  small  fragment  of  God's 
illimitable  empire.  The  bulk  of  my  knowledge  has  been  derived  from  other 
sources  than  the  observation  of  my  senses.  All  that  I  know  of  other  countries  or 
regions  than  the  httle  spot  I  call  my  home  I  have  learned  from  others.  I  know  that 
in  Kentucky  there  is  a  mammoth  cave,  extending  ten  miles  or  more  under  ground, 
not  because  I  have  actually  seen  it,  but  because  I  have  been  told  of  it  by  those  who 
have  seen  it.  And  this  knowledge  is  just  as  certain  as  knowledge  derived  in  any 
other  way.  I  am  just  as  certain  that  Queen  Victoria  rules  over  the  British  Empire, 
though  I  have  never  seen  her,  as  that  I  am  occupying  this  pulpit  to-day  and  that 
you  are  seated  before  me.  Now,  this  principle  which  holds  society  together,  which 
is  the  key  to  all  progress  in  knowledge,  to  aU  achievements  in  science,  which  is  the 
spring  of  all  useful  activity  in  the  world,  and  which,  in  a  religious  sense,  is  the 
source  of  all  piety  in  the  soul,  is  faith.  For  faith  is  but  dependence  upon  the  word 
of  another.  Now,  just  as  in  relation  to  those  countries  which  he  outside  of  the 
limits  of  our  daily  experience  and  observation,  we  are  indebted  for  our  knowledge 
to  the  evidence  of  others,  so  in  relation  to  those  worlds  which  he  beyond  the  range 
of  this  material  universe,  and  those  spiritual  truths  which  transcend  the  bounds 
of  human  experience  and  reason,  we  must  depend  for  our  knowledge  upon  the 
testimony  of  another.  What  can  we  know  of  heaven  or  the  state  beyond  the  grave 
from  our  own  observation  ?  For  this  knowledge  we  must  depend  upon  the  testi- 
mony of  none  other  than  the  Almighty  Himself.  He  alone  can  disclose  to  us  His 
purposes  and  plans.  To  accept  the  testimony  of  God  is  to  exercise  true  faith. 
I.  The  text  teaches,  in  the  first  place,  that  God  hath  boene  witness  concerning 
His  Son — that  is,  concerning  the  character  and  mission  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
To  the  mere  facts  connected  with  the  life  of  Jesus  at  Nazareth  human  testimony  is 
a  sufficient  ground  of  evidence.  But  to  the  fact  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Saviour  of  the  world.  Divine  testimony  is  necessary  to  compel  our  assent.  His 
mission  must  be  authenticated  by  Him  from  whom  He  came  and  in  whose  name 
He  professed  to  act.  And  Christ's  work  was  authenticated.  God  the  Father  hath 
set  His  seal  to  the  fact  that  Jesus  is  His  Son.  None  but  an  Almighty  Mind  could 
have  conceived  a  plan  of  redemption  such  as  is  made  known  in  this  Book.  None 
but  God  could  have  accomplished  it.  None  but  God  could  have  made  it  known. 
The  human  imagination  has  brought  forth  some  grand  conceptions,  but  no  human 
imagination  evolved  the  grand  and  glorious  scheme  of  salvation  contained  in  the 
Word  of  God.  The  true  revelation  of  God's  wiU  may  have  many  counterfeits. 
n.  The  text  implies  that  some  men  do  not  credit  the  testimony  op  God.  Very 
many,  indeed,  reject  the  evidence  which  God  gives  of  His  Son.  It  was  so  when 
Christ  yet  dwelt  upon  the  earth.  HI.  But,  finally,  the  text  teaches  the  rejection 
OF  the  witness  op  God  with  respect  to  His  Son  is  not   simplv   an   error  op 

JUDGMENT,  A  MIBTAEB  OP  THE  INTEIiLECT,  BUT  AN  piSULT  OP  THE  DEEPEST  DTE 
OFFERED     TO    THE    GREATEST    OP    ALL     BEINGS     IN     THE    UNIVERSE.        Unbelief    SayS  : 

•'  There  is  no  coming  wrath  that  we  need  dread.  No  hell  that  we  need  shun.  No 
heaven  to  which  we  need  hope  to  attain.  No  fellowship  with  God  and  Christ  and 
redeemed  spirits  beyond  the  grave."  Unbelief  declares:  "There  is  no  sin  that 
needs  an  expiation ;  no  justifying  righteousness  required  by  man  ;  that  he  can  save 
himself  from  all  the  dangers  to  which  he  is  exposed."  See  what  unbelief  does. 
It  justifies  the  greatest  of  all  crimes,  the  murder  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  enters 
the  chamber  of  sickness,  and  ridicules  the  prayers  that  go  up  from  pallid  lips,  and 
derides  the  faith  and  confidence  of  those  who  fall  asleep  in  Jesus.  It  enters  the 
sanctuary  of  God,  mocks  at  the  worship  of  the  Most  High,  and  sneers  at  the 
preaching  of  His  Word.  Unbelief  says  :  "  God  is  untrue.  He  is  endeavouring  to 
deceive  His  creatures.     He  is  imposing  upon  the  world  a  false  system  of  doctrines, 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

an  untrustworthy  scheme  of  salvation  through  a  crucified  Redeemer."  This  is  the 
hideous  character  of  unbelief  as  painted  by  the  inspired  apostle.     (S.  W.  Reigart.) 

Yer.  11.  And  this  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this 
life  is  in  His  Son. — The  Divine  record : — It  is  obvious  that  the  designs  of  God 
respecting  the  work  of  His  hands  entirely  depend  on  His  own  will,  and  that,  unless 
He  please  to  favour  us  with  an  express  declaration  of  those  designs,  we  may, 
indeed,  by  debating  about  the  probabilities  of  the  case,  bewilder  ourselves  in  all 
the  mazes  of  metaphysical  conjecture;  but,  as  for  anything  like  certainty  respect- 
ing what  so  deeply  concerns  us,  that  is  a  point  which  it  is  utterly  beyond  our 
abilities  to  attain.  Such  a  declaration,  however,  God  has  been  pleased  to  make. 
In  the  record  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  we  have  an  express  revelation  of 
His  will.  I.  The  unmebited  grant  of  oub  God.  1.  The  nature  of  the  blessing 
here  said  to  be  granted  to  us.  (1)  It  is  life,  life  worthy  of  the  name,  a  life  perfectly 
exempt  from  every  kind  and  degree  of  evil,  and  accompanied  by  every  conceivable 
and  by  every  inconceivable  good.  (2)  This  life  is  eternal,  not  like  our  present  life, 
which  is  but  as  a  vapour  that  appeareth  for  a  short  time  and  then  vanisheth  away. 
(3)  It  is  a  life,  too,  which  includes  everything  that  appertains  to  it,  the  pardon 
of  our  sins,  reconciliation  with  God,  adoption  into  His  family,  and  all  those 
sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  constitute  the  foretaste  of  this 
eternal  life  in  the  heart  of  the  Christian.  2.  The  person  to  whom  this  grant  is 
here  also  said  to  be  made.  "  To  us,"  the  sinful  children  of  sinful  parents ;  "  to 
us,"  miserable  sinners,  who  thus  were  lying  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of 
death,  provided  only  we  will  accept  the  boon  in  His  appointed  way ;  "  to  us  " 
hath  God  given  eternal  life.  3.  The  gratuitous  nature  of  the  grant.  For  in  what 
way  but  in  that  of  a  free  gift  could  eternal  life  be  made  over  to  those  who  have 
both  forfeited  the  blessing  and  incurred  the  curse  ?  H.  The  channel  through 
WHICH  THIS  GRANT  IS  CONVEYED  TO  US.  1.  The  obstacles  which  stood  in  the  way 
of  this  grant  were  of  the  most  formidable  description.  These  were  no  other  than 
the  severer  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  the  honour  both  of  God's  law 
and  of  His  universal  government.  2.  But  by  the  determination  that  this  free 
gift  of  life  should  be  in  the  Son  of  God,  to  be  sought  for  through  Him  alone, 
all  the  obstacles  to  the  grant,  which  presented  themselves  from  the  quarters  just 
referred  to,  were  at  once  removed.     III.  The  character  of  the  individuals  who 

WILL   obtain    the    BENEFIT    OF     THIS     GRANT     AND     OF     THOSE    WHO    WILL     FAIL     OF    IT. 

"  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not 
life."  1.  It  is  clear,  then,  on  the  one  hand,  that  we  are  interested  in  this  grant 
of  eternal  life  if  we  have  the  Son.  2.  And  it  is  the  undisputed  testimony  of 
the  record  that  he  that  thus  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and  that  he  that  hath  not 
the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life.     {John  Natt,  B.D.)        Eternal  life  a  gift : — I.  The 

SUBJECT   OF   THE    "RECORD" "ETERNAL    LIFE."        What    is    it?        It     iS     UOt    eudlcSS 

existence.  The  "  record "  refers  not  to  this  point.  The  Bible  assumes  man's 
immortality.  "  Eternal  life "  consists  in  the  soul's  well-being — its  intrinsic, 
internal  blessedness :  "  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you."  This  life  is  "  eternal." 
It  is  drawn  from  the  Eternal  One ;  His  principles  of  rectitude  imbedded  in  the 
heart  and  "  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  11.  The  doctrine  of  the  record, 
"  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  is  in  His  Son."  1.  It  is  a 
gift.  Not  something  for  which  men  need  to  toil,  but  something  to  be  simply 
received.  2.  It  is  a  gift  already  given.  "  God  hath  given,"  &c.  The  believer 
has  its  foretaste.  3.  It  is  a  gift  already  given  "  in  His  Son."  Not  in  systems, 
churches ;  "  grace  and  truth  "  come  by  Jesus  Christ.  4.  This  is  for  "  record."  It 
is  testified  that  men  may  know  it  on  God's  authority  and  live.  (Homilist.) 
Eternal  life : — Before  opening  up  the  passage  there  are  two  preliminary  questions 
that  press  for  answer.  In  the  first  place,  what  is  meant  by  the  Scriptural  phrase, 
"  eternal  life  "  ?  The  term,  eternal  life,  is  hardly  at  all  one  of  quantity,  but  of 
quality.  Just  as  there  is  wheat-life  in  the  wheat  plant,  bird-life  in  the  winged 
creatures,  lion-life  in  the  lion,  so  there  is  Christ-life  in  the  Christian.  It  is  a  con- 
dition of  existence  in  which  the  very  life  of  God  pulsates  through  every  faculty  of 
the  life  of  man,  bringing  him  into  affinity  of  love  and  purpose  and  aspiratioa 
with  the  Eternal  Himself.  Eternal  life  is,  therefore,  the  imparting  of  Christ's  own 
life  to  those  who  accept  Him  as  Saviour  and  M-aster.  A  second  preliminary  ques- 
tion presses  for  answer.  When  and  where  is  this  eternal  life  attained  ?  It  seems 
clear  from  the  Word  of  God  that  it  is  attained  in  this  world  and  not  in  the  world 
to  come.     Men  do  not  go  to  heaven  to  get  it,  but  they  go  to  heaven  because  they 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  441 

have  it.  If  these  things  are  true  it  surely  becomes  a  pressing  interest  to  every 
thoughtful  man  as  to  how  this  priceless  gift  may  become  his  own  personal  posses- 
sion, as  to  how  he  may  grow  in  eternal  life  and  eternal  life  grow  in  him,  and  as  to 
how  he  may  have  the  joy,  the  power,  and  the  prospect  of  it.  These  questions  are 
all  clearly  answered  in  the  text.  I.  Eternal  life  is  provided  in  Christ.  "  This 
life  is  in  His  Son."  It  is  of  the  very  last  importance  to  note  well  the  fountain  of 
this  eternal  life.  It  is  not  in  man  as  natural,  for  as  natural  he  is  fallen,  and  the 
fall  implied  the  loss  of  this  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man,  the  passing  away  of 
all  conscious  afi&nity  with  God,  and  the  coming  in  of  a  spirit  of  alienation  and 
hostility.  And  as  it  is  not  in  man  naturally,  neither  does  man  find  it  in  what  is 
called  his  environment.  We  think  that  the  power  of  environment  over  human  life 
is  greatly  exaggerated  in  our  day,  and  is  essentially  the  reversal  of  a  central 
principle  in  God's  dealings  with  the  world.  It  is  never  the  new  environment  that 
makes  the  new  man,  but  it  is  the  new  man  that  creates  the  new  environment.  Let 
us,  therefore,  face  the  fact  that  eternal  life  is  provided  only  in  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Those  in  quest  of  it  have,  therefore,  not  to  wander  over  a  wilderness  of 
abstract  thought,  and  not  to  whip  the  energies  of  mind  and  heart  to  attain  this 
great  end ;  but,  as  a  person  deeply  convinced  that  this  gift  is  not  now  theirs,  to 
come  humbly  and  trustfully  to  the  feet  of  the  living  personality  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  alone  has  this  gift  to  give,  and  who  is  longing  to  bestow  it.  U. 
Eternal  life  is  published  in  Christ.  "  This  is  the  record  that  God  hath  given 
to  us  eternal  life,"  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son  essentially.  The  whole  Word  of  God 
is  an  apocalypse  or  unveiling  of  Christ.  The  testimony  of  God  Himself,  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  of  inspired  historian,  poet,  prophet,  and  evangelist,  all  converges  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  III.  Eternal  life  is  possessed  in  Christ.  God  hath 
given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son;  "  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
life."  The  gift  has  not  only  been  provided  and  published,  but  it  has  in  a  very  real 
sense  actually  been  given.  God  has  given  to  us  eternal  life.  We  stand  firm  on  the 
ground  that  Christ's  part,  both  in  provision  and  offer,  has  already  been  finished ; 
but  salvation  by  gift  implies  the  part  of  the  receiver  as  well  as  the  part  of  the  giver, 
and  while  the  gift  has  been  offered  there  is  no  salvation,  and  there  can  be  no  salva- 
tion till  the  gift  is  accepted.  This  view  of  the  possession  of  eternal  life  delivers 
man  from  all  perplexity  as  to  the  ground  of  his  acceptance  with  God,  and  as  to  his 
humble  assurance  of  the  certainty  of  his  salvation.  It  causes  feelings,  for  example, 
to  fall  into  due  perspective  in  spiritual  experiences.  When  a  man  comes  to  see 
that  he  possesses  Christ,  and  on  that  possession  can  call  eternal  life  his  own,  there 
will  come,  and  must  come,  those  feelings  of  peace  and  rest  and  certainty  and  enjoy- 
ment, and  until  he  is  quite  sure  that  he  possesses  Christ,  and  with  Him  all  things, 
the  feelings  will  be  fitful  and  the  whole  life  wiU  be  clouded.  IV.  Eternal  life  is 
perpetuated  in  Christ.  "  These  things  have  I  written  unto  you  that  believe  on 
the  name  of  the  Son  of  God  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life,  and  that 
ye  may  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God."  The  entrance  of  eternal  life  into 
the  soul  of  man  is  the  entrance  of  Christ  Himself  to  dwell  and  reign  and  unfold 
the  nature  that  He  inhabits  and  permeates.  The  whole  Christ,  and  only  Christ,  is 
needed  to  save,  and  the  whole  Christ  in  perpetual  indwelling  is  needed  to  sanctify. 
There  is  no  possible  life  for  the  Christian  apart  from  his  abiding  in  Christ  and 
Christ  abiding  in  him.  Out  of  this  flows  aU  the  sweetness  of  sanctity,  all  the 
dignity  of  lowliness,  all  the  enlarging  of  love,  all  the  practical  power  of  obedience, 
and  all  the  finished  graces  of  a  complete  character.  (G.  Wilson.)  Example  and 
life  : — It  will  be  admitted,  of  course,  that  Christ  has  given  us  a  perfect  example. 
He  has  not  only  told  us  what  to  do.  He  has  shown  us  how  to  live.  He  was  Him- 
self, by  the  method  which  He  followed,  the  great  object  teacher,  and  His  life  was 
the  great  object  lesson.  Example  is  more  powerful  than  precept ;  its  influence 
goes  deeper  and  takes  hold  of  us  with  a  stronger  grasp ;  but  after  all  it  is  of  the 
Bame  nature  as  precept.  You  can  give  a  child  in  words  some  idea  of  the  rules  of 
polite  behaviour ;  you  can  give  him  an  example  of  politeness  which  wiU  be  much 
more  instructive  and  effective  in  forming  his  manner  than  any  verbal  rules ;  but 
the  rules  and  the  example  would  both  operate  in  the  same  way  ;  they  would  reach 
and  influence  him  through  his  intellect  and  his  will.  In  both  cases  the  effect 
produced  would  be  the  result  of  a  voluntary  effort.  It  is  easier  for  him  to  imitate 
your  actions  than  it  is  to  remember  and  obey  your  rules  ;  but  both  address  the 
win  through  the  intelligence.  Now,  while  the  imitation  of  an  action  is  easier  and 
pleasanter  than  the  obedience  of  a  precept,  there  is  still  a  great  lack  of  beauty  and 
of  vigour  in  the  conduct  that  is  simply  the  result  of  imitation.    There  is  a  per- 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  y. 

ceptible  hardness  and  stiffness  and  unreality  about  it ;  it  is  artificial.  So,  then,  if 
a  perfect  example  were  put  before  us,  and  we  should  set  ourselves  resolutely  and 
carefully  to  the  copying  of  that  example,  we  should  be  sure  to  fail ;  our  lives, 
though  they  might  seem  outwardly  very  like  the  Ufe  we  were  trying  to  imitate, 
would  resemble  it  only  as  the  artificial  flower  resembles  the  real  one.  When  Qoi 
gave  you  being  He  gave  you  character  and  personality  of  your  own.  What  He 
meant  you  to  be  is  indicated  in  the  very  constitution  of  your  soul.  And  although 
by  disobedience  and  alienation  from  Him  you  may  have  badly  injured  your  own 
character,  though  the  Divine  perfection  in  which  it  ought  to  shine  may  but  dimly 
appear  in  it,  yet  the  ground  plan,  so  to  speak,  is  there,  and  that  is  the  plan  on 
which  your  character  is  to  be  built ;  the  thing  for  you  to  do  is  simply  to  become 
what  God  meant  you  to  be,  and  this  you  cannot  do  by  trying  to  imitate  the 
character  and  conduct  of  some  one  else.  What  men  most  need  is  the  healing,  the 
quickening,  the  replenishing  of  their  spiritual  life.  It  is  not  a  model  to  live  by,  it 
is  "  new  life  and  fuller  that  we  want."  And  this  is  the  want  that  Christ  supplies. 
"  I  am  come,"  He  says,  "that  they  might  have  life  and  that  they  might  have  it 
more  abundantly."  How  is  it  that  He  imparts  to  men  this  life  ?  Ah,  I  do  not 
know  that.  How  does  the  sun  impart  life  to  the  seeds  and  roots  and  bulbs  that 
during  all  this  long  winter  have  been  waiting  for  him  under  ground  ?  I  do  not 
know  how  he  does  it,  but  I  know  that  he  does  it.  Some  of  them  have  heard  his 
voice  already  and  have  come  forth  from  their  graves.  The  subtle  might  of  his 
regenerating  rays  is  seeking  them  out ;  they  begin  to  feel  in  every  fibre  the 
influence  of  his  power ;  life  is  quickened  within  them  by  his  genial  influence. 
And  as  many  as  receive  Jesus  Christ,  as  many  as  will  accept  Him  as  the  Lord  of 
their  life,  and  will  let  Him  instruct  them  and  lead  them  and  inspire  them,  sweetly 
yielding  to  the  influences  of  His  grace,  will  find  that  He  is  doing  for  them  some- 
thing like  what  the  sun  does  for  the  germs  beneath  the  soil ;  that  He  is  imparting 
spiritual  life  to  them ;  that  He  is  kindling  in  their  souls  the  love  of  all  things  right 
and  true  and  good,  and  increasing  in  them  the  power  to  realise  such  things  in  their 
lives.  This  is  what  He  does  for  all  who  will  receive  Him.  But  the  text  says  that 
this  life  is  eternal  life.  The  witness  is  that  God  has  given  to  us  eternal  life  and 
the  life  is  in  His  Son.  Yea,  verily !  The  life  whose  organising  principles  are 
righteousness  and  truth  and  love  is  a  life  that  takes  hold  of  the  sons  to  come 
with  a  sure  grasp.  God  has  so  made  the  universe  that  these  principles  are 
indestructible ;  in  the  nature  of  things  virtue  is  immortal ;  the  life  that  is  incor- 
porate with  it  has  the  promise  of  an  everlasting  day.  (W.  Gladden,  D.D.)  Life 
in  Christ : — Mark  the  grammatical  form.  The  statement  is  not  part  of  the  record, 
but  "the  record"  itself,  as  if  God  had  given  none  else.  "This  is  the  record," 
standing  out  alone  in  its  sublime  grandeur.  "This  is  the  record"  that  transcends 
all  others  by  its  brilliancy,  upon  which  every  conscience  might  rest.  So  in  chap.  ii.  25 
he  uses  exactly  the  same  emphatic  expression — "This  is  the  promise  that  He  hath 
promised  us,  even  eternal  life,"  as  if  not  a  single  star  shone  in  the  firmament  above 
except  this ;  as  if  not  one  promise  had  been  given  except  this,  standing  ont  distinct, 
full,  alone  in  hopes  and  comfort  to  all.  And  not  only  he,  but  St.  Paul,  so  different 
in  the  characteristic  order  of  intellect,  uses  the  same  kind  of  expression — "  The 
wages  of  sin  is  death,  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  "  (Rom.  vi.  23) ;  "the  gift,"  as  if  no  other  boon  had  been  granted — the  gift 
towering  out  above  all,  and  standing  in  its  holy  Alpine  grandeur,  the  noblest 
blessing  God  had  ever  given  to  His  people.  Put  these  three  passages  together, 
and  then  we  have  brought  before  us  this  glorious  truth,  that  He  is  emphatically 
the  gift,  the  record  to  us,  the  promise  of  (Jod  of  life  eternal  through  His  Son. 
I.  The  religion  which  we  profess,  true  practical  Christianity,  is  lifb.  This 
truth  lies  at  the  foundation  of  this  passage ;  and  what  type  can  be  more  glorious 
of  good  conferred  ?  The  most  despised  creature  upon  earth  clings  to  life.  I  need 
not  say  that  the  life  here  spoken  of  is  not  physical  life,  not  a  life  in  common  with 
an  ungodly  man,  not  a  life  in  common  with  the  beasts  that  perish,  but  spiritual 
life,  life  in  the  soul,  life  in  the  thinking  elements  of  our  nature,  life  in  that  part  of 
our  nature  which  links  us  with  God  Himself,  and  which,  if  lost,  consigns  us  to 
everlasting  ruin.  Such  then  is  the  boon  ;  the  Christian  lives.  Religion  is  no  dead 
thing ;  it  is  not  formalism,  it  is  not  mere  professionalism,  it  is  not  the  assent  of 
the  understanding  to  certain  dogmas,  it  is  not  the  experience  in  the  heart  even  of 
certain  sentimental  emotions.  Religion,  if  it  be  anything  at  all,  is  a  living, 
practical  reality.  I  have  the  conviction  that  I  have  spiritual  life,  because  I  think 
with  God,  I  feel  the  presence  of  God,  I  move  in  the  ways  of  God.     The  Christian, 


CHAP,  v.]  J.  JOHN.  443 

then,  lives ;  that  life  may  be  mysterious,  but  it  is  the  distinguishing  character  of 
the  Christian  man  that  he  has  this  spiritual  life  in  him.  I  add  that  it  is,  more- 
over, a  progressive  thing.  Here  religion  harmonises  with  all  the  phenomena  and 
rules  of  life.  11.  This  life  is  Divine  in  its  origin — "  God  hath  given  to  us 
eternal  life."  All  life  is  of  Divine  production.  Pierce  as  far  as  you  may  into 
eternity,  the  deeper  and  closer  our  examination  of  its  realities,  the  more  fully  and 
simply  are  we  thrown  on  our  conviction  of  the  Divine  origin.  All  life  is  the  pro- 
duction of  the  eternal  God.  The  spiritual  life  of  which  I  speak  is,  therefore, 
certainly  of  His  production.  The  old  Greek  fable,  myth,  to  use  the  fashionable 
expression  of  modern  times,  brings  out  the  truth  in  a  simple  shape — "  You  may 
take  a  man  and  set  him  up  by  the  pillar  of  the  temple,  but  unless  the  god  who 
inhabits  it  touches  him  he  cannot  move  a  step."  Or,  according  to  another  Greek 
fable,  you  may  take  clay  and  form  and  fashion  it  into  the  mould  of  a  man,  but 
unless  the  celestial  fire  penetrates  the  frame  and  imparts  life  it  has  no  power  of 
action.  "  Paul  may  plant,  and  Apollos  may  water,  but  God  gives  the  increase." 
All  means  and  appliances  are  in  vain  until  the  power  of  God  Himself  shall  visit 
the  Church — all  in  vain  until  Jesus  Christ,  who,  when  His  message  is  proclaimed, 
shall  accompany  that  message  with  His  own  living  power  and  waken  up  dead  spirits 
into  eternal  life.  IH.  This  life  is  in  Chkist.  The  source,  I  say,  of  that  life 
which  is  the  gift  of  God,  the  source  of  all  life,  is  Christ  Himself.  Again,  for  this 
purpose  He  is  described  as  having  life  in  Himself.  Mark  the  emphatic  expression. 
It  corresponds  with  that  expression  of  the  living  God,  "  I  am  that  I  am  " — Jehovah. 
Pray  for  this  gift,  but  pray  for  it  in  union  with  Christ's  sacrifice,  for  without  His 
death  the  Spirit  never  had  come  down.  IV.  This  life  is  not  only  through  the 
Son,  but  is  in  the  Son,  and  will  just  be  in  us  as  it  is  in  Him.  In  other 
words,  the  character  of  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God  is  a  model  character  to  all  the 
brotherhood  of  Christ ;  every  Christian  is  a  Christian  just  in  the  degree  that  he  is 
Christ-like.  V.  This  life,  this  Divine  gift,  is  eternal.  Now  the  soul  is  eternal, 
and  as  such,  therefore,  this  life  must  endure  for  ever.  That  man  is  a  fool  who 
tries  to  procure  something  by  great  labour  which  will  last  only  till  to-morrow. 
But  this  eternal  life  never  comes  to  a  close.  Moreover,  it  is  a  life  which  shall 
expand.  I  can  set  no  limits  to  it.  VI.  Who  have  that  life  ?  What  man  possesses 
it?  Who  has  a  distinct  credential  that  he  does  possess  it  ?  "He  became  the  author 
of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that  obey  Him."  Tell  me  not  of  spasmodic 
enjoyments  of  spiritual  elevation,  of  occasional  paroxysms  of  spiritual  life.  I  ask, 
is  Christ's  life  in  you  ?  Is  His  law  in  your  hearts,  and  is  it  exemplified  in  your 
lives?  If  so,  you  have  clear  proof  of  the  possession  of  that  gift  which  is  everlasting, 
(r.  Archer,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  He  that  hath  tbe  Son  hath  life;  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of 
God  hath  not  life. — To  have  Christ  is  to  have  life : — We  may  be  said  to  have  or 
receive  the  Son  in  these  three  modes — as  a  teacher,  an  example,  and  a  Saviour  ; 
and  in  each  of  these  He  is  life  to  those  who  have  Him.  I.  Christ  is  life  in  His 
INSTRUCTIONS.  He  is  so,  because  His  instructions  are  truth,  and  truth  brings  life. 
In  another,  and  yet  a  kindred  sense,  is  Christ  life  by  His  word.  He  teaches  as 
how  to  live,  and  for  what  ends.  Honour,  happiness,  respect,  love,  usefulness, 
those  things  without  which  life  is  only  animal,  or  worse,  are  most  easily  and 
completely  to  be  secured  by  adopting  the  principles  and  obeying  the  precepts  of  the 
gospel.  It  is  life,  by  eminence,  to  live  temperately,  soberly,  justly,  kindly,  peace- 
fully, doing  good  actions,  exercising  good  affections,  gaining  good  opinions.  It  is 
the  only  proper  life  of  a  moral,  intellectual,  accountable  creature  of  God.  He  then 
lives  as  his  Maker  would  have  him  live ;  lives  most  acceptably  in  the  sight  of 
heaven,  and  most  profitably  to  himself  and  to  the  world.  He  lives,  answering  the 
best  purposes  of  life  ;  contributing  to  the  means  of  human  advancement ;  making 
his  actions  to  be  counted  in  the  sum  of  human  felicity.  In  a  moral  sense  he 
protracts  his  life,  because  he  employs  it  fully  and  well.  11.  He  who  has  ob 
RECEIVES  Christ  as  an  example  has  life.  The  life-giving  word  is  not  only  taught, 
but  embodied  and  made  incarnate  in  the  teacher;  it  is  not  only  didactic,  but 
possesses  the  merit  and  charm  of  historical  interest.  The  Son  not  only  points  the 
way  to  the  Father,  but  He  precedes  the  disciple,  and  guides  him  in  it  and  through 
it.  Whoever  walks  as  Christ  walked,  Uves  ;  and  in  proportion  to  the  exactness  of 
his  imitation  is  the  vigour  and  health  of  his  life.  To  know  that  we  are,  in  any 
degree,  sharing  the  life  and  spirit  of  our  Master,  is  enough  to  give  us  an  increase  of 
vital   warmth,  to  cause  the  pulse   of   our  spirit  to  beat  firmer  and  more  true, 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  t. 

because  it  beats  in  happy  and  honoured  union  with  the  heart  of  Jesus.  If  Hia  life 
was  true  and  eternal,  then  that  which  is  borrowed  from  His  is  so  too.  The  seeds 
of  corruption  are  not  in  it.  The  process  of  dissolution  cannot  commence  in  it.  It 
is  a  sound  and  pure  and  heavenly  life,  for  it  is  the  very  life  of  the  Son  of  God. 
III.  He  who  hath  the  Son  by  faith,  he  who  receives  Him  as  the  Christ  of  God 
AND  THE  Saviour  of  men,  by  this  faith  also,  as  well  as  by  obedience  and  imitation, 
hath  life.  And  why  ?  Because  the  hope  and  assurance  of  eternal  life  is  contained 
and  perfected  in  such  faith.  {F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  Alive  or  dead — 
which? — I.  Concerning  THE  living.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  1.  I  shall 
remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  having  the  Son  is  good  evidence  of  eternal  life,  from 
the  fact  that  faith  by  which  a  man  receives  Christ  is  in  itself  a  living  act.  Further- 
more, faith  in  Jesus  is  good  evidence  of  life,  because  of  the  things  which 
accompany  it.  No  soul  asks  for  pardon  or  obtains  it  till  he  has  felt  that  sin  is  an 
evil  for  which  pardon  is  necessary  ;  that  is  to  say,  repentance  always  comes  with 
faith.  Where  there  is  faith,  again,  there  is  always  prayer.  So  might  I  say  that 
the  consequences  of  receiving  Christ  are  also  good  evidences  of  heavenly  life ;  for 
when  a  man  receives  the  Son  of  God  he  obtains  a  measure  of  peace  and  joy ;  and 
peace  with  God  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  sepulchres  of 
dead  souls.  2.  The  possession  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  evidence  of  faith  in 
many  ways.  It  is  God's  mark  upon  a  living  soul.  Whatever  else  we  cannot  see, 
if  a  simple  trust  in  Jesus  is  discernible  in  a  convert,  we  need  feel  no  suspicions, 
but  receive  him  at  once  as  a  brother  beloved.  Moreover,  the  possession  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  becomes  a  clear  evidence  of  life,  because,  indeed,  it  is  in  some  sense 
the  source,  fountain,  and  nourishment  of  life.  While  the  branch  is  vitally  in  the 
stem  it  will  have  life  ;  if  it  is  not  always  bearing  fruit,  yet  it  always  has  life  ;  and 
thus  the  fact  of  having  the  Son  becomes  an  evidence  of  life,  because  it  is  the  source 
of  life.  In  another  aspect  of  it,  having  the  Son  is  not  only  the  source  of  life,  but 
the  result  of  life.  Now,  when  a  man  receives  Jesus  into  his  soul  as  life  from  the 
dead,  his  faith  is  the  sure  indicator  of  a  spiritual  and  mysterious  life  within  him, 
in  the  power  of  which  he  is  able  to  receive  the  Lord.  Jesus  is  freely  preached  to 
you.  His  grace  is  free  as  the  air,  but  the  dead  do  not  breathe  that  air — those  who 
breathe  it  are,  beyond  all  doubt,  alive.  3.  Let  me  further  remark  that  the  possession 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  faith  is  sufficient  evidence  of  eternal  life.  "  I  do  not 
know,"  says  one,  "  when  I  was  converted."  Have  you  the  Son  of  God  ?  Do  you 
trust  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  That  is  quite  enough.  4.  It  is  a  great  mercy  that  having 
the  Son  is  abiding  evidence.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  I  know  what  it  is 
to  see  every  other  evidence  I  ever  gloried  in  go  drifting  down  the  stream  far  out  of 
sight.  5.  I  may  close  this  first  head  by  saying  that  having  the  Son  is  infallible 
evidence  of  life.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  It  is  not  said  that  he  may 
perhaps  have  it,  or  that  some  who  have  the  Son  have  life,  but  there  is  no  exception 
to  the  rule.  II.  Concerning  the  dead.  "  He  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath 
not  life  " — that  is,  he  hath  not  spiritual  life,  sentence  of  death  is  recorded  against 
him  in  the  book  of  God.  His  natural  Ufe  is  spared  him  in  this  world,  but  he  is 
condemned  already.  Now  observe  that  the  not  having  the  Son  of  God  is  clear 
evidence  of  the  absence  of  spiritual  life ;  for  the  man  who  has  not  trusted  in  Jesus 
has  made  God  a  liar.  Shall  pure  spiritual  life  make  God  a  liar  ?  Shall  he  receive 
life  from  God  who  persists  in  denying  God's  testimony  ?  Let  me  tell  you  that  for 
a  hearer  of  the  go  .pel  not  to  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  must  be,  in  the  judgment 
of  angels,  a  very  aslouivling  crime.  Recollect,  if  you  have  never  received  Christ, 
that  this  is  overwhelming  evidence  that  you  are  dead  in  sin.  I  tell  thee,  moralist, 
what  thou  art :  thou  art  a  corpse  well  washed  and  decently  laid  out,  daintily  robed 
in  fair  white  linen,  sprinkled  plenteously  with  sweet  perfumes,  and  wrapped  in 
myrrh  and  cassia  and  aloes,  with  flowers  wreathed  about  thy  brow  and  thy  bosom 
bedecked  by  the  hand  of  affection  with  sweetly  blushing  roses ;  but  thou  hast  no 
life,  and  therefore  thy  destiny  is  the  grave,  corruption  is  thy  heritage.  III.  Con- 
cerning the  living  as  they  dwell  among  the  dead.  As  the  living  are  constrained 
to  live  among  the  dead,  as  the  children  of  God  are  mixed  up  by  Providence  with 
the  heirs  of  wrath,  what  manner  of  persons  ought  they  to  be  ?  1.  In  the  first  place, 
let  us  take  care  that  we  do  not  become  contaminated  by  the  corruption  of  the  dead. 
You  who  have  the  Son  of  God,  mind  that  you  are  not  injured  by  those  who  have 
not  the  Son.  2.  If  we  must  in  this  life,  in  a  measure,  mingle  with  the  dead,  let  us 
take  care  that  we  never  suffer  the  supremacy  of  the  dead  to  be  acknowledged  over 
the  living.  It  would  be  a  strange  thing  if  the  dead  were  to  rule  the  living.  Yet 
sometimes  I  have  seen  the  dead  have  the  dominion  of  this  world ;  that  is  to  say, 


CHAP.  T.]  I.  JOHN.  445 

they  have  set  the  fashion  and  living  Christians  have  followed.  3.  What  I  think  we 
should  do  towards  dead  souls  is  this — we  should  pity  them.  "  The  most  of  these  I 
meet  with  are  dead  in  sin."  Ought  not  this  to  make  us  pray  for  them  :  "  Eternal 
Spirit,  quicken  them  I  They  cannot  have  life  unless  they  have  the  Son  of  God. 
Oh,  bring  them  to  receive  the  Son  of  God  "  !  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sublimest 
possession : — Deep  in  the  soul  of  man  is  a  desire  to  appropriate  something  outside  / 
of  itself — the  instinct  for  getting,  what  phrenologists  call  the  "  acquisitive  faculty."  ( 
But  what  is  the  good  it  really  wants,  the  chief  good,  that  without  which  it  will  ' 
never  be  satisfied  ?  I.  The  highest  possession  of  man  is  the  possession  of  Cheist.  I 
1.  It  is  something  more  than  to  possess  an  intellectual  knowledge  of  Him.  2.  It  is  i 
something  more  than  to  admire  His  character  and  to  sympathise  with  His  enter- 
prise. 3.  It  is  to  possess  His  ruling  disposition,  or,  in  other  words,  the  moral  ( 
inspiration  of  His  soul.  It  is  to  have  His  spirit.  II.  The  possession  of  Christ 
INVOLVES  THE  HIGHEST  LIFE.  Eternal  life  does  not  mean  eternal  existence,  but 
eternal  goodness ;  and  eternal  goodness  is  the  highest  paradise  of  the  soul.  1.  The  ( 
life  of  supremacy.  He  wiU  be  in  the  highest  sense  a  king.  2.  The  life  of  self- 
oblivious  devotion.  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  3.  The  life  of  the  highest 
knowledge.  (Homilist.)  The  natural  man  and  the  spiritual  man : — The  natural 
man  belongs  to  the  present  order  of  things.  He  is  endowed  simply  with  a  high 
quality  of  the  natural  animal  life.  But  it  is  life  of  so  poor  a  quality  that  it  is  not 
life  at  all.  He  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  life ;  but  he  that  hath  the  Son 
hath  hfe — a  new,  distinct,  and  supernatural  endowment.  He  is  not  of  this  world. 
He  is  of  the  timeless  state,  of  eternity.  The  difference,  then,  between  the  spiritual 
man  and  the  natural  man  is  not  a  difference  of  development,  but  of  generation. 
The  distinction  is  one  of  quality,  not  of  quantity.  The  scientific  classification  of 
men  would  be  to  arrange  all  natural  men,  moral  or  immoral,  educated  or  vulgar, 
as  one  family.  One  higher  than  another  in  the  family  group,  yet  aU  marked  by  the 
same  set  of  characteristics — they  eat,  sleep,  work,  think,  live,  die.  But  the  spiritual 
man  is  removed  from  this  family  so  utterly  by  the  possession  of  an  additional 
characteristic  that  a  biologist  would  not  hesitate  to  classify  him  elsewhere,  not  in 
another  family,  but  in  another  kingdom.  It  is  an  old-fashioned  theology  which 
divides  men  into  the  living  and  the  dead,  lost  and  saved — a  stern  phraseology  all 
but  fallen  into  disuse.  This  difference,  so  startUng  as  a  doctrine,  has  been  ridiculed 
or  denied.  Nevertheless  the  grim  distinction  must  be  retained.  It  is  a  scientific 
distinction.  "He  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  life."  (Prof.H.Drummond.) 
Christ  the  life  of  the  soul : — He,  who  has  a  right  to  speak,  has  said  that  there  is  a 
certain  thing,  the  possession  of  which  constitutes  "l5e,"  and  so  constitutes  it  that 
he  who  has  it  "  has  life,"  and  he  who  has  it  not  "  has  not  life."  There  is  a  "  life," 
dependent  upon  the  possession  of  a  certain  thing,  so  much  worthier  than  anything 
else  of  the  name  of  "  life,"  that,  compared  to  it,  nothing  besides  is  real  "  life." 
Could  you  at  this  moment  do  it  by  a  word,  would  you  immortalise  the  "life"  you 
are  now  living  ?  The  real  Christian  would.  To  him  the  change  which  he  wishes 
is  not  one  of  kind,  but  of  degree.  He  has  that  which  he  only  wants  purified  and 
increased  a  thousandfold.  The  "  life  "  he  lives  is  what  he  wishes  to  be  the  germ 
of  a  "  life  "  which  he  shall  live  for  ever  and  ever.  Now  this  possession  of  Christ 
appears  to  me  to  be  made  up  of  three  things.  Properly  speaking,  the  life  which  ^ 
Christ  lived  upon  this  earth  before  His  Cross  was  not  the  "  life  "  which  He  came  to  f 
communicate  to  His  people.  All  that  "  life "  He  lived  simply  that  He  might 
purchase  the  "  life  "  which  He  was  going  to  give.  The  "  resurrection-life  "  is  the 
"  life  "  which  Christ  imparts  to  man.  It  is  a  "  life  "  springing  out  of  death.  It  is 
a  "life"  out  of  which  the  element  of  death  has  been  altogether  extracted.  It  is  a 
"life"  as  essential  as  the  Godhead  of  the  Christ — as  the  "life"  in  which  that 
Godhead  resides  is  essential  "life."  "  Life"  is  not  what  we  live,  but  how  we  live 
it.  To  live  indeed  you  must  live  livingly.  To  this  end,  then,  if  a  man  would 
"live"  indeed,  a  man's  soul  must  be  always,  in  some  way,  receiving  Christ. 
(J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Christ  in  man: — Before  proceeding  to  analyse  this  passage, 
contemplate  for  one  moment  the  mysterious  grandeur  of  human  nature's  position 
through  the  Incarnation ;  for  it  is  obviously  through  the  Incarnation  that  we  "have 
the  Son."  Think,  then,  that  in  all  other  works  of  Deity  communication  is  the 
distinction.  When  God  creates.  He  communicates  being  to  nothing;  in  nature, 
God  communicates  beauty,  form,  and  harmony  to  materialism ;  in  providence,  God 
communicates  wisdom,  truth,  power,  responsibility,  and  so  forth,  to  agents  and 
agencies ;  in  legislation  God  communicates  wiU  and  law  to  moral  nature ;  and  in 
levelation  God  commanicates  grace  and  truth  to  mankind ;  but  in  the  Incarnation 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

God  does  not  communicate,  but  He  assumes.  Observe  the  words,  "  He  that  hath 
the  Son  hath  life."  There  is  no  man  named.  God  Almighty,  when  He  speaks 
from  the  throne  of  revelation,  speaks  to  human  nature.  He  does  not  by  His  word 
lay  hold  on  the  conventional,  the  local,  the  chronological,  or  the  transitory  in  man. 
Now  mark  the  decisive  grandeur  of  this ;  for  it  intimates  a  connection  between 
our  nature  now  and  our  condition  hereafter.  Christianity  now  is  Christianity  for 
ever ;  every  stone  which  is  now  laid  to  your  spiritual  fabric  is  to  form  part  of  an 
ascending  structure  of  conscious  humanity,  which  is  to  rise  higher  and  higher 
towards  perfection  throughout  the  everlasting  ages.  He,  therefore,  "  that  hath  the 
Son  hath  life,"  and  the  same  life  that  he  will  have  hereafter.  I.  What  is  it  to 
"HAVE  THE  Son"?  We  say,  then,  in  the  first  place,  every  human  being  on  God's 
earth  "  hath  the  Son."  There  is  not  a  pulse  in  your  body  but  proclaims  Calvary  ; 
there  is  not  a  drop  in  your  veins  but  preaches  Christ.  You  are  not  to  imagine 
creation  proceeding  by  one  principle,  providence  administered  by  another,  and 
grace  acting  by  a  third ;  the  same  God  who  acts  in  creation  and  rules  in  providence 
bestows  in  grace.  And  therefore  I  charge  it  upon  every  unconverted  man,  with 
this  truth  bound  upon  his  heart,  "  Verily  Christ  is  in  me,  and  I  knew  it  not." 
But  more  particularly,  to  take  the  words  spiritually :  a  man  may  be  said  to  "  have 
the  Son  "  when  He  is  the  sovereign  of  his  intellect.  He  will  ascertain  upon  clear 
grounds  and  through  an  honest  logic  whether  this  book  be  or  be  not  Divine  ;  but 
the  moment  the  man  has  come  to  the  conclusion,  "  Verily  God  is  in  this  thing, 
verily  God  is  in  these  syllables,"  then  all  that  he  has  to  do  is  to  submit  his  intellect 
to  Christ,  then  he  "  has  the  Son."  Secondly,  a  man  may  be  said  to  "  have  the 
Son  "  when  he  hath  Him  as  the  ruler  of  his  desires.  If  we  "  have  the  Son  "  our 
desires  are  submitted  to  Christ  even  as  our  intellect.  Thkdly,  Jesus  Christ  may  be 
said  to  be  ours,  or  we  "  have  the  Son,"  when  He  is  the  pacifier  of  our  conscience. 
Lastly,  a  man  may  be  said  to  "have  the  Son"  when  Jesus  Christ  is  the  centre  of 
his  affections.  The  worldling's  centre  is  the  world ;  the  sensualist's  centre  is  the 
enjoyment  of  the  passions ;  the  rationalist's  is  the  cultivation  of  the  intellect ;  the 
pohtician's  the  progress  of  his  party.  But  the  Christian  hath  one  centre  and  one 
circumference — Jesus  Christ  in  the  beginning  and  the  middle  and  without  end. 
His  supreme  attractor  is  Christ.  II.  The  possession  of  Christ  is  tantamount  to 
THE  possession  OF  LITE.  In  the  first  place,  then,  this  connection  contains  (though 
not  here  stated)  three  marvellous  views.  First,  it  is  the  unfathomable  mystery  of 
heaven ;  secondly,  it  is  the  infinite  mercy  of  earth ;  and,  thirdly,  it  is  the  unrivalled 
miracle  of  all  eternity.  Lastly,  we  go  on  to  show  you  the  right  connection  between 
"  having  Christ "  and  "  having  life."  It  is  to  be  drawn  from  the  contrast  to  the 
fall.  The  fall  of  man  was  the  death  of  man  through  the  first  Adam;  the  rise 
of  man  is  the  life  of  man  in  the  second  Adam.     (JR.  Montgomery,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  These  things  have  I  written  unto  you  that  believe  on  the  name  of 
the  Son  of  God ;  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life. — Helps  to  full 
assurance : — I.  To  whom  was  this  written  ?  It  is  important  to  observe  the 
direction  of  a  letter ;  for  I  may  be  reading  a  communication  meant  for  somebody 
else,  and  if  it  should  contain  good  tidings,  I  may  be  deceiving  myself  by  appropriating 
the  news.  1.  This  Epistle,  and  this  particular  text  in  it,  were  written  for  all  those 
who  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  To  unbelievers  this  text  is  not 
written :  it  is  for  all  who  trust  in  Jesus ;  but  it  is  for  none  beside.  If  you  inquire 
why  it  is  not  addressed  to  unbelievers,  I  answer,  simply  because  it  would  be 
preposterous  to  wish  men  to  be  assured  of  that  which  is  not  true.  3.  We  may 
gather  from  this  address  being  made  to  all  the  people  of  God  and  to  none  beside, 
that  there  are  some  believers  in  the  world,  and  true  believers  too,  who  do  not  know 
that  they  have  eternal  life.  Again,  a  large  number  of  Christ's  people  who  may  be 
perfectly  sound  in  the  doctrinal  view  of  the  nature  of  this  life  do  not  know  that 
they  possess  it  at  this  present  moment  if  they  are  believers.  We  want  children  of 
God  who  believe  in  Jesus  to  feel  that  the  holy  flame  which  kindles  their  lamp  to-day 
IB  the  same  fire  which  will  shine  forth  before  the  throne  of  God  for  ever;  they  have 
begun  already  to  exercise  those  holy  emotions  of  delight  and  joy  which  will  be  their 
heaven :  they  already  possess  in  measure  those  perceptions  and  faculties  which  will 
be  theirs  in  glory.  Yet  again,  there  are  some  Christians  who  believe  all  this,  and 
are  perfectly  right  in  theory,  but  yet  they  each  one  cry,  "  I  want  to  know  that  I  have 
eternal  life.  I  want  a  fuller  assurance  of  salvation  than  I  have  already  obtained." 
That  is  also  our  desire  for  you.  II.  To  what  end  John  has  written.  1.  When  he 
says,  "  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life,"  I  think  his  first  meaning  i3 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  447 

that  you  may  know  that  everybody  who  believes  in  Jesus  Christ  has  eternal  life. 
You  are  not  to  form  an  opinion  upon  it,  but  to  believe  it,  for  the  Lord  hath  said  it. 
2.  I  think  that  John  in  this  passage  meant,  and  we  will  consider  him  as  meaning, 
something  more — namely,  he  would  have  us  know  that  we  personally  have  eternal 
life  by  having  us  know  that  we  do  personally  believe  in  Jesus.  Eationally  a  living 
man  should  know  that  he  is  alive.  No  man  should  give  sleep  to  his  eyes  or 
slumber  to  his  eyelids  while  he  has  a  doubt  about  his  eternal  state.  It  is  possible,  and 
it  is  very  desirable ;  for  when  a  man  knows  that  he  has  eternal  life,  what  a  comfort 
it  is  to  him  !  What  gratitude  it  produces  in  his  spirit !  How  it  helps  him  to  live 
above  the  world  !  And  it  is  our  duty  to  obtain  full  assurance.  We  should  not  have 
been  commanded  to  give  diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure  if  it  were 
not  right  for  us  to  be  sure.  III.  What  has  John  said  in  this  Epistle  which 
CONDUCES  TO  OUR  FULL  ASSURANCE  ?  How  docs  he  help  us  to  know  that  we  are 
believers,  and  consequently  to  know  that  we  have  eternal  life  ?  1.  You  will  find, 
first,  that  John  mentions  as  an  evidence  truthful  dealing  with  God,  in  faith  and 
confession  of  sin.  Naturally  men  walk  in  darkness  or  falsehood  towards  God ;  but 
when  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  we  come  to  walk  in  the  light  of  truth.  Eead  in  the 
first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  from  verse  6  to  9.  2.  Next,  John  gives  us  obedience  as 
a  test  of  the  child  of  God.  Look  to  the  second  chapter,  and  begin  to  read  at  the 
third  verse.  3.  Follow  me  as  I  call  attention,  next,  to  the  evidence  of  love  in  the 
heart.  In  the  second  chapter  read  at  the  ninth  verse.  Then  go  on  to  the  fourteenth 
verse  of  the  third  chapter.  This  will  greatly  help  you  to  decide  your  case.  Do  you 
hate  anybody  ?  Are  you  seeking  revenge  ?  Then  you  are  not  dwelling  in  the 
light ;  you  are  of  Cain  and  not  of  Christ.  4.  Next  to  that  comes  separation  from 
the  world.  Eead  in  the  second  chapter  at  the  fifteenth  verse.  This  is  backed  up 
by  the  first  verse  of  the  third  chapter.  Thus  slander,  abuse,  and  other  forms  of 
persecution  may  turn  to  your  comfort  by  showing  that  you  are  of  that  sect  which 
is  everywhere  spoken  against.  5.  Next  to  that,  in  the  second  chapter,  we  have  the 
evidence  of  continuance  in  the  faith.  "  And  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the 
lust,"  &c.  6.  The  next  evidence  you  will  find  in  the  third  chapter,  the  third  verse, 
namely,  purification.  Do  you  every  day  endeavour  to  keep  clear  of  sin ;  and,  when 
you  have  sinned,  do  you  at  night  go  with  bitter  repentance  to  God,  and  beg  to  be 
delivered  from  it  ?  7.  Again,  in  the  twenty-first  verse  of  the  third  chapter,  we  meet 
with  another  blessed  evidence,  and  that  is  a  clear  conscience.  8.  Furthermore,  we 
find  an  evidence  in  answer  to  prayer :  "  And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him, 
because  we  keep  His  commandments,  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  ' 
sight."  9.  Adherence  to  the  truth  is  another  help  to  full  assurance.  Eead  the 
whole  fourth  chapter.  If  you  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  the  truth  bears  witness  to 
you.  Blessed  are  those  who  are  not  removed  from  the  hope  of  their  calling. 
10.  One  of  the  best  evidences  of  true  faith,  and  one  of  the  best  helps  to  full 
assurance,  is  a  holy  familiarity  with  God.  Eead  in  the  fourth  chapter  the  sixteenth  V 
verse.  When  you  have  no  longer  that  slavish  fear  which  makes  you  stand  back, 
but  that  childlike  confidence  which  draws  you  nearer  and  yet  nearer  unto  God,  then 
are  you  His  child.  He  who  can  call  God  his  exceeding  joy  is  among  the  living  in 
Zion.  IV.  The  appendix  to  John's  design.  "  That  ye  may  believe  on  the  name 
of  the  Son  of  God."  I  think  he  means  this — you  are  never  to  get  into  such  a  state 
that  you  say,  "  I  have  eternal  life,  and  therefore  I  need  not  trust  simply  in  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.  Years  ago  I  was  born  again,  and  so  I  can 
now  live  without  the  daily  exercise  of  faith."  "No,"  says  the  apostle,  "lam 
writing  this  to  believers,  and  I  tell  them  that  while  they  may  have  full  assurance,  it 
cannot  be  a  substitute  for  habitual  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus."  Every  vessel,  whether 
it  be  a  great  flagon  or  a  little  cup,  must  hang  upon  the  one  nail  which  is  fastened 
in  a  sure  place.  If  you  get  from  Je  ;us,  you  wander  into  a  land  of  darkness  and  of 
the  shadow  of  death.  {C.H.  Spurgeon.)  The  blessing  of  full  assurance  : — I.  John 
Y.'ROTE  with  a  SPECIAL  PURPOSE.  1.  To  begin  with,  John  wrote  that  we  might  enjoy 
the  full  assurance  of  our  salvation.  Full  assurance  is  not  essential  to  salvation, 
but  it  is  essential  to  satisfaction.  May  you  get  it — may  you  get  it  at  once ;  at  any 
rate,  may  you  never  be  satisfied  to  live  without  it.  You  may  have  full  assurance. 
You  may  have  it  without  personal  revelations ;  it  is  wrought  in  us  by  the  word  of 
God.  He  begins  thus :  "  Whosoever  belie veth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  ^j 
God."  Can  anything  be  more  clear  than  this?  The  loving  spirit  cf  John  leads  ' 
him  to  say,  "Every  one  that  loveth  Him  that  begat,  loveth  Him  also  that  is 
begotten  of  Him."  Do  you  love  God ?  Do  you  love  His  only-begotten  Son?  You  ' 
can  answer  those  two  questions  surely.     John  goes  on  to  give  another  evidence : 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

"  By  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children  of  God,  when  we  love  God,  and  keep 
His  commandments."  You  can  tell  whether  you  love  the  brethren,  as  such,  for 
their  Master's  sake,  and  for  the  truth's  sake  that  is  in  them  ;  and  if  you  can  truly 
say  that  you  thus  love  them,  then  you  may  know  that  you  have  eternal,  life.  Our 
apostle  gives  us  this  further  evidence :  "  This  is  th6  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  His 
commandments ;  and  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."  Obedience  is  the 
grand  test  of  love.  By  the  fruit  you  can  test  the  root  and  the  sap.  But  note  that 
this  obedience  must  be  cheerful  and  willing.  "  His  commandments  are  not  grievous." 
I  said  to  one  who  came  to  join  the  Church  the  other  day,  "  I  suppose  you  are  not 
perfect  ?  "  and  the  reply  was,  "  No,  sir,  I  wish  I  might  be."  I  said,  "  And  suppose 
you  were?"  "  Oh,  then,"  she  said,  "  that  would  be  heaven  to  me."  So  it  would 
be  to  me.  We  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man.  Oh,  that  we  could 
perfectly  obey  in  thought,  and  word,  and  deed  1  John  then  proceeds  to  mention 
three  witnesses.  Do  you  know  anything  about  these  three  witnesses?  Do  you 
know  "  the  Spirit "  ?  Has  the  Spirit  of  God  quickened  you,  changed  you, 
illuminated  you,  sanctified  you?  Next,  do  you  know  "the  water,"  the  purifying 
power  of  the  death  of  Christ?  Do  you  also  know  "  the  blood  "  ?  Do  you  know  the 
power  of  the  blood  to  take  away  sin  ?  Then  in  the  mouth  of  these  three  witnesses 
shall  the  fact  of  your  having  eternal  life  be  fully  established.  One  thin^  more 
I  would  notice.  Read  the  ninth  verse :  the  apostle  puts  our  faith  and  assurance  on 
the  ground  that  we  receive  "  the  witness  of  God."  The  inmost  heart  of  Christian 
faith  is  that  we  take  God  at  His  Word ;  and  we  must  accept  that  Word,  not  because 
of  the  probabilities  of  its  statements,  nor  because  of  the  confirmatory  evidence  of 
science  and  philosophy,  but  simply  and  alone  because  the  Lord  has  spoken  it. 
2.  Furthermore,  John  wrote  that  we  might  know  our  spiritual  life  to  be  eternal. 
We  are  said  to  be  "made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  Immortality  is  of  the 
essence  of  the  life  of  God.  If  our  life  is  Christ's  life,  we  shall  not  die  until  Christ 
dies.  Let  us  rest  in  this.  3.  Once  more,  John  desired  the  increase  and  confirma- 
tion of  their  faith.  "  That  ye  might  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God." 
Many  a  Christian  man  is  narrow  in  the  range  of  his  faith  from  ignorance  of  the 
Lord's  mind.  Like  certain  tribes  of  Israel,  they  have  conquered  a  scanty  territory 
as  yet,  though  all  the  land  is  theirs  from  Dan  to  Beersheba.  John  would  have  us 
push  out  our  fences,  and  increase  the  enclosure  of  our  faith.  Let  us  believe  all  that 
God  has  revealed,  for  every  truth  is  precious  and  practically  useful.  It  will  be 
well  for  you  if  your  faith  also  increases  intensively.  Oh  that  you  may  more  fully 
believe  what  you  do  believe  !  We  need  deeper  insight  and  firmer  conviction.  This 
is  John's  desire  for  you,  that  you  believe  with  all  your  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength. 
He  would  have  you  believe  more  constantly,  so  that  you  may  say,  "  My  heart  is 
fixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed  ;  I  will  sing  and  give  praise."  He  would  have  us 
trust  courageously.  Some  can  believe  in  a  small  way  about  small  things.  Oh,  for  a 
boundless  trust  in  the  infinite  God  !  We  need  more  of  a  venturesome  faith  ;  the 
faith  to  do  and  dare.  We  need  also  to  have  our  faith  increased  in  the  sense  of  its 
becoming  more  practical.  We  want  an  everyday  faith,  not  to  look  at,  but  to  use. 
God  give  to  you  that  you  may  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God  with  a  sound, 
common  sense  faith,  which  will  be  found  wearable,  and  washable,  and  workable 
throughout  life.  We  need  to  believe  more  joyfully.  Oh,  what  a  blessed  thing  it  is 
when  you  reach  the  rest  and  joy  of  faith  !  If  we  would  truly  believe  the  promise  of 
God,  and  rest  in  the  Lord's  certain  fulfilment  of  it,  we  might  be  as  happy  as  the 
angels.  II.  The  pukpose  which  John  had  in  his  mind  we  ought  to  follow 
UP.  11  he  wished  us  to  know  that  we  have  eternal  life,  let  us  try  to  know  it.  The 
Word  of  God  was  written  for  this  purpose;  let  us  use  it  for  its  proper  end.  Our 
conscience  tells  us  that  we  ought  to  seek  full  assurance  of  salvation.  It  cannot  be 
right  for  us  to  be  children  of  God,  and  not  to  know  our  own  Father.  Are  you  not 
bidden  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure  ?  Are  you  not  a  thousand  times  over 
exhorted  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  to  give  thanks  continually?  But  how  can  you 
rejoice,  if  the  dark  suspicion  haunts  you,  that  perhaps,  after  all,  you  have  not  the 
life  of  God?  (Had.)  The  Christian's  title: — Suppose  I  should  come  to  you 
some  day  and  call  in  question  your  ownership  of  your  house,  and  demand 
that  you  give  it  up — a  homestead  bequeathed  to  you  by  your  father.  "  Why  do  you 
make  such  a  demand  upon  me?  "  you  ask.  "  Because,"  I  reply,  "  it  is  not  your 
house;  you  have  no  right  to  it;  at  least  you  do  not  know  that  it  is  yours."  "  Oh, 
yes,"  you  reply,  "  I  am  quite  sure  it  is  my  house."  "  How  do  you  know?  what  is 
your  reason  for  believing  that  it  is  your  house  "  ?  "  Why,  because  my  father  lived 
here  before  me."    "  That  is  no  good  reason."    "  Well,  I  have  lived  here  undisturbed 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  449 

for  five  years  myself."  "  It  does  not  hence  follow  that  the  house  is  yours."  "  But 
I  am  very  happy  m  it:  I  enjoy  myself  here."  "  Well,  but,  my  dear  sir,  that  you 
may  do  and  still  have  no  right  to  it."  At  last,  pushed  to  the  wall,  you  take  me 
with  you  down  to  the  court-house,  and  show  me  your  father's  will,  duly  written, 
signed,  sealed  and  recorded.  This  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  point.  A  great  many 
Christians  are  at  a  loss  where  and  how  to  ground  their  "  title."  It  is  not  in  the 
fact  that  you  are  a  descendant  of  a  saintly  family,  a  child  of  believing  parents :  for 
as  old  Matthew  Henry  says  :  "  Grace  does  not  run  in  the  blood"  :  nor  is  it  that 
you  have  membership  in  the  visible  Church  of  Christ ;  nor  is  it  to  be  found  in 
delightful  frames  and  feeUngs — in  a  word,  not  even  a  genuine  Christian  experience 
constitutes  your  "title-deed."  Where  then  are  we  to  lay  the  foundation  of  our 
hope?  Why,  just  in  the  naked,  bare  Word  of  God  (John  v.  24).  Straight  to  the 
record  do  we  appeal  for  a  final  test  as  to  our  possession  in  God  (1  John  v.  11-12). 
{G.  F,  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Eternal  life : — Eternal  life  is  not  in  the  Scriptures 
limited  to  God  as  an  incommunicable  attribute  or  essence,  nor  to  the  angels  even  as 
a  possession  shut  up  within  the  walls  of  heaven ;  but  is  spoken  of  as  something 
that  may  be  conveyed  to  and  shared  with  men.  Eternal  life  is  the  life  of  the 
spiritual  nature,  the  lite  of  sentiment  and  affection,  of  moral  and  religious  principle. 
Indeed,  in  the  New  Testament,  many  phrases  might  equally  well  be  translated  either 
eternal  or  spiritual  life;  as,  for  example,  "No  murderer  hath  eternal  life,"  hath 
spiritual,  holy,  religious,  divine  life,  "  abiding  in  him."  Moreover,  that  eternal 
life  is  not  simply  enduring,  or  hterally  and  only  everlasting  lite,  is  plain,  because 
we  never  speak  of  the  devU  and  his  angels  as  having  eternal  life,  though  it  is 
supposed  in  our  theology  they  have  a  life  that  endures  through  all  the  future, 
contemporaneously  with  that  of  Divinity  and  seraph.  The  bad  surely  do  not  live 
the  eternal  life,  though  they  have  before  them  the  same  unbounded  prospect  of 
existence  with  the  good.  Theirs  is  a  state  of  eternal  or  spiritual  death.  Eternal 
life  in  God  is  the  life  of  absolute  goodness,  purity,  rectitude,  and  truth.  Eternal 
life  in  man  is  the  life  of  justice  and  love,  of  fidelity  in  all  his  relations.  It  is  a 
right,  holy,  and  becoming  life.  When  we  are  elevated  above  selfish  and  trifling 
cares  into  noble  thought  and  generous  feeling,  our  life,  so  far  from  having  the 
character  of  a  life  that  simply  endures  or  is  to  endure  for  a  long  succession  of  time, 
seems  no  longer  concerned  with  time  at  all,  but  to  have  risen  above  it.  Days  and 
weeks  are  no  longer  the  terms  of  our  existence  ;  but  thoughts,  emotions,  dictates  of 
conscience,  impulses  of  kindness,  and  aspirations  of  worship — these  make  the 
eternal  life,  because  we  feel  there  is  something  reaUy  fixed  and  impregnable  in 
them,  which  neither  time  can  alter,  nor  age  wrinkle,  nor  the  revolutions  of  the 
world  waste,  nor  the  grave  bury,  but  the  eternity  of  God  alone  embrace  and  preserve. 
It  is  true,  that  in  that  life,  as  in  the  absolute  and  perfect  Spirit  of  God,  is  involved 
also  the  quahty  of  permanence.  The  pure,  loving,  righteous,  and  devoted  heart, 
feels  its  own  imperishableness.  Its  immortahty  is  secretly  whispered  to  it  in  a. 
great  assurance.  The  Spirit  bears  witness  with  it  to  its  incorruptible  nature. 
Even  here,  rising  above  the  earth,  "  nor  feeUng  its  idle  whirl,"  it  shaU  vindicate  its 
superiority  to  all  that  is  material,  as  it  drops  the  flesh,  and  takes  the  celestial  body. 
But  the  heavenly  and  indissoluble  life  begins  in  this  world.  Jesus  Christ  had  it 
here.  For  who  thinks  of  Him  as  any  more  immortal  after  His  resurrection  and 
ascension  than  before?  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  perfect  possessor  on  earth,  is 
accordingly  the  great  and  incomparable  communicator  of  this  eternal  life.  To 
Him,  especially  and  above  all,  we  are  to  go  for  it.  Shall  this  spiritual  or  eternal 
life  Ijecome  at  length  universal  throughout  the  intelligent  and  moral  creation? 
The  theme  is  perhaps  too  great  for  the  comprehension  of  the  human  mind,  nor  is  it 
even  by  the  hght  of  inspiration  so  cleared  up  that  we  can  hope  for  an  entire  agree- 
ment respecting  it  among  equally  wise  and  good  men.  Better  is  it  that  we  should, 
by  all  the  motives  and  sanctions,  hopes  and  fears,  of  the  gospel,  try  to  awaken  the 
moral  and  spiritual  nature  in  our  own  and  in  others'  hearts,  than  that  we  should 
exercise  the  fancy  with  predicting  the  fortunes  to  arise  in  the  coming  ages. 
(C.  A.  Bartol.) 

Yers.  14,  15.  And  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  Him,  that,  if  we  ask  any- 
thing according  to  His  will,  He  heareth  us. — The  answer  to  prayer  received  by 
faith : — A  very  considerable  amount  of  error  prevails  in  regard  to  the  answer  of 
prayer.  That  answer  is  by  many  supposed  to  be  a  more  tangible  and  ascertainable 
result  than  it  really  is.  To  answer  prayer  God  has  promised ;  to  make  the  answer 
of  prayer  evident  He  has  not  promised.  Eeligion  is  in  all  its  departments  a  business 

29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of  faith.  In  all  that  it  calls  us  to  do,  we  "  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight."  Prayer 
is  no  exception.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is,  and  that  He  is 
a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him."  In  pursuing  our  subject  further, 
then,  let  us  consider  first,  that — I.  God  in  answebino  oub  pbayees  allows  Himself 
GBEAT  LATITUDE  OF  TIME.  We  are  impatient  creatures,  eager  for  speedy  and  imme- 
diate results.  But  God  is  always  calm,  deUberate,  judicious.  He  waiteth  to  be 
gracious,  not  capriciously  but  discreetly.  A  benefit  often  owes  its  chief  value  to  its 
being  seasonable,  opportune.  And  the  discipline  of  delay  is  frequently  even  a 
greater  profit  than  the  bliss  of  fruition.  II.  Consider  that  the  answee  of  peayeb 
IS  without  limitation  IN  eegard  to  the  mode.  God  binds  Himself  to  grant  our 
requests,  but  He  limits  Himself  to  no  particular  method  of  gi-anting  them.  God  is 
not  wont  to  bestow  His  favours,  especially  spiritual  favours,  on  men  directly.  He 
far  more  commonly  employs  indirect  and  circuitous  processes  for  their  conveyance. 
Hence,  we  do  not  often  perceive  the  success  of  our  petitions  as  the  fruit  of  God's 
immediate  agency.  We  lose  sight  of  its  connection  with  its  true  source  in  the 
multiplicity  of  intermediate  objects  and  events,  not  for  the  most  part  evidently 
relevant  or  suitable  to  the  end.  We  pray  for  a  new  heart,  and  we  expect  our  answer 
in  the  upspringing  and  operation  within  us  of  new  desires.  Or  we  ask  for  the  pro- 
duction or  increase  of  some  spiritual  grace.  But  the  real  answer  may  come  in 
changes  of  our  external  state  unlooked  for  and  unwelcome,  such  as  will  call  us  to 
toil  and  suffering,  under  the  operation  of  which,  by  the  secret  influences  of  the 
Divine  Spirit,  the  result  we  desire  may  be  slowly  and  painfully  developed.  We 
looked  for  the  blessing  by  immediate  and  easy  communications ;  it  comes  under  a 
course  of  prolonged  and  afflictive  discipline.     III.  Consider  that  God  in  answering 

PBATEK  HOLDS  HiMSELF  AT  PEEFECT  LIBEETY  IN  BEOABD  TO   THE  SHAPE    OF    ITS   ANSWEE. 

Whether  that  which  we  ask  for  be  really  or  only  apparently  good  for  us,  or  whether 
it  be  compatible  with  higher  interests  pertaining  to  ourselves  or  others  must  be  left 
to  His  decision.  "  Our  ignorance  in  asking,"  and  especially  in  reference  to 
temporal  things,  we  ought  not  to  overlook.  In  all  true  prayer,  "  the  Spirit  helpeth 
our  infirmities."  He  will  in  all  such  cases  hear  us  according  to  the  Spirit's  meaning, 
and  not  according  to  our  own.  The  removal  of  a  trouble,  for  instance,  may  not  be 
60  great  a  blessing  to  us  as  grace  to  bear  it ;  and  in  that  case  God  will  withhold  the 
inferior  good  which  we  ask.  From  all  these  considerations  it  must  appear  to 
reflecting  minds  that  the  answer  of  prayer  must  necessarily  be  a  thing  of  great 
obscurity  and  of  manifold  disguises  ;  and  that  our  confidence  in  it,  and  consequent 
satisfaction  from  it,  must  rest  far  more  on  the  Word  of  God  than  upon  direct 
experience,  observation,  recognition,  consciousness.  {R.  A.  Hallam,  D.D.) 
Praying  and  tcaiting  : — I.  Explanation  :  and  let  the  explanation  be  taken  from 
instances  in  Holy  Writ.  Elijah  bowed  his  knee  on  the  top  of  Carmel,  and  prayed 
to  God  for  rain.  He  sent  his  servant  till  at  last  he  brought  back  the  news,  "  There 
is  a  little  cloud  the  size  of  a  man's  hand."  Quite  enough  for  Elijah's  faith.  He 
acts  upon  the  belief  that  he  has  the  petition,  though  not  a  drop  of  rain  has  fallen. 
II.  Commendation.  Expect  answers  to  prayer.  1.  By  this  means  you  put  an 
honour  upon  God's  ordinance  of  prayer.  2.  Such  a  spirit,  in  the  next  place, 
having  honoured  prayer,  also  honours  God's  attributes.  To  believe  that  the  Lord 
will  hear  my  prayer  is  honour  to  His  truthfulness.  He  has  said  that  He  will,  and  I 
believe  that  He  will  keep  His  word.  It  is  honourable  to  His  power.  I  beheve  that 
He  can  make  the  word  of  His  mouth  stand  fast  and  stedfast.  It  is  honourable  to  His 
love.  The  larger  things  I  ask  the  more  do  I  honour  the  liberality,  grace,  and  love 
of  God.  It  is  honourable  to  His  wisdom,  for  I  believe  that  His  word  is  wise  and  may 
safely  be  kept.  3.  Again,  to  believe  that  God  hears  prayer,  and  to  look  for  an 
answer,  is  truly  to  reverence  God  Himself.  If  I  stand  side  by  side  with  a  friend,  and 
I  ask  him  a  favour,  and  when  he  is  about  to  reply  to  me  I  turn  away  and  open  the 
door  and  go  to  my  business,  why  what  an  insult  is  this !  Merely  to  knock  at  mercy's 
door  without  waiting  a  reply,  is  but  like  the  runaway  knocks  of  idle  boys  in  the 
street :  you  cannot  expect  an  answer  to  such  prayers.  4.  Furthermore,  thus  to 
believe  in  the  result  of  prayer  tries  and  manifests  faith.  5.  Such  a  habit,  moreover, 
helps  to  bring  out  our  gratitude  to  God.  None  sing  so  sweetly  as  those  who  get 
answers  to  prayer.  Let  me  add  how  this  would  make  your  faith  grow,  how  it 
•would  make  your  love  burn,  how  every  grace  would  be  put  in  active  exercise 
if,  believing  in  the  power  of  prayer,  you  watched  for  the  answer,  and  when  the 
answer  came  went  with  a  song  of  praise  to  the  Saviour's  feet.  III.  Having  thus 
spoken  by  way  of  commendation,  we  pause  awhile,  and  turn  to  speak  by  way  of 
gentle  rebuke.     I  am  communing  this  morning  with  those  persons  to  whom  John 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  451 

wrote ;  you  who  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God ;  you  who  do  believe  in 
the  efficacy  of  prayer.     How  is  it  that  you  do  not  expect  an  answer  ?    I  think  I 
hear  you  say,  "  One  reason  is  my  own  unworthiness ;  how  can  I  think  that  God 
will  hear  such  prayers  as  mine  ?  "    Let  me  remind  thee  that  it  is  not  the  man  who 
prays  that  commends  the  prayer  to  God,  but  the  fervency  of  the  prayer,  and  in  the 
virtue  of  the  great  Intercessor.    Why,  think  you,  did  the  apostle  write  these  words : 
•'  Elias  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with  us  "  ?    Why,  precisely  to  meet  the  case  of 
those  who  say,  "  My  prayer  is  not  heard  because  I  have  such  and  such  faults." 
Here  is  a  case  in  point  with  yours.     "  Yes,"  say  you,  "  but,  sir,  you  do  not  know 
the  particular  state  of  mind  I  have  been  in  when  I  have  prayed.     I  am  so  fluttered, 
and  worried,  and  vexed,  that  I  cannot  expect  my  prayer,  offered  in  such  a  state  of 
mind,  to  prevail  with  God."     Did  you  ever  read  the  thirty-fourth  psalm,  and  care- 
fully consider  where  David  was  when  his  prayer  had  such  good  speed  with  God  ? 
Do  not,  I  pray  you,  get  into  the  ill  habit  of  judging  that  your  prayers  are  not  heard 
because  of  your  failings  in  spuit.     "  Yes,"  says  a  third,  "it  is  not  merely  that  I 
do  not  so  much  doubt  the  efficacy  of  prayer  on  account  of  myself,  but  my  prayers 
themselves  are  such  poor  things."     This  is  your  sin  as  well  as  your  infirmity.     Be 
humbled  and  pray  God  to  make  you  like  the  importunate  widow,  for  so  only  will 
you  prevail.    But  at  the  same  time  let  me  remind  you  that  if  your  prayers  be 
sincere  it  shall  often  happen  that  even  their  weakness  shall  not  destroy  them.     He 
may  rebuke  the  unbelief  of  your  prayer,  and  yet  in  infinite  mercy  He  may  exceed 
His  promise.    Further,  I  have  no  doubt  many  of  God's  people  cannot  think  their 
prayers  will  be  heard,  because  they  have  had  as  yet  such   very  few  manifest 
replies.     You  say  you  have  had  no  answers  1     How  know  you  ?     God  may  have 
answered  you,  though  you  have  not  seen  the  answer.     God  has  not  promised  to 
give  you  the  particular  mercy  in  kind,  but  He  will  give  it  you  somehow  or  other. 
Many  do  not  pray  expecting  an  answer,  because  they  pray  in   such  a  sluggish 
spirit.     They  called  "some  of  the  early  Christians  on  the  Continent,  "  Beg-hards," 
because  they  did  pray  hard  to  God  ;  and  none  can  prevail  but  those  who  pray  hard. 
Then  there  are  so  many,  again,  who  pray  in  a  legal  spirit.     Why  do  you  pray  ? 
Because  it  is  my  duty?    A  child  does  not  cry  because  the  time  to  cry  has  come,  nor 
does  a  sick  man  groan  because  it  is  the  hour  of  groaning,  but  they  cry  and  groan 
because  they  cannot  help  it.     When  the  new-born  nature  says,  "  Let  us  di'aw  nigh 
unto  God,"  then  is  the  time  and  the  place.    A  legal  spirit  would  prevent  our 
expecting  answers  to  prayer.   Liconsistencies  after  prayer,  and  a  failure  to  press  our 
Buit,  will  bring  us  to  doubt  the  power  of  prayer.    If  we  do  not  plead  with  God  again 
and  again,  we  shall  not  keep  up  our  faith  that  God  hears  us.     IV.  Exhortation. 
Let  us  believe  in  God's  answering  prayer,  I  mean  those  of  us  who  have  believed  in 
Jesus ;  and  that  because  we  have  God's  promise  for  us.   Hear  what  He  says,  "  Thou 
shalt  make  thy  prayer  unto  Him,  and  He  shall  hear  thee."    Again,  prayer  must  be 
answered,  because  of  the  character  of  God  our  Father.     Will  He  let  His  children 
cry  and  not  hear  them  ?    He  heareth  the  young  ravens,  and  will  He  not  hear  His 
own  people  ?     Then  think  of  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.     When  you  pray  it 
is  the  blood  that  speaks.     Think,  again,  that  Jesus  pleads.     Shall  the  Father  deny 
the  Son  ?    Besides,  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself  is  the  Author  of  your  prayers.     Will 
God  indite  the  desire,  and  then  not  hear  it  ?     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         Confidence  in 
prayer : — ^I.  The  spibit  of  prayer  is  expressed  in  the  words,  "  This  is  the  confidence 
that  we  have  in  Him."     The  nature  of  this  confidence  is  determined  by  the  connec- 
tion.   It  is  not  the  confidence  of  presumption,  but  of  children  in  a  father.     God  is 
dishonoured  by  distrust.      Christ  is  dishonoured  by  unbelief.     11.  The  btjle  of 
PRATER  prescribed  in  the  text — "If  we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will."     It  is 
clear  this  rule  is  intended  to  remind  us  there  is  to  be  a  limitation  in  our  prayers.   It 
plainly  suggests  there  are  many  things  which  we  may  not  ask  of  God  in  prayer. 
We  must  not  suppose  we  are  to  follow  our  own  desires  in  our  supplications.    We 
may  wish  for  many  things  which  we  ought  not  to  obtain.     They  may  be  wrong  in 
themselves.   Or,  though  proper  in  themselves,  they  might  be  hurtful  to  us.  In  either 
of  these  cases  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  wisdom  a,ud  goodness  of  God  to  grant 
them.     This  rule  also  reminds  us  there  are  certain  blessings  which  are  right  in 
themselves,  and  which  it  may  be  the  will  of  God  to  bestow,  but  which  we  must  ask 
only  in  subservience  to  His  pleasure,  and  service,  and  glory.    For  example,  I  am 
justified  in  asking  for  health  within  these  limitations.     So  also  may  I  ask  a  reason- 
able share  of  temporal  prosperity.    With  all  these  exceptions,  however,  the  rule 
before  us  assumes  there  are  some  things  clearly  declared  to  be  in  such  full  harmony 
with  the  will  of  God,  that  we  may  ask  them  absolutely  and  confidently,  and  without 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

any  reserve.  They  contain  all  that  is  essential  to  our  real  interests,  for  both  time 
and  eternity.  We  may  ask  at  once  for  the  pardon  of  our  sins.  The  promise  is 
plain  and  universal  (Isa.  i.  18).  The  same  is  true  of  the  renewal  of  the  soul  in 
righteousness.  So  also  may  we  ask  for  increasing  holiness.  "  This  is  the  will  of 
God,  evMi  your  sanctification."  We  need  set  no  limits  to  our  desires  after  holiness. 
God  has  set  none.  In  a  word,  we  may  ask  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  this  is  the  sum 
and  centre  of  all  blessings.  We  may  go  beyond  ourselves,  too,  and  ask  for  others. 
We  may  pray  for  the  conversion  and  godliness  of  our  household ;  for  the  advance- 
ment of  the  cause  of  Christ  in  earth.  III.  The  acceptance  of  our  prayers  akd 
THEiB  GRACIOUS  ANSWERS.  "  He  hcareth  us."  This  is  universally  true.  He  is  more 
ready  to  hear  than  we  are  to  ask.  God  then  often  hears  and  answers  our  prayers, 
although  it  may  not  seem  to  be  so  at  the  time  of  our  entreaty.  Or  He  may  hear 
and  answer,  but  not  in  the  way  we  desire.  Besides,  we  may  have  answers  to  our 
prayers,  although  we  know  neither  the  time  nor  the  manner  of  them.  The  very 
exercise  is  good.  Still,  we  may  have  manifest  answers  to  our  prayers.  If  we  mark 
the  providence  of  God  we  shall  discover  that  He  has  heard  us.  But  it  is  in  eternity 
we  shall  see  all  the  answers  to  all  our  prayers.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Prayer : — I, 
Pbateb  is  the  expression  of  confidence  in  God.  1.  In  general,  the  language  of 
want,  desire,  and  necessity.  2.  Specially,  the  language  of  the  soul  enlightened  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  discover  its  necessities,  and  to  desire  what  the  Divine  bounty 
has  provided  for  them.  3.  It  is  intelligent,  discriminating,  definite — embracing  the 
exercise  of  faith  in  the  Divine  purpose  and  integrity.    11.  Our  petitions,  embodying 

THE  soul's  confidences,  ABE    REGULATED    BY    God'S   PROMISE   AND   WARB.VNT.       His  will 

as  revealed.  Precepts  concerning  our  progress  in  holiness  to  which  everything  else 
is  subordinate.  Promise — revelation  of  Divine  intention  in  relation  to  the  moral 
progress  of  the  soul.     God  hath  said — then  faith  may  confide.    III.  Faith  bbingb 

WITHIN  THE  BANGE  OF  OUB  EXPEBIENCE  THE  BLESSINGS  WE  THUS  DESIBE.      Faith,  HOt  an 

opinion,  nor  a  bare  persuasion,  but  an  intelligent,  active  principle.  1.  Appre- 
hending the  good  promised  and  sought.  2.  By  its  moral  influence  it  prepares  and 
qualifies  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  promised  good.  3.  The  love  thus  relying  on  the 
promise  becomes  conscious  of  the  blessings  bestowed.  {John  A.  Williams,  B.A.) 
Confidence  in  Him  : — Faith  towards  God  in  Jesus  Christ  is  the  essential  activity  of 
the  Christian  religion.  Salvation  begins  where  faith  begins.  When  man  opens 
his  hand  to  receive,  God  opens  His  to  give.  Again,  prayer  is  the  essential  function 
of  faith — its  natural  activity.  Prayer  comes  from  faith,  from  the  confidence  we 
have  in  Him.  Let  us  see,  then,  what  is  the  confidence  on  which  prayer  is  founded. 
1.  That  if  we  ask  anything.  He  heabeth  us — that  it  is  possible  to  make  known 
our  thoughts,  feelings,  and  desires  to  God.  I  cannot  believe  that  He  who  built  the 
cells  of  hearing  is  Himself  deaf ;  nor  that  amid  the  myriad  eyes  His  hands 
fashioned,  and  in  the  blaze  of  all  the  suns  kindled  by  His  power,  God  alone  is 
blind !  No,  it  is  infinitely  more  consonant  to  right  reason  to  believe  with  John  that 
He  heareth  us.  II.  Yes,  no  doubt  He  can ;  but  will  He  ?  Will  He  pay  any  atten- 
tion to  the  woes  and  the  wants  of  so  insignificant  a  creature  as  man  is  ?  Well, 
shifting  the  emphasis  one  word  on,  I  say,  "  This  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in 
Him,  that  He  heareth  ut  " — men  and  women  with  nothing  special  about  them 
except  their  mere  humanity.  God  Himself,  by  His  love,  has  proved  the  greatness  and 
value  of  man.  IH.  "  That  if  we  ask  anything  accobdino  to  His  will,  we  know  that 
we  have  the  petitions  that  we  desired  of  Him."  I  said  that  without  faith  in  God's 
being  and  intellect  prayer  would  be  impossible;  and  now  I  say  that  without  this 
saving  clause — without  the  confidence  that  God  only  grants  petitions  which  accord 
with  His  own  will — prayer  would  be  dangerous.  What  could  be  more  fatal  than  for 
the  power  of  God  to  be  at  the  disposal  of  human  caprice  ?  But,  thank  God,  He  will 
not  yield.  God  is  inexorable.  Love  always  is  inexorable.  The  doctor's  child 
wishes  to  have  the  run  of  the  surgery,  that  he  may  play  with  the  keen  blades  and 
taste  of  every  coloured  powder  and  potion  ;  and  the  servant  may  yield  to  his  impor- 
tunities, simply  because  her  love  is  weak ;  but  the  father  is  inexorable,  deaf, 
unyielding.  Why  ?  Because  he  loves  his  child  intensely.  I  can  venture  to  draw 
near  to  God ;  it  is  safe,  because  I  have  this  confidence  in  God  that  He  will  not  yield 
to  me  against  His  own  wisdom  and  will.  He  is  inexorable  for  my  highest  goud. 
But  God's  refusal  of  one  thing  always  means  a  grant  of  something  better. 
"According  to  His  will."  Why  so?  Because  nothing  that  is  not  on  a  level  with 
that  will  is  good  enough  for  thee.  {J.  M.  Gibbon.)  Prayer : — I.  Eegenebatb 
humanity  as  the  subject  of  continual  necessity.  Man  is  a  suppliant.  There  is 
no  moment  in  his  immortality  in  which  he  can  declare  absolute  independence  of  a 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  453 

Superior  Power.  Our  salvation  has  not  lessened  our  dependence  on  the  Divine 
bounty.  We  feel  necessities  now  of  which  in  our  natural  state  we  are  totally 
unconscious.  1.  There  is  our  want  of  a  world-conquering  faith.  Without  faith 
man  is  the  mere  sport  of  swelling  waves  or  changeful  winds — faith  gives  him 
majesty  by  ensuring  for  all  his  energies  an  immovable  consolidation !  2.  There  is 
our  need  of  infallible  wisdom.  The  realities  of  life  rebuke  our  self-sufficiency.  The 
countless  errors  for  whose  existence  we  are  unhappily  responsible  are  teaching  us 
that  our  unaided  powers  are  unequal  to  the  right  solution  of  life's  problems.  3. 
There  is  our  need  of  renewing  and  protective  grace.  All  who  know  the  subtlety  of 
sin  feel  their  danger  of  being  undermined  by  its  insidious  influence.  Without  the 
"daily  bread"  of  heaven  we  must  inevitably  perish.  II.  Kegenerate  humanity 
INTBODUCED  TO  THE  INFINITE  SOURCE  OF  BLESSING.  1.  This  source  is  rcvcaled  by 
the  highest  authority.  It  is  the  Son  revealing  the  Father — the  Well-beloved  who  is 
intimately  acquainted  with  the  feelings  which  characterise  the  Infinite  Being  in 
regard  to  an  apostate  race ;  so  that  in  accepting  this  testimony  we  accept  it  at  the 
lips  of  a  Divine  witness.  2.  This  source  is  continually  accessible.  It  would  indeed 
have  been  graciously  condescending  had  God  appointed  periodical  seasons  at  which 
He  would  have  listened  to  human  cries ;  but  He  has  appointed  us  audience-hours — 
He  is  ever  ready  to  hear  man's  song  and  to  attend  man's  suit.  3.  This  source  is 
inexhaustible.  The  ages  have  drunk  at  this  fountain,  but  it  flows  as  copiously  as 
though  no  lip  had  been  applied  to  the  living  stream.  III.  Kegenerate  humanity 
ENGAGED  IN  SOCIAL  DEVOTION.  1.  Prayer  is  the  mightiest  of  all  forces  (Matt, 
xviii.  19,  20).  2.  Special  encouragement  is  given  to  social  worship.  3.  Am  I 
surrounded  by  those  who  inquire  how  they  can  serve  their  race?  I  point  to 
the  text  for  answer  :  you  can  agree  to  beseech  the  enriching  blessing  of  God !  IV. 
Kegenerate  humanity  causing  a  distribution  of  the  riches  of  the  universe. 
While  man  is  a  moral  alien  he  has  no  influence  in  the  distribution  of  Divine  bounty ; 
but  when  he  becomes  a  child  he  may  affect  the  diffusion  of  celestial  blessings.  If  God 
has  given  us  His  Son  wiU  He  not  with  Him  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  If  He  has 
given  us  the  ocean  we  know  that  He  will  not  withhold  the  drop  !  This  assurance 
is  solemnly  suggestive.  1.  It  silences  all  complaints  as  to  the  Divine  bounty.  Do  you 
wail  that  you  feel  so  little  of  holy  influence  ?  The  reason  is  at  hand  :  "  Ye  have 
not  because  ye  asked  not,  or  because  ye  asked  amiss."  2.  It  places  the  Church  in  a 
solemn  relation  to  the  unsaved  world.  That  world  is  given  us  as  a  vineyard.  The 
fruitful  rain  and  glorious  light  may  be  had  for  asking.  Are  we  clear  of  the  world's 
blood  in  the  matter  of  prayer?  3.  It  defines  the  limit  of  our  supplication.  " If  we 
ask  anything  according  to  His  will."  There  is  a  mysterious  boundary  separating 
confidence  and  presumption.  We  must  not  interfere  in  the  settled  purposes  of  God. 
Conclusion :  1.  Earth  is  intended  to  be  a  great  sanctuary—"  if  two  of  you  shall  agree 
on  earth."  2.  All  worship  is  to  be  rendered  in  connection  with  the  name  of  Christ. 
3.  The  true  suppliant  retires  from  the  altar  in  actual  possession  of  the  blessings 
which  he  besought.  "We  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  that  we  desired  of  Him." 
We  have  too  long  acted  as  though  we  wished  some  visible  manifestation  or  audible 
proof  of  answered  prayer,  whereas  the  scriptural  doctrine  is — believe  and  have. 
(Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Life   and  prayer  : — Very  naturally,  very  opportunely, 

does  the  doctrine  of  prayer  follow  that  of  eternal  life.  For  the  new  life  brings  with 
it  new  needs.  Every  higher  grade  of  life  brings  with  it  a  sense  of  need  undreamt  of 
in  the  lower  grades  of  life.  Buddha,  for  instance,  preached  a  very  noble  doctrine 
and  lived  a  very  noble  life.  He  preached  salvation  by  self-control  and  love.  He  set 
up  in  India  a  sublime  ideal  of  character,  and  dying,  left  behind  him  the  memory  of 
a  singularly  pathetic  and  beautiful  career.  And  by  his  life  and  teaching  he  raised 
India  to  something  like  a  higher  life.  But  he  forgot  the  main  thing.  He  forgot  that 
the  soul  of  man  pants  for  the  living  God ;  that  it  must  have  God.  It  cannot 
live  on  words  however  true,  nor  on  an  example  however  noble.  It  can  only  rest 
in  God.  Mahomet,  too,  woke  in  his  people  the  sense  of  a  new  life  to  be  lived  by  them. 
To  a  people  that  had  worshipped  gods  he  proclaimed  God.  "  God  is  one,  and  God 
is  great.  Bow  down  before  Him  in  all  things."  A  noble  message  surely  as  far  as 
it  went.  But  it  did  not  go  far  enough.  It  did  not  bring  God  near  enough.  Man 
wants  something  human,  something  tender,  something  near  and  dear  in  God.  And 
the  fierce  followers  of  Mahomet  were  driven  by  the  love-hunger  in  them  to  half-deify 
the  Prophet,  and  to  invent  a  system  of  saint-worship,  a  ladder  of  sympathetic  human 
souls  by  which  they  hoped  to  come  a  little  nearer  to  God.  The  vision  of  a  higher 
life  had  awakened  new  needs  within  them.  "  Necessity,"  says  the  proverb,  "  is  the 
mother  of  invention,"  and  man's  religious  inventions  bear  startling  witness  to  the 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

great  religious  necessity,  the  imperative  God-hunger  that  is  in  him.  "  Let  us  take 
the  precepts  of  Christ  and  follow  the  example  of  Christ,  leaving  all  the  doctrinal  and 
redemptive  parts  behind."  No  !  The  life  without  the  love  will  crush  you.  The 
law  of  God  without  the  grace  of  God  will  bear  you  down.  Dr.  Martineau  says  that 
Bince  Christ  lived  a  profound  sense  of  sin  has  filled  the  whole  air  with  a  plaint  of 
penitence.  He  who  despises  the  blood  of  Christ  as  Saviour  has  not  yet  seen  the 
life  of  Christ  as  his  example.  But  eternal  life,  while  it  brings  new  seeds,  brings  also 
a  new  boldness  in  prayer.  "We  know  that  He  heareth  us."  Love  does  not  exhaust 
itself  by  what  it  gives.  We  kneel  securely  when  we  kneel  on  Calvary.  The  Cross 
is  the  inspiration  and  justification  of  prayer.  We  can  ask  anything  there.  There 
no  prayer  seems  too  great,  no  petition  too  daring.  (J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The  qualifications 
of  prayer,  with  respect  to  the  subject  matter  of  it : — I.  The  proper  qualifications 

OF    PRAYER,    WITH    RESPECT    TO    THE    SUBJECT   MATTER   OF    IT.  1.    What    We    pray    fot 

must  be  as  to  the  matter  of  it,  innocent  and  lawful.  To  pray  that  God  would 
prosper  us  in  any  wicked  design  is  not  to  present  ourselves  as  humble  suppliants  to 
His  mercy,  but  directly  to  affront  His  holiness  and  justice.  2.  What  we  pray  for 
must  not  only  be  lawful  in  itself,  but  designed  for  innocent  and  lawful  ends.  3.  The 
subject  matter  of  our  prayers  must  be  according  to  the  ordinary  course  and  events 
of  God's  providence,  something  possible.  We  must  not  expect  that  God  will  interpose 
by  a  miraculous  power,  to  accomplish  what  we  pray  for.  4.  What  we  pray 
for  ought  to  tend  chiefly  to  our  spiritual  improvement  and  growth  in  grace.      U. 

How  FAR,  WHEN  WE  PRAY  ACCORDING  TO  God's  WILL,  WE  MAY,  WITH  HUMBLE  CON- 
FIDENCE, RELY  ON  THE  SUCCESS  OF  OUR  PRAYERS.  1.  Whatever  God  has  promised 
absolutely.  He  will  faithfully  and  to  aU  intents  and  purposes  perform  (Numb, 
xxiii.  19).  2.  Where  the  promises  of  God  are  made  to  us  upon  certain  conditions 
or  reserves,  we  have  no  right  to  the  performance  of  them  any  further  than  is  agree- 
able to  the  reason  of  such  conditions.  (1)  God  alone  perfectly  knows  what  would 
be  the  consequence  of  His  gi'anting  us  our  requests.  (2)  The  heart  of  a  man  is  very 
deceitful ;  it  is  not  easy  for  him  at  all  times  to  discover  the  secret  insincerity  which 
lies  at  the  bottom  of  it.  Conclusion  :  1.  If  prayer  be  a  means  of  giving  us  access 
to  God,  and  procuring  for  us  so  many  and  great  blessings,  it  is  just  matter  of  reproof 
to  Christians  especially  that  this  duty  is  so  generally  neglected  among  them.  2. 
What  has  been  said  affords  good  men  matter  of  great  consolation,  even  when  they 
do  not  find  the  return  of  their  prayers  in  the  blessings  they  pray  for.  God  intends  the 
very  denial  of  their  requests  to  them  for  good.  (R.  Fiddes,  D.D.)  The  power  of 
believing  prayer : — Some  of  the  natural  forces  of  the  universe  can  only  be  manifested 
through  the  special  elements  and  agencies  that  are  adapted  to  transmit  them.  Elec- 
tricity must  have  a  pathway  of  susceptible  matter  over  which  to  travel,  even  if  that 
pathway  be  one  of  indefinitely  minute  particles  of  ether  only.  So  with  the  spiritual 
forces  of  the  universe.  If  the  power  of  the  mediatorial  presence  have  no  conducting 
lines  of  faith  along  which  to  travel,  it  must  sleep  for  ever,  and  the  world  be  left  to  swing 
on  in  its  old  grooves  of  evil  and  death.  The  manifestation  of  all  the  energies  of 
that  presence  can  only  come  through  the  believing  request  of  the  disciples. 
{T.  O.  Selby.) 

Vers.  16, 17.  There  is  a  sin  unto  death :  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it. — Tht 
tin  unto  death: — The  sin  mentioned  here  is  not  the  same  as  the  "  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost."  The  persons  spoken  of  as  respectively  guilty  are  very  different  from 
each  other.  In  the  latter  sin  it  is  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  malignant  enemies 
of  Christ ;  in  the  case  before  us  it  is  a  Christian  brother  that  is  the  offender  :  "  If 
any  man  see  'his  brother  '  sin."  This  clears  the  way  so  far,  or  at  least  it  narrows 
the  ground,  and  so  facilitates  our  inquiry.  Much  depends  on  the  meaning  of  the 
expression,  "  a  sin  unto  death."  Death  may  mean  either  temporal  or  eternal  death ; 
either  the  death  of  the  soul  or  that  of  the  body.  In  the  passage  before  us  it  seems 
to  mean  such  a  sin  as  God  would  chastise  with  disease  and  death,  though  He  would 
not  exclude  the  doer  of  it  from  His  kingdom.  In  the  case  of  Moses,  we  have  this 
paternal  chastisement  involving  death.  The  most  remarkable  instance  of  the  kind 
is  in  the  Corinthian  Church  (1  Cor.  xi.  30).  Weakness,  sickliness,  and  death  were 
the  three  forms  of  chastisement  with  which  the  Corinthian  Church  was  visited. 
These  passages  show  the  true  meaning  of  our  text.  The  sin  unto  death  is  a  sin  such 
as  God  chastises  by  the  infliction  of  disease  and  death.  What  this  sin  is  we  do  not 
know.  It  was  not  the  same  sin  in  all,  but  different  in  each.  In  the  case  of  the 
Corinthian  Church  unworthy  communicating  was  "  the  sin  unto  death  "  ;  but  what 
it  was  in  others  is  not  recorded.     But  then  the  question  would  arise,  How  are  we  to 


CHAP.  Y.]  I.  JOHN.  455 

know  when  a  sin  is  unto  death,  and  when  it  is  not  unto  death,  so  that  we  may  pray 
in  faith  ?  The  last  clause  of  the  16th  verse  answers  this  question.  It  admits  that 
there  is  a  sin  unto  death :  which  admission  is  thus  put  in  the  17th  verse :  "  All 
unrighteousness  is  sin  ;  but  all  sin  is  not  unto  death."  But  what  does  the  apostle 
mean  by  saying,  in  the  end  of  the  16th  verse,  "  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for 
it  "  ?  If  we  cannot  know  when  a  sin  is  unto  death,  and  when  not,  what  is  the  use 
of  saying,  "  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it  "  ?  The  word  translated  "  pray  " 
means  also  "inquire,"  and  is  elsewhere  translated  so  (John  i.  19).  (See  also  John 
i.  21,  25,  V.  12,  ix.  2,  xix.  21.)  If  thus  rendered  the  meaning  would  be,  "  I  say  he 
is  to  ask  no  questions  about  that."  That  is  to  say,  if  he  sees  a  brother  sick  and 
ready  to  die,  he  is  not  to  say.  Has  he  committed  a  sin  unto  death,  or  has  he  not  ? 
He  is  just  to  pray,  letting  alone  all  such  inquiries,  and  leaving  the  matter  in  the 
hands  of  God,  who,  in  answer  to  prayer,  will  raise  him  up,  if  he  have  not  committed 
the  sin  unto  death.  Let  us  now  come  to  the  lessons  of  our  text.  1.  Don't  puzzle 
yourself  with  hard  questions  about  the  particular  kind  of  sins  committed.  Be 
satisfied  that  it  is  sin,  and  deal  with  it  as  such.  It  is  not  the  nature  or  the  measure 
of  its  punishment  that  you  have  to  consider,  but  its  own  exceeding  sinfulness.  2. 
Be  concerned  about  a  brother's  welfare.  3.  Don't  trifle  with  sin.  Count  no  sin 
trivial,  either  in  yourself  or  another.  Do  not  extenuate  guilt.  4.  Take  it  at  once 
to  God.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  sin  unto  death: — Noble  men  and  women  have 
gone  mad  over  this  sentence.  In  the  shadows  of  this  mystery  the  gentle  spirit  of 
WiUiam  Cowper  wandered  many  a  weary  month,  wounding  itself  with  bitterest 
accusations — the  noble  intellect  distraught,  "  like  sweet  bells  jangled  out  of  tune," 
weaving  the  phantasies  of  despair — the  burden  of  its  sad  song  being,  "  There  is  a 
sin  unto  death."  I.  There  are  degrees  in  sin.  Guilt  has  its  gradations.  There 
are  sins  of  ignorance  and  of  deliberation — of  weakness  and  of  wickedness :  sins 
which  show  a  lack  of  goodwill,  and  others  that  express  intense  malignity  of  wiU. 
There  are  the  sins  of  a  Peter,  and  there  are  the  sins  of  a  Judas.  H.  Every  one 
BIN  TENDS  TO  OTHERS  MORE  GUILTY  THAN  ITSELF.  It  gives  the  will  a  wroug  bias.  It 
breaks  the  prestige  of  virtue.  Fact  tries  to  become  precedent.  Acts  become  habits. 
Choice  hardens  into  destiny.  Sin  becomes  master  and  the  sinner  a  slave.  III. 
This  sad  development  reaches  its  climax  in  the  sin  unto  death.  Beyond  this  it 
cannot  go.  What  then  can  it  be  ?  It  is  evidently  not  any  one  act  or  word.  It  is  a 
condition,  a  settled  state  of  heart  and  mind — a  state  of  opposition  to  and  hatred  of 
good  as  good,  and  God  as  God.  The  sin  unto  death  is  unbelief  of  heart  and  mind : 
rejection  of  the  holy  as  holy.  IV.  This  is  sm  unto  death.  It  hath  no 
forgiveness  under  law  or  gospel.  Why?  How  so?  Because  God  will  not? 
No.  The  way  of  return  to  God  is  closed  against  no  one  who  does  not  close 
it  against  himself.  The  unholy  cannot  be  saved.  V.  Let  us  look  at  our 
RELATION  to  THE  SIN  UNTO  DEATH.  With  regard  to  ourselves  let  us  not  yield  to 
morbid  fears,  nor  sleep  in  over  security.  The  door  is  never  closed  till  we 
close  it,  and  yet  all  sin  tends  to  the  sin  unto  death.  Let  us  then  beware  of  aU  sin. 
{J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The  sin  unto  death  : — The  leading  thought  which  St.  John  had  in 
his  mind  was  not  the  distinction  between  different  kinds  of  sin,  but  the  efficacy  of  a 
Christian's  prayers.  He  shows  it  to  be  an  immediate  consequence  of  our  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  that  we  should  offer  up  our  prayers  in  full  confidence 
that  those  prayers  will  be  heard,  and  that  they  will  be  answered,  provided  only  that 
the  petition  is  in  accordance  with  God's  holy  vsdll ;  and  then  he  applies  it  to  the 
question  of  intercession  one  for  another ;  he  would  have  us  to  remember,  that  if  we 
have  the  privilege  of  coming  to  God's  mercy-seat,  we  ought  not  to  use  the  privilege 
merely  on  our  own  behalf,  but  that  we  ought  to  pray  for  our  brethren  as  well ;  and 
we  may  even  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins.  But  does  this  direction  extend 
to  all  kinds  of  sins  ?  Is  there  no  limit  to  the  power  of  intercession  to  obtain  for- 
giveness of  sin  ?  St.  John  asserts  that  there  is  a  Umitation ;  he  says  that  a 
Christian  may  obtain  forgiveness  for  his  brother  by  intercession,  provided  that  the 
sin  for  which  he  prays  has  not  been  a  deadly  sin,  a  sin  unto  death.  And  though  it 
may  be  very  difficult  to  draw  an  exact  line  between  the  two  kinds  of  sin  of  which 
the  apostle  speaks,  yet  we  may  sufficiently  illustrate  his  meaning  by  taking  two 
extreme  cases.  On  the  one  hand,  take  the  faults  and  failings  which  beset  the  very 
best  amongst  Christ's  disciples ;  or  again,  taking  the  great  question  of  steadfastness 
in  the  faith,  which  in  St.  John's  day  was  a  question  of  overwhelming  importance 
to  every  Christian,  one  Christian  might  see  his  "brother  sinning  a  sin  not  unto 
death  "  in  this  respect ;  then  the  faults  of  a  weak  brother  such  as  this  would  be,  as 
I  conceive,  a  proper  subject  for  the  intercession  of  his  brethren.    But  take  the  other 


4g6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

extreme,  suppose  a  man  who  has  known  what  is  right  to  have  turned  his  back  upon 
his  convictions  and  to  have  wallowed  in  the  filth  of  sin,  or  suppose  you  knew  him 
to  have  committed  any  atrocious  sin,  would  you  have  any  reasonable  ground  to 
intercede  for  such  a  person  at  the  throne  of  grace,  and  to  expect  to  obtain  forgiveness 
for  him  ?  Or  suppose  a  person  not  merely  to  have  shown  some  faltering  and  weak- 
ness concerning  the  faith,  but  to  have  openly  and  expressly  denied  the  faith  (which 
may  have  been  the  case  that  St.  John  had  chiefly  in  his  mind),  then  would  a 
Christian  have  any  right  to  ask  for  the  forgiveness  of  this  sin  ?  It  seems  to  me  that 
in  this  case  the  very  nature  of  the  sin  cuts  off  all  possibility  of  intercession  ;  for  to 
intercede  for  pardon  would  be  to  plead  those  merits  of  Christ  the  virtue  of  which 
the  apostate  has  himself  expressly  renounced.  {Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  viortal 
sin  : — In  very  deed  there  is  no  sin  that  is  not  unto  death,  in  a  momentous  sense  of 
the  words,  although  the  inspired  penman,  when  viewing  the  subject  under  another 
aspect,  affirms  that  "  there  is  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death."  Alienation  from  God 
is  the  essence  of  sin  ;  and  since  God  is  life,  the  slightest  estrangement  from  Him  is 
a  tendency  to  death.  1.  The  sin  unto  death  appears  sometimes  to  be  a  single  deed 
of  extraordinary  wickedness.  It  seems  to  extinguish  conscience  at  a  blast,  and  to 
rob  the  moral  sense  of  all  its  energy  and  discernment.  It  breaks  down  the  barriers 
which  had  hitherto  restrained  the  vicious  tendencies  of  nature ;  and  forth  they  flow 
in  a  vast  irrepressible  torrent.  In  a  moment  it  produces  an  impassable  gulf  between 
God  and  the  soul.  It  turns  the  man  into  a  bravo :  it  makes  him  desperate  and 
reckless.  He  has  taken  the  leap ;  he  has  made  the  plunge ;  and  on  he  goes, 
wherever  unbridled  concupiscence  or  malignity  may  urge  him,  "  as  a  horse  rusheth 
into  the  battle."  2.  Still  more  common  is  that  ruin  of  the  soul  which  grows  out  of 
the  long  indulgence  of  comparatively  small  sins.  When  people  go  on  sipping  sin, 
although  abstaining  from  a  large  draught ;  when,  in  spite  of  a  reproving  conscience, 
they  persist  in  practices  to  which  the  lust  of  gain,  or  of  pleasure,  incites  them,  not 
pretending  that  these  practices  are  altogether  right,  but  only  that  they  are  not 
extremely  wrong ;  when  the  protest  of  the  inward  monitor  against  this  or  the  other 
misdeed  is  put  aside  with  the  base  apology.  But,  "  is  it  not  a  little  one  "  ;  it  may 
well  be  feared  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  disgusted  with  such  double-dealing,  will  leave 
the  heart  a  prey  to  its  own  deceitfulness.  3.  Habitual  carelessness  in  matters  of 
religion  is  also  a  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  which,  after  a  certain  continuance, 
♦'  bringeth  forth  death."  If  absolute,  irretrievable  ruin  is  no  rare  fruit  of  careless 
indolence,  in  the  business  of  this  world,  or,  I  should  rather  say,  is  its  natural 
consequence,  why  should  we  deem  it  unlikely  that  everlasting  ruin,  in  another 
world,  will  prove  the  consequence  of  having  neglected  in  our  lifetime  religion  and 
the  interests  of  the  soul?  To  slight  the  message,  and  hardly  give  it  a  thought, 
seems  to  me  an  outrage  even  more  atrocious  than  that  of  rejecting  it  after  examina- 
tion. 4.  Unprofitableness  under  means  of  grace,  there  is  reason  to  suspect,  becomes 
in  numerous  instances  the  sin  unto  death.  A  dull  insensibility  steals  over  the  soul 
that  has  repeatedly  been  plied  in  vain  with  spiritual  incentives,  till  at  length  a  lethargy 
possesses  it,  invincible  to  human  urgency,  from  which  it  will  not  awake  till  the  day 
of  judgment.     (J.  N.  Pearson,  M.A.) 

Yer.  18.  We  know  that  whosoever  is  bom  of  God  sinneth  not;  but  he  that  is 
begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself,  and  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not — Three 
views  of  the  truly  regenerate  man: — 1.  He  "  sinneth  not."  As  regenerate,  he  has  a 
new  nature.  The  power  of  sin  is  broken  in  his  soul,  and  therefore  its  influence 
over  his.  character  and  conduct  is  subdued.  2.  He  "  keepeth  himself."  The  Holy 
Spirit,  indeed,  regulates  his  mind.  But  still,  his  own  faculties  and  affections  are  in 
exercise ;  he  voluntarily  and  earnestly  endeavours  to  avoid  sin  and  to  practise 
righteousness ;  he  steadily  and  energetically  sets  himself  in  opposition  to  the 
temptations  by  which  he  is  beset,  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  is  successful.  3.  The 
"  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not."  The  devil  may  stand  up  against  him ;  he  may 
even  sometimes  gain  an  advantage  over  him.  But  to  overpower — to  conquer — him, 
is  beyond  the  utmost  of  Satan's  arts  and  efforts.  (A.  S.  Patterson,  D.D.)  Whoso- 
ever is  born  of  God  sinneth  not : — John  closes  his  letter  with  a  series  of  triumphant 
certainties,  which  he  considers  as  certified  to  every  Christian  by  his  own  experience. 
"  We  know  that  whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not  ...  we  know  that  we  are 
of  God  .  .  .  and  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come."  I.  Who  is  the  apostlb 
TALKING  about  HERE?  "  Wc  kuow  that  whosocver  is  born  of  God" — or,  as  the 
I?evised  Version  reads  it,  "  begotten  of  God  " — "sinneth  not."  This  new  birth,  and 
fhc  new  Divine  life  which  is  its  result,  co-exists  along  with  the  old  nature  in  which  it  is 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  457 

planted,  and  which  it  has  to  coerce  and  subdue,  sometimes  to  crucify,  and  always  to 
govern.  This  apostle  puts  great  emphasis  upon  that  idea  of  advancement  in  the 
Divine  life.  So  the  new  life  has  to  grow — grow  in  its  own  strength,  grow  in  its  own 
sphere  of  influence,  grow  in  the  power  with  which  it  purges  and  hallows  the  old 
nature  in  the  midst  of  which  it  is  implanted.  And  growth  is  not  the  only  word  for 
its  development.  That  new  Mfe  has  to  fight  for  its  life.  There  must  be  effort,  in 
order  that  it  may  rule.  Thus  we  have  the  necessary  foundation  laid  for  that  which 
characterises  the  Christian  life,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  that  it  is  a  working 
out  of  that  which  is  implanted,  a  working  out,  with  ever-widening  area  of  influence, 
and  a  working  in  with  ever  deeper  and  more  thorough  power  of  transforming  the 
character.  There  may  be  indefinite  approximation  to  the  entire  suppression  and 
sanctification  of  the  old  man ;  and  whatsoever  is  born  of  God  manifests  its  Divine 
kindred  in  this,  that  sooner  or  later  it  overcomes  the  world.  Now  if  all  this  is  true, 
I  come  to  a  very  plain  answer  to  the  first  question  that  I  raised :  Who  is  it  that 
John  is  speaking  about  ?  "  Whosoever  is  born  of  God  "  is  the  Christian  man,  in  so 
far  as  the  Divine  life  which  he  has  from  God  by  fellowship  with  His  Son,  through 
his  own  personal  faith,  has  attained  the  supremacy  in  him.  The  Divine  nature 
that  is  in  a  man  is  that  which  is  born  of  God.  And  that  the  apostle  does  not  mean 
the  man  in  whom  that  nature  is  implanted,  whether  he  is  true  to  the  nature  or  no, 
is  obvious  from  the  fact  that  in  another  part  of  this  same  chapter  he  substitutes 
*'  whatsoever  "  for  "  whosoever,"  as  if  he  would  have  us  mark  that  the  thing  which 
he  declares  to  be  victorious  and  sinless  is  not  so  much  the  person  as  the  power  that 
is  lodged  in  the  person.  That  is  my  answer  to  the  first  question.  II.  What  is 
ASSERTED  ABOUT  THIS  DiviNE  LIFE  ?  "  Whosoevcr  is  bom  of  God  sinneth  not." 
That  is  by  no  means  a  unique  expression  in  this  letter.  For,  to  say  nothing  about 
the  general  drift  of  it,  we  have  precisely  similar  statements  in  a  previous  chapter, 
twice  uttered.  "  Whosoever  abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not "  ;  "  whosoever  is  born  of 
God  doth  not  commit  sin,  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him,  and  he  cannot  sin,  because 
he  is  born  of  God."  Nothing  can  be  stronger  than  that.  Yes,  and  nothing  can  be 
more  obvious.  I  think,  then,  that  the  apostle  does  not  thereby  mean  to  declare  that 
unless  a  man  is  absolutely  sinless  in  regard  of  his  individual  acts  he  has  not  that 
Divine  life  in  him.  For  look  at  what  precedes  our  text.  Just  before  he  has  said, 
and  it  is  the  saying  which  leads  him  to  my  text,  "  If  any  man  seeth  his  brother  sin 
a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask,  and  he  shall  give  him  life."  And  do 
you  suppose  that  any  man,  in  the  very  same  breath  in  which  he  thus  declared  that 
brotherhood  was  to  be  manifested  by  the  way  in  which  we  help  a  brother  to  get  rid 
of  his  sins,  would  have  stultified  himself  by  a  blank,  staring  contradiction  such  as 
has  been  extracted  from  the  words  of  my  text  ?  I  take  the  text  to  mean — not  that 
a  Christian  is,  or  must  be,  in  order  to  vindicate  his  right  to  be  called  a  Christian, 
sinless,  but  that  there  is  a  power  in  him,  a  life-principle  in  him  which  is  sinless, 
and  whatsoever  in  him  is  born  of  God,  overcometh  the  world  and  "  sinneth  not." 
Now,  then,  that  seems  to  me  to  be  the  extent  of  the  apostle's  affirmation  here ;  and 
I  desire  to  draw  two  plain,  practical  conclusions.  One  is,  that  this  notion  of  a 
Divine  life-power,  lodged  in,  and  growing  through,  and  fighting  with  the  old  nature, 
makes  the  hideousness  and  the  criminality  of  a  Christian  man's  transgressions  more 
hideous  and  more  criminal.  The  teaching  of  my  text  has  sometimes  been  used  in 
the  very  opposite  direction.  There  have  been  people  that  have  said,  "  It  is  no  more 
I,  but  sin,  that  dwelleth  in  me  ;  I  am  not  responsible."  The  opposite  inference  is 
what  I  urge  now.  In  addition  to  all  the  other  foulnesses  which  attach  to  any  man's 
lust,  or  drunkenness,  or  ambition,  or  covetousness,  this  super-eminent  brand  and 
stigma  is  burned  in  upon  yours  and  mine.  Christian  men  and  women,  that  it  is  dead 
against,  absolutely  inconsistent  with,  the  principle  of  life  that  is  bedded  within  us. 
"  To  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  much  be  required."  Another  con- 
sideration may  fairly  be  urged,  as  drawn  from  this  text,  and  that  is  that  the  one 
task  of  Christians  ought  to  be  to  deepen  and  to  strengthen  the  life  of  God,  which  is 
in  their  souls,  by  faith.  There  is  no  limit,  except  one  of  my  own  making,  to  the 
extent  to  which  my  whole  being  may  be  penetrated  through  and  through  and  ruled 
absolutely  by  that  new  life  which  God  has  given.  It  is  all  very  well  to  cultivate 
specific  and  sporadic  virtues  and  graces.  Get  a  firmer  hold  and  a  fuller  possession 
of  the  life  of  Christ  in  your  own  souls,  and  all  the  graces  and  virtues  will  come. 
III.  What  is  the  ground  of  John's  assertion  about  him  "  that  is  born  of  God  "  ? 
My  text  runs  on,  "  But  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself."  If  any  of  you 
are  using  the  Kevised  Version,  you  will  see  a  change  there,  small  in  extent,  but 
large  in  significance.     It  reads,  "  He  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  him."    Let 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼ 

me  just  say  in  a  sentence  that  the  original  has  considerable  variation  in  expression 
in  these  two  clauses,  which  variation  makes  it  impossible,  I  think,  to  adopt  the  idea 
contaiued  in  the  Authorised  Version,  that  the  same  person  is  referred  to  in  both 
clauses.  The  difference  is  this.  In  the  first  clause,  "  He  that  is  begotten  of  God  " 
is  the  Christian  man ;  in  the  second,  "  He  that  is  begotten  of  God  "  is  Christ  the 
Saviour.  There  is  the  guarantee  that  "  Whosoever  is  begotten  of  God  sinneth  not," 
because  round  his  weakness  is  cast  the  strong  defence  of  the  Elder  Brother's  hand  ; 
and  the  Son  of  God  keeps  all  the  sons  who,  through  Him,  have  derived  into  their 
natures  the  life  of  God.  K,  then,  they  are  kept  by  the  only-begotten  Son  of  the 
Father,  then  the  one  thing  for  us  to  do,  in  order  to  strengthen  our  poor  natures,  is 
to  take  care  that  we  do  not  run  away  from  the  keeping  hand  nor  wander  far  from 
the  only  safety.  When  a  little  child  is  sent  out  for  a  walk  by  the  parent  with  an 
elder  brother,  if  it  goes  staring  into  shop-windows  and  gaping  at  anything  that  it 
sees  upon  the  road,  and  loses  hold  of  the  brother's  hand,  it  is  lost,  and  breaks  into 
tears,  and  can  only  be  consoled  and  secured  by  being  brought  back.  Then  the  little 
fingers  clasp  round  the  larger  hand,  and  there  is  a  sense  of  relief  and  of  safety.  If 
we  stray  away  from  Christ  we  lose  ourselves  in  muddy  ways.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  keeping : — A  lady  was  leaving  home,  and  was  concerned  for  the  safety  of  a 
jewel  box  too  precious  to  be  left  in  an  empty  house.  Asking  a  friend  to  undertake 
the  charge,  responsible  as  it  was,  and  receiving  a  promise  that  she  would  do  so,  she 
left  it  with  her.  But,  reflecting  that  in  her  absence  she  might  wish  to  wear  some  of 
her  trinkets,  the  lady  took  three  of  them  with  her.  On  her  return  home,  her  first 
concern  was  with  the  box  which  contained  so  many  precious  things.  It  was  safe. 
Yes,  there  it  was ;  and  one  by  one  the  jewels  were  examined  and  found  all  there. 
The  friend  had  been  faithful ;  she  had  kept  them  all  in  safety.  But  of  the  three 
which  had  been  taken  with  her,  one  had  been  dropped  somewhere  on  the  journey 
and  could  not  be  found  !  Who  was  to  blame  ?  Was  it  the  fault  of  the  friend  who 
took  charge  of  the  box?  Nay,  she  could  only  keep  "that  which  had  been  com- 
mitted "  to  her.  She  would,  no  doubt,  have  kept  this  other  also,  had  it  been  left 
in  her  care.  That  which  you  have  not  committed  to  Christ  you  cannot  expect  Him 
to  keep.     (J.  B.  Figgis.) 

Ver.  19.  We  know  that  we  are  of  God. — All  true  believers  are  of  God,  and  to 
separated  from  the  world  lying  in  wickedness : — I.  How  true  believers  are  of  God. 
1.  By  creation  ;  and  so  all  things  are  of  God  (Rom.  xi.  36).  Thus  the  devils  them- 
selves are  of  God  as  their  Creator,  and  so  is  the  world.  But  this  is  not  the  being 
of  God  here  meant.  2.  By  generation,  as  a  son  is  of  the  father.  3.  The  work  of 
regeneration  is  held  forth  under  a  double  notion,  showing  the  regenerate  to  be  of 
God.  (1)  It  is  a  being  begotten  of  God  (ver.  18).  God  Himself  is  the  Father 
of  the  new  creature :  it  is  of  no  lower  original  (James  i.  18 ;  1  Peter  i.  23,  25). 
(2)  It  is  a  being  born  of  God  (ver.  18).  By  His  Spirit  alone  the  new  creature 
is  formed  in  all  its  parts,  and  brought  forth  into  the  new  world  of  grace 
(John  iii.  5).  H.  How  believers,  as  they  are  of  God,  regenerate  persons, 
are  separated  from  the  world  lying  in  wickedness.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not 
in  respect  of  place  (1  Cor.  v.  9,  10).  (2)  Not  in  respect  of  gathering  them 
into  pure  unmixed  societies  for  worship.  There  are  no  such  visible  Church 
societies  in  the  world  (Matt.  xiii.  28-30).  2.  But  positively,  the  regenerate  as 
Buch  are  separated  from  the  world — (1)  In  respect  of  their  being  broken  off  from 
that  corrupt  mass,  and  become  a  part  of  a  new  lump.  They  are  become  members 
of  Christ's  mystical  body,  of  the  invisible  Church,  a  distinct  though  invisible  society. 

!2)  Their  being  delivered  from  under  the  power  of  the  god  of  this  world,  viz.,  Satan 
Acts  xxvi.  18).  (3)  Their  having  a  Spirit,  even  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  them, 
■which  the  world  have  not  (Rom.  viii.  9  ;  Jude  19).  (4)  Their  having  a  disposition, 
and  cast  of  heart  and  soul,  opposite  to  that  of  the  world ;  so  that  they  are  as  much 
separated  from  the  world  as  enemies  are  one  from  another  (Gen.  iii.  15).  From  this 
doctrine  we  may  learn  the  following  things.  1.  This  speaks  the  dignity  of  believers. 
They  are  the  truly  honourable  ones,  as  being  of  God  ;  they  are  the  excellent  of  the 
earth.  2.  It  speaks  the  privilege  of  believers.  Every  one  will  care  and  provide  for 
his  own :  be  sure  God  will  then  take  special  concern  about  believers  (Matt.  vi.  31,  32). 
8.  It  speaks  the  duty  of  believers.  Carry  yourselves  as  becomes  your  dignity  and 
privilege,  as  those  that  are  of  God.  4.  It  shows  the  self-deceit  of  unbelievers, 
pretenders  to  a  saving  interest  in  God,  while  in  the  meantime  they  are  lying 
together  with  the  world  in  wickedness.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  People's  being  of  God 
may  be  known  to  themselves : — I.  Men  may  know  themselves  to  be  of  God,  by  giving 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  459 

diligence  to  make  their  calling  and  election  sure  (2  Peter  i.  10).  Spiritual  discern- 
ing, a  spiritual  sight,  taste,  or  feeling  of  the  things  of  God,  in  ourselves  or 
others  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  Spiritual  reasoning  on  Scripture  grounds  (ver.  13).  1.  One 
may  know  that  others  are  of  God,  and  separated  from  the  world,  discerning  the 
image  of  God  shining  forth  in  them.  2.  A  true  believer  may  know  himself  to  belong 
to  God,  and  not  to  the  world.  We  should  not  be  rash  in  giving  or  refusing  that 
judgment,  but  hold  pace  with  the  appearance  or  non-appearance  of  the  grace  of 
God  in  them.  The  love  bestowed  on  hypocrites  is  not  all  lost,  and  therefore  it  is 
safest  erring  on  the  charitable  side.  Let  us  carry  our  judgment  of  others  no  farther 
than  that  of  charity,  and  not  pretend  to  a  certainty,  which  is  not  competent  to  us 
in  that  case,  but  to  God  only.  In  our  own  case,  we  may  have  by  rational  evidence 
a  judgment  of  certainty,  without  extraordinary  revelation.  What  moves  ourselves 
so  to  walk,  we  can  assuredly  know ;  but  what  moves  others,  we  cannot  know  that. 
A  true  child  of  God  may  assuredly  know  his  relative  state  in  the  favour  of  God. 
n.  I  exhort  you  to  be  concerned  to  know  whether  ye  are  of  God,  separated  from 
the  world  or  not.  To  press  you  thereto,  consider — 1.  We  are  aU  of  us  naturally, 
and  by  our  first  birth,  of  the  world  lying  in  wickedness  (Eph.  ii.  2,  3).  2.  The  world 
lying  in  wickedness  is  the  society  appointed  to  destruction,  as  in  a  state  and  course  of 
enmity  against  God  (Eph.  ii.  3).  Therefore  aU  that  are  to  be  saved  are  delivered  and 
gathered  out  of  it  (Gal.  i.  4).  3.  Many  deceive  themselves  in  this  matter,  as  the 
fooUsh  virgins  (Matt.  xxv.).  Christ's  flock  is  certainly  a  little  flock  (Luke  xii.  32 ; 
Matt.  V.  13, 14).  4.  Death  is  approaching ;  and  if  it  were  come,  there  will  be  no  sepa- 
rating more  from  the  world.  5.  It  is  uncertain  when  death  comes  to  us,  and  how 
(Matt.  xxiv.  42).  At  best  it  is  hardly  the  fit  time  of  being  new  born,  when  a-dying. 
6.  It  is  an  excellent  and  useful  thing  to  know  our  state  in  this  point.  For  if  we  find 
that  we  are  not  of  God,  but  of  the  world,  we  are  awakened  to  see  to  it  in  time.  (Ibid.) 
The  triumphant  Christian  certainties : — I.  I  ask  you,  then,  to  look  first  at  thb 
Cheistian  certainty  of  belonging  to  God.  "  We  know  that  we  are  of  God." 
Where  did  John  get  that  form  of  expression  ?  He  got  it  where  he  got  most  of  his 
terminology,  from  the  lips  of  the  Master.  For,  if  you  remember,  our  Lord  HimseK 
speaks  more  than  once  of  men  being  "  of  God."  As,  for  instance,  when  He  says, 
"He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God's  words."  *'  Ye  therefore  hear  them  not  because 
ye  are  not  of  God."  The  first  conception  in  the  phrase  is  that  of  life  derived,  com- 
municated from  God  Himself.  Fathers  of  flesh  communicate  the  life,  and  it  is 
thenceforth  independent.  But  the  life  of  the  Spirit,  which  we  draw  from  God,  is 
only  sustained  by  the  continual  repetition  of  the  same  gift  by  which  it  was  origi- 
nated. The  better  life  in  the  Chiistian  soul  is  as  certain  to  fade  and  die  if  the 
supply  from  heaven  is  cut  off  or  dammed  back,  as  is  the  bed  of  a  stream,  to  become 
parched  and  glistering  in  the  fierce  sunshine  if  the  head- waters  flow  into  it  no  more. 
You  can  no  more  have  the  life  of  the  Spirit  in  the  spirit  of  a  man  without  continual 
communication  from  Him  than  a  sunbeam  can  subsist  if  it  be  cut  off  from  the 
central  source.  Divine  preservation  is  as  necessary  in  grace  as  in  nature.  If  that 
life  is  thus  derived  and  dependent,  there  follows  the  last  idea  in  our  pregnant 
phrase — viz.,  that  it  is  correspondent  with  its  source.  "  Ye  are  of  God,"  kindred 
with  Him  and  developing  a  life  which,  in  its  measure,  is  cognate  with,  and  assimi- 
lated to.  His  own.  Then  there  is  another  step  to  be  taken.  The  man  that  has  that 
life  knows  it.  "  We  know,"  says  the  apostle,  "  that  we  are  of  God."  That  word 
"  know  "  has  been  usurped  by  certain  forms  of  knowledge.  But  surely  the  inward 
facts  of  my  own  consciousness  are  as  much  reliable  as  are  facts  in  other  regions 
which  are  attested  by  the  senses,  or  arrived  at  by  reasoning.  Christian  people  have 
the  same  right  to  lay  hold  of  that  great  word  "  we  know,"  and  to  apply  it  to  the 
facts  of  their  spiritual  experience,  as  any  scientist  in  the  world  has  to  apply  it  to  the 
facts  of  his  science.  How  do  you  know  that  you  are  at  all?  The  only  answer  is, 
"  I  feel  that  I  am."  And  precisely  the  same  evidence  applies  in  regard  to  these 
lofty  thoughts  of  a  Divine  kindred  and  a  spiritual  life.  But  that  is  not  all.  For  the 
condition  of  being  "  born  of  God  "  is  laid  plainly  down  in  this  very  chapter  by  the 
apostle  as  being  the  simple  act  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  So,  then,  if  any  man  is 
sure  that  he  believes,  he  knows  that  he  is  born  of  God,  and  is  of  God.  Ah  !  But 
you  say,  "  Do  you  not  know  how  men  deceive  themselves  by  a  profession  of  being 
Christians,  and  how  many  of  us  estimate  their  professions  at  a  very  different  rate  of 
genuineness  from  what  they  estimate  them  at  ?  "  Yes !  I  know  that.  And  this 
■whole  letter  of  John  goes  to  guard  us  against  the  presumption  of  entertaining 
inflated  thoughts  about  ourselves.  You  remember  how  continually  in  this  Epistle 
there  crops  up  by  the  side  of  the  most  thoroughgoing  mysticism,  as  people  call  it. 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

the  plainest,  home-spun,  practical  morality.  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you  ;  he  that 
doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God ;  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother." 
There  is  another  test  which  the  Master  laid  down  in  the  words,  "  He  that  is  of  God 
heareth  God's  words.  Ye,  therefore,  hear  them  not  because  ye  are  not  of  God." 
Christian  people,  take  these  two  plain  tests — first,  righteousness  of  hfe,  common 
practical  morality ;  and,  second,  an  ear  attuned  and  attent  to  catch  God's  voice.  It 
is  a  shame,  and  a  weakening  of  any  Christian  life,  that  this  triumphant  confidence 
should  not  be  clear  in  it.  "  We  know  that  we  are  of  God."  Can  you  and  I  echo 
that  with  calm  confidence ?  "I  sometimes  half  hope  that  I  am."  " I  am  almost 
afraid  to  say  it."  "  I  do  not  know  whether  I  am  or  not."  "  I  trust  I  may  be." 
That  is  the  kind  of  creeping  attitude  in  which  hosts  of  Christian  people  are  con- 
tented to  live.  Why  should  our  skies  be  as  grey  and  sunless  as  those  of  this 
northern  winter's  day  when  all  the  while,  away  down  on  the  sunny  seas,  to  which 
we  may  voyage  if  we  will,  there  is  unbroken  sunshine,  ethereal  blue,  and  a  perpetual 
blaze  of  light  ?  II.  We  have  here  the  Christian  view  of  the  surrounding  world. 
I  need  not,  I  suppose,  remind  you  that  John  learned  from  Jesus  to  use  that  phrase 
"  the  world,"  not  as  meaning  the  aggregate  of  material  things,  but  as  meaning  the 
aggregate  of  godless  men.  Now,  the  more  a  man  is  conscious  that  he  himself,  by 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  has  passed  into  the  family  of  God,  and  possesses  the  life  that 
comes  from  Him,  the  more  keen  will  be  his  sense  of  the  evil  that  lies  round  him. 
Just  as  a  native  of  Central  Africa  brought  to  England  for  a  while,  when  he  gets 
back  to  his  kraal,  will  see  its  foulnesses  as  he  did  not  before,  the  measure  of  our 
conscious  belonging  to  God  is  the  measure  of  our  perception  of  the  contrast  between 
us  and  the  ways  of  the  men  about  us.  I  am  not  concerned  for  a  moment  to  deny, 
rather,  I  most  thankfully  recognise  the  truth,  that  a  great  deal  of  the  world  has  been 
ransomed  by  the  Cross,  and  the  Christian  way  of  looking  at  things  has  passed  into 
the  general  atmosphere  in  which  we  live.  But  the  world  is  a  world  still,  and  the 
antagonism  is  there.  The  only  way  by  which  the  antagonism  can  be  ended  is  for 
the  kingdoms  of  this  world  to  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  His  Christ. 
III.  Lastly,  consider  the  consequent  Christian  duty.  Let  me  put  two  or  three 
plain  exhortations.  I  beseech  you,  Christian  people,  cultivate  the  sense  of  belonging 
to  a  higher  order  than  that  in  which  you  dwell.  A  man  in  a  heathen  land  loses  his 
sense  of  home,  and  of  its  ways ;  and  it  needs  a  perpetual  effort  in  order  that  we 
should  not  forget  our  true  affinities.  So  I  say,  cultivate  the  sense  of  belonging  to 
God.  Again,  I  say,  be  careful  to  avoid  infection.  Go  as  men  do  in  a  plague- 
stricken  city.  Go  as  our  soldiers  in  that  Ashanti  expedition  had  to  go,  on  your 
guard  against  malaria,  the  "  pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness."  Go  as  these 
same  soldiers  did,  on  the  watch  for  ambuscades  and  lurking  enemies  behind  the 
trees.  And  remember  that  the  only  safety  is  keeping  hold  of  Christ's  hand.  Look 
on  the  world  as  Christ  looked  on  it.  There  must  be  no  contempt ;  there  must  be 
no  self-righteousness.  There  must  be  sorrow  caught  from  Him,  and  tenderness  of 
pity.  Work  for  the  deliverance  of  your  brethren  from  the  alien  tyrant.  The  solemn 
alternative  opens  before  every  one  of  us — Either  I  am  "  of  God,"  or  I  am  "  in  the 
wicked  one."  {A.  Maclnren,  D.D.)  Certainties: — This  has  been  called  the 
Epistle  of  Love,  and  it  well  deserves  that  title,  but  it  might  be  almost  more  a,ppro- 
priately  called  the  Epistle  of  Certainties ;  there  is  the  ring  of  absolute  assurance 
from  the  opening  words  to  the  finish.  I.  The  strength  and  prevailing  power  or 
the  early  disciples  were  in  their  certainties  ;  they  went  forth  with  decision 
upon  their  lips,  with  the  fire  of  intense  conviction  in  their  hearts,  and  it  made  their 
testimony  irresistible,  and  gave  them  their  victory  over  the  world.  It  was  the  age  of 
the  sceptic,  a  period  of  almost  universal  uncertainty.  Agnosticism  was  bringing 
forth  its  inevitable  fruit  of  pessimism  and  despair.  Man  hungers  for  the  spiritual 
food  which  he  has  cast  away.  That  was  the  secret  sigh  and  groan  of  all  the  world 
in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  And  then  these  men  appeared,  declaring  in  tones  to 
which  the  world  had  long  been  unaccustomed  that  they  had  found  the  Truth,  and 
the  Eternal  Life.  It  was  the  one  clear  beacon  light  in  a  waste  of  darkness.  No 
wonder  that  men  gathered  around  them.  "  This  is  the  victory  which  overcometh 
the  world,  even  our  faith."  II.  It  was  the  certainties  of  the  Apostolic  Church 
that  made  it  a  Missionary  Church.  Each  illumined  soul  passed  on  the  light  to 
another.  Each  convert  was  as  good  as  two,  for  each  one  made  a  second.  Prisoners 
whispered  the  glad  news  to  their  gaolers,  soldiers  to  their  comrades,  slaves  to  their 
masters,  women  to  every  one  who  would  listen.  Nor  could  it  be  otherwise.  They 
were  swayed  by  the  force  of  a  mighty  conviction.  There  was  no  hesitation  because 
there  was  no  doubt.     III.  The  measure  of  our  certainty  is  the  measure  of  oub 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  461 

POWER.  We  cannot  lift  others  on  the  rock  unless  our  own  feet  are  there.  No  man 
ever  wrought  conviction  in  his  fellow-men  until  conviction  had  first  swept  hesita- 
tion out  of  him  like  a  whirlwind,  and  cleansed  his  heart  from  doubt  like  a  fire.  No 
man  believes  the  witness  who  only  half  believes  himself.  If  there  be  no  certainty 
there  will  be  no  fervour,  no  enthusiasm,  no  pathos  in  the  voice,  no  pity  in  the  eyes, 
no  thrill  of  sympathy.  There  will  only  be  cold  words  falling  on  cold  hearts,  and 
returning,  as  they  went  out,  void.  The  whole  Church  is  beginning  to  feel  and 
rejoice  in  a  powerful  reaction  towards  positive  beliefs.  Those  who  talk  somewhat 
boastfully  of  their  advanced  thought  are  being  left  behind,  though  they  do  not  know 
it,  by  advance  of  a  nobler  kind.  The  Church  sweeps  past  them  in  the  impatience 
of  a  renewed  assurance.  Missions  can  only  march  to  the  music  of  the  words  "  We 
know."  If  the  steps  are  taken  with  dubious  feet  and  trembling  misgivings  in  the 
heart  there  will  be  perpetual  baitings  and  paralysing  weariness.  If  we  are  not  sure 
that  our  Bible  is  the  very  Word  of  God,  and  our  Christ  the  only  possible  Saviour  of 
the  world,  shall  we  expend  treasure  and  blood  and  send  men  out  to  solitude  and 
danger,  and  often  into  the  very  grip  of  death,  to  make  them  known  ?  There  will  be 
an  end  of  all  our  missionary  zeal  if  we  are  to  believe  or  be  influenced  by  that  talk 
about  the  heathen  systems  which  students  of  comparative  religion  have  recently 
made  current.  Many  hands  have  been  busy  of  late  whitewashing  the  darkness  and 
laying  gilt  upon  corruption.  It  has  become  fashionable  in  certain  quarters  to 
extol  Buddha  and  Confucius  and  Mahomet,  and  by  implication  to  depreciate  Christ ; 
to  hold  up  to  admiration  the  light  of  Asia,  and  by  implication  to  bedim  the  Light  of 
the  World.  And  the  levelling  down  of  the  Bible  and  the  levelling  up  of  the  heathen 
writings  have  gone  on  together  until  the  two  are  made  to  meet  almost  on  common 
ground.  If  we  had  nothing  more  to  carry  to  the  heathen  world  than  our  moral 
precepts,  who  would  waste  the  least  effort  or  treasure  on  that  task?  Christ 
did  not  come  so  much  to  teach  men  what  they  ought  to  be  and  do,  not  to  mock 
them  by  a  revelation  of  their  own  impotence,  but  to  give  them  that  which  is  more 
than  human,  and  to  enable  them  to  ascend  to  the  heights  which  He  showed.  IV. 
Wb  c6me  back,  then,  ever  to  this  confession  of  the  apostle,  for  to  question 
it  is  to  make  missionary  enterprise,  if  not  a  laughing-stock,  at  least  a  "  much 
ado  about  nothing."  "  We  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness." 
Perhaps  in  Christian  lands  we  cannot  draw  the  line  so  clearly  as  it  was  drawn 
of  old.  The  darkness  shades  into  the  light  where  Christian  influences  are 
working  in  all  societies,  and  permeating  all  thought.  And  the  measure  of 
•ssurance  is  the  measure  of  obligation.  The  more  absolutely  we  know  these 
things  the  heavier  is  our  burden  of  responsibility.  {J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.) 
The  regenerate  and  the  unregenerate : — ^I.  The  regenerate.  1.  Their  relation  to 
God.  (1)  Of  His  family.  (2)  Of  His  school.  (3)  His  willing  servants.  2.  Their 
consciousness  of  this  relation.  H.  The  unregenerate.  "Lieth  in  the  wicked 
one  " — in  his  power,  dominion,  influence.  Some  he  there  as  a  sow  in  the  mire ; 
they  are  satisfied  with  their  filth,  they  luxuriate  in  the  pollution.  Some  as 
sufferers  in  a  hospital ;  they  writhe  in  agony,  and  long  to  get  away.  What 
a  condition  to  be  in !  Better  lie  on  the  deck  of  a  vessel  about  going  down,  or 
on  the  bosom  of  a  volcanic  hill  about  to  break  into  flame.  (Homilist.) 
The  whole  world  Ueth  in  wickedness. — The  unregenerate  world  described  : — That 
world  is  (as  it  were  two  hemispheres)  twofold.  1.  The  lower  world  lying  in 
wickedness.  That  is  the  region  of  eternal  death ;  the  lake  of  fire.  2.  The  upper 
world  lying  in  wickedness.  That  is  the  land  of  the  Uving,  this  present  evil  world. 
(1)  The  lower  and  upper  unregenerate  world  are  indeed  one  world,  one  kingdom  of 
Satan,  one  family  of  his.  (2)  But  they  are  in  different  circumstances,  (a)  The 
state  of  the  one  is  alterable,  as  of  those  who  are  upon  a  trial ;  of  the  other  unalter- 
able, as  those  on  whom  a  definite  sentence  is  passed,  (b)  So  the  case  of  the  one 
is  not  without  hope,  but  that  of  the  other  absolutely  hopeless,  (c)  Here  they  lie  in 
wickedness  with  some  ease  and  pleasure ;  there  they  he  in  it  with  none  at  all. 
Their  pleasurable  sins  are  there  at  an  end  (Rev.  xviii.  14).  I.  The  parts  of  the 
unregenerate  world.  1.  The  religious  part  of  it.  Wonder  not  that  we  speak  of 
the  religious  part  of  the  world  lying  in  wickedness  ;  for  there  is  some  religion,  but 
of  the  wrong  stamp.  (1)  A  natural  conscience,  which  dictates  that  there  is  a  God, 
a  difference  betwixt  good  and  evil,  rewards  and  punishments  after  this  life  (Bom. 
ii.  15).  (2)  Interest,  which  sways  the  men  of  the  world  to  it  several  ways.  In 
some  times  and  places  religion  is  fashionable,  gains  men  credit.  2.  The  moral  part 
of  it.  Some  such  there  have  been  among  heathens,  and  some  among  Christians, 
Two  things,  besides  natural  conscience  and  interest,  bring  in  morahty  into  the 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

world  lying  in  wickedness.     (1)  Civil  society,  by  which  means  men  may  live  at 
peace  in  the  world,  and  be  protected  from  injuries.      (2)  Natural  modesty  and 
temper,  in  respect  of  which  there  is  a  great  difference  among  even  worldly  men.     3. 
The  immoral  part  of  it.     This  is  the  far  greatest  part  of  that  world  (1  Cor.  vi.  9 ; 
Gal.  V.  19-21 ;  Titus  iii.  3).     (1)  The  corruption  of  human  nature,  the  natural  bent 
of  which  lies  to  aU  enormities.     This  was  the  spring  of  the  flood  of  wickedness, 
and  of  water,  that  overflowed  the  old  world  (Gen.  vi.  5).     (2)  Occasions  of  sin  and 
temptations  thereto,  which  offer  themselves  thick  in  this  evil  world ;  because  the 
multitude  is  of  that  sort  (Matt,  xviii.  7).     (a)  The  wealth  of  the  rich  makes  im- 
morality abound  among  them.    It  swells  the  heart  in  pride,  and  fills  them  with 
admu-ation  of  themselves  ;  it  ministers  much  fuel  to  their  lusts,  and  affords  them 
occasions  of  fulfilling  them,     (b)  The  poor,  those  who  are  in  extreme  poverty. 
Their  condition  deprives  them  of  many  advantages  others  have.     4.  If  we  compare 
the  immoral  part  of  the  world  lying  in  wickedness  with  the  other  two,  though  it  is 
true  they  are  aU  of  the  same  world,  and  will  perish  if  they  be  not  separated  from 
it ;  yet  the  religious  and  moral  have  the  advantage  of  the  immoral.     (1)  In  this 
life,  in  many  respects.     They  walk  more  agreeable  to  the  dignity  of  human  nature 
than  the  immoral.     They  are  more  useful  and  beneficial  to  mankind.     They  have 
more  inward  quiet,  and  are  not  put  on  the  rack  that  immorality  brings  on  men. 
And  so  they  have  more  outward  safety,  their  regular  lives  being  a  fence  to  them, 
both  from  danger  without  and  within.     2.  In  the  lite  to  come.     Though  the  world, 
the  unregenerate  world's  religion  and  moraUty  will  not  bring  them  to  heaven,  yet  it 
win  make  them  a  softer  hell  than  the  immoral  shall  have  (Eev.  xx.  12,  13).     II. 
The  state  of   the   unregenerate   world.      1.  I  am  to  confirm  and  evince  the 
truth  of  the  doctrine  in  the  general.     (1)  Satan  is  the  god  of  the  whole  unregenerate 
world  ;  how  can  it  miss  then  to  be  wholly  lying  in  wickedness  ?  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).     (2) 
Spiritual  darkness,  thick  darkness,  is  over  the  whole  of  that  world  (Eph.  v.  8),  how 
can  anything  but  works  of  darkness  be  found  in  it  ?     The  sun  went  down  on  all 
mankind  in  Adam's  transgressing  the  covenant;  the  light  of  God's  countenance 
was  then  withdrawn.     (3)  They  are  all  lying  under  the  curse  (Gal.  iii.  10).     For 
not  being  in  Christ,  they  are  under  the  law  as  a  covenant  of  works  (Eom.  iii.  19). 
The  curse  always  implies  wickedness.     (4)  They  are  all  destitute  of  every  principle 
of  holiness,  and  there  cannot  be  an  effect  without  a  cause  of  it ;  there  can  be  no 
acts  of  holiness  without  a  principle  to  proceed  from.     They  are  destitute  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  ;  He  dwells  not  in  them  (Jude  19  ;  comp.  1  Cor.  ii.  14).     II.  ErPLAiN 

THIS    STATE    OF    THE    UNREGENERATE   WORLD,    THERE    LYTNO   IN    WICKEDNESS.        1.    What 

of  wickedness  they  lie  in.  (1)  In  a  state  of  sin  and  wickedness  (Acts  viii.  23). 
They  are  all  over  sinful  and  wicked,  as  over  head  and  ears  in  the  mire  (Eev.  iii.  17). 
(a)  Their  nature  is  wholly  corrupted  with  sin  and  wickedness  (Matt.  vii.  18).  (6) 
Their  hves  and  conversations  are  wholly  corrupted  (Psa.  xiv.  3).  For  the  fountain 
being  poisoned,  no  pure  streams  can  come  forth  from  thence  (Matt.  xii.  34).  (2) 
The  whole  unregenerate  world  Ues  under  the  dominion  and  reigning  power  of  sia 
and  wickedness  (Rom.  vi.  17).  (a)  Sin  is  in  them  in  its  full  strength  and  vigour, 
and  therefore  rules  and  commands  all.  (b)  It  possesses  them  alone  without  an 
opposite  principle.  (3)  They  lie  in  the  habitual  practice  of  sin  and  wickedness 
(Psa.  xiv.  1).  The  best  things  they  do  are  sin,  unapproved,  unaccepted  of  God 
(Prov.  XV.  8 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  3).  2.  How  the  unregenerate  world  lies  in  wickedness. 
They  lie  in  it  in  the  most  hopeless  case  ;  which  we  may  take  up  in  three  things. 
(1)  Bound  in  it  (Acts  viii.),  bound  in  it  like  prisoners  (Isa.  Ixi.  1).  They  are  in 
chains  of  guilt,  which  they  cannot  break  off  ;  there  are  fetters  of  strong  lusts  upon 
them,  which  hold  them  fast.  (2)  Asleep  in  it  (Eph.  v.  14).  They  have  drunk  of 
the  intoxicating  cup,  and  are  fast  asleep,  though  within  the  sea-mark  of  vengeance. 
(3)  Dead  in  it  (Eph.  ii.  1).  A  natural  life,  through  the  union  of  a  soul  with  their 
body,  they  have  ;  but  their  spiritual  life  is  gone,  the  union  of  their  souls  with  God 
being  quite  broken  (Eph.  iv.  18).  Use  1.  Of  information.  See  here — 1.  The  spring 
and  fountain  of  the  abounding  sin  in  our  day.  The  whole  world  lies  in  wicked- 
ness;  and  wickedness  proceedeth  from  the  wicked  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  13).  Hence — (1) 
The  apostacy  in  principles,  men  departing  from  the  faith.  (2)  Apostacy  in  practice. 
There  is  a  deluge  of  profanity  gone  over  the  land.  2.  The  spring  of  all  the 
miseries  that  are  lying  on  us,  and  we  are  threatened  with.  The  world  is  lying  in 
wickedness,  and  therefore  Ues  in  misery  ;  foi  God  is  a  sin-hating  and  sin-revenging 
God.  Men  wiU  carry  themselves  agreeable  to  their  state  of  regeneracy  or  irre- 
generacy  ;  and  to  find  unregenerate  men  lying  in  this  and  the  other  wickedness,  la 
no  more  strange  than  to  find  fish  swimming  in  the  water,  and  birds  flying  in  the 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  463 

air  ;  it  is  their  element.  4.  The  world  must  be  an  infectious  society ;  it  must  be  a 
pestilential  air  that  is  breathed  in  it,  and  wickedness  in  it  must  be  of  a  growing 
and  spreading  nature.  5.  This  accounts  for  the  uneasy  life  that  the  serious-godly 
have  in  the  world.  For  unto  them — (1)  It  is  a  loathsome  world,  where  their  eyes 
must  behold  abominations  that  they  cannot  help  (Hab.  i.  3).  (2)  It  is  a  vexatious 
world ;  the  temper  of  the  parties  is  so  different,  so  opposite,  that  they  can  never  hit 
it,  but  must  needs  be  heavy  one  to  another.  (3)  It  is  an  ensnaring  world,  wherein 
snares  of  all  sorts  are  going,  and  they  are  many  times  caught  in  the  trap  ere  they 
are  aware  (2  Tim.  iii.  1,  2).  (4)  It  is  a  world  wherein  wickedness  thrives  apace  as 
in  its  native  soil,  but  any  good  has  much  ado  to  get  up  its  head.  (Jer.  iv.  22).  6. 
This  accounts  for  the  frightful  end  this  visible  world  will  make,  by  the  general 
conflagration  (2  Pet.  iii.  10).  7.  This  shows  the  dangerous  state  of  the  unregenerate 
world ;  they  lie  in  wickedness.  (1)  They  now  lie  under  wrath,  hanging  in  the 
threatening  and  curse  which  is  over  their  heads  (Eph.  ii.  8).  (2)  They  will  perish 
under  that  wrath,  whoever  continue  and  come  not  out  from  among  them  (Matt. 
XXV. ;  Eev.  xx.  14,  15).  Use  2.  Of  exhortation.  1.  To  all  I  would  say,  Search 
and  try  what  society  ye  belong  to,  whether  ye  are  still  of,  or  separated  from,  the 
world  lying  in  wickedness.  2.  To  saints  separated  from  the  world,  I  would  say — 
(1)  Do  not  much  wonder  at  the  harsh  entertainment  ye  meet  with  in  it.  (2)  Watch 
against  it  while  ye  are  in  it,  as  being  in  hazard  of  sins  and  snares  in  a  world  lying 
in  wickedness.  (3)  Look  homeward,  and  long  to  be  with  Christ,  where  you  shall 
be  for  ever  out  of  the  reach  of  all  evil,  and  enjoy  such  peace  and  freedom  as  your 
enemies  can  disturb  no  more.  3.  To  sinners  of  the  world  lying  in  wickedness,  I 
would  say,  Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  separated,  as  ye  would  not  be 
ruined  with  them,  and  perish  eternally  in  their  destruction.     (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come. — The  gospel  of  the  Incarnation  .•— 
"  He  is  coming  "  is  the  word  of  the  Old  Testament ;  "  He  is  come  "  is  the  better 
word  of  the  New.  John  knew  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  in  his  writings  he  only 
tells  us  what  he  knows.  "  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come."  Well,  this  is 
a  simple  fact,  simply  stated  ;  but  if  you  go  down  deep  enough  into  it,  you  will  find 
a  whole  gospel  inside.  I.  By  His  coming  He  has  "  given  us  an  understanding 
THAT  WE  MAY  KNOW  HiM  THAT  IS  TRUE."  Now  thls  docs  not  mean,  of  course,  that 
Christ  gives  men  any  new  intellectual  power,  that  He  adds  to  the  faculties  of  the 
mind  any  more  than  to  the  senses  of  the  body.  "  Understanding  "  here  signifies 
rather  the  means  of  knowing,  the  power  of  understanding.  By  word  and  life  He 
has  given  us  ideas  about  Fatherhood,  holiness,  pity,  kindness,  and  love,  that  we 
had  not  before.  Purity,  meekness,  patience,  and  all  the  graces,  mean  more  now 
than  they  did  before  Christ  lived  and  died.  The  horizon  of  language  has  been 
widened,  and  its  heaven  lifted  higher  than  before.  II.  Well,  for  what  purpose 
HAS  Christ  given  us  these  new  ideas  and  opened  the  eyes  of  our  understand- 
ings ?  In  order  that  we  may  "  know  Him  that  is  true,"  in  order  that  we  may  know 
God.  In  Christ  you  will  find  the  truth  about  God.  There  are  mysteries  still  ? 
Yes,  but  they  are  all  mysteries  of  goodness,  holiness,  and  love.  In  a  recently 
published  book  of  travel  the  authoress  tells  of  gigantic  camellia-trees  in  Madeira, 
and  says  that  one  man  made  an  excursion  to  see  them,  and  came  back  much  dis- 
appointed, having  failed  to  find  them.  He  was  desired  to  pay  a  second  visit  to  the 
spot,  and  was  told  by  his  friends  to  look  upwards  this  time,  and  was  much  surprised 
and  gladdened  to  see  a  glorious  canopy  of  scarlet  and  white  blossoms  fifty  feet 
overhead  !  Is  not  that  the  story  of  many  more  in  our  days  ?  They  grub  and  moil 
amid  molluscs  and  ocean  slime ;  "  they  turn  back  the  strata  granite,  limestone, 
coal  and  clay,  concluding  coldly  with,  Here  is  law!  Where  is  God?  "  "I  have 
swept  the  heavens  with  my  telescope,"  said  Lalande,  "but  have  nowhere  found  a 
God !  "  Sirs,  you  are  looking  in  the  wrong  direction :  look  higher !  Look  as 
Ezekiel  looked — above  the  firmament.  In  the  presence  of  Christ  Jesus  you  will 
find  what  you  shall  in  vain  seek  elsewhere,  God,  in  all  that  He  is,  made  manifest 
in  the  flesh.  III.  "  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  we  are  in  Him 
that  is  true,  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,"  i.e.,  In  Christ  we  are  in  God.  Dr.  Arnold 
used  to  say  that  though  the  revelation  of  the  splendour  of  God  in  the  infinite  fulness 
of  His  nature  may  be  something  awaiting  him  in  the  world  to  come,  he  felt  sure 
that  in  this  world  he  had  only  to  do  with  Christ.  Yes  !  it  is  with  Christ  we  have 
to  do.  God  Himself  is  the  ultimate,  but  Christ  is  the  immediate  object  of  our 
faith.  In  our  penitence  we  go  straight  as  the  Magdalene  went,  and,  sitting  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus,  we  know  that  we  are  confessing  our  sins  to  God.     Our  prayers  are  as 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

direct  as  that  of  Peter,  when,  beginning  to  sink  in  the  boiling  sea,  he  cried,  saying, 
"  Lord,  save  me  !  "  and  we  know  that  we  are  crying  to  God  for  help.  IV.  Lastly, 
the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  to  be  in  Him  is  to  have  eternax,  life.  "  This  is 
the  true  God  (the  God  in  Christ)  and  eternal  life."  Victor  Hugo  said  on  his  death- 
bed in  a  fit  of  great  pain,  "  This  is  death :  this  is  the  battle  of  the  day  and  the 
night."  Yes,  but  for  those  who  are  in  Christ  the  day  wins,  not  the  night,  and 
death  is  the  gate  leading  to  a  larger  life.  (J.  M.  Gibbon.)  Three  greatest  things  ; — 
In  this  verse  we  have  three  of  the  greatest  things.  I.  The  greatest  fact  in  human 
HISTORY.  That  the  Son  of  God  has  come.  There  are  many  great  facts  in  the 
history  of  our  race.  But  of  all  the  facts  the  advent  of  Christ  to  our  world  eighteen 
centuries  ago  is  the  greatest.    This  fact  is  the  most — 1.  Undeniable.     2.  Influential. 

3.  Vital  to  the  interests  of  every  man.  II.  The  greatest  capability  of  the  human 
MIND.  What  is  that  ?  "An  understanding,  that  we  may  know  Him  that  is  true." 
Men  are  endowed  with  many  distinguishing  faculties — imagination,  memory, 
intellect.  But  the  capacity  to  know  Him  who  is  true  is  for  many  reasons  greater 
than  all.  1.  It  is  a  rare  faculty.  The  mighty  millions  have  not  this  power,  "  O 
righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not  known  Thee."  2.  It  is  a  Christ-imparted 
faculty — "  He  hath  given  us."  What  is  it  ?  It  is  love.  "  He  that  loveth  not, 
knoweth  not  God."  Christ  generates  this  love.  Love  alone  can  interpret  love, 
"  God  is  love."  HI.  The  greatest  privilege  in  human  life.  "  We  are  in  Him 
that  is  true,  even  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  This  means,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true 
God.  (Hoinilist.)  Soul  evidence  of  the  divinity  of  Christ : — Christ  was  Divine- 
As  there  can  be  no  argument  of  chemistry  in  proof  of  odours  like  a  present  perfume 
itself ;  as  the  shining  of  the  stars  is  a  better  proof  of  their  existence  than  the  figures 
of  an  astronomer ;  as  the  restored  health  of  his  patients  is  a  better  argument  ol 
skill  in  a  physician  than  laboured  examinations  and  certificates  ;  as  the  testimony 
of  the  almanac  that  summer  comes  with  June  is  not  so  convincing  as  is  the  coming 
of  summer  itself  in  the  sky,  in  the  air,  in  the  fields,  on  hill  and  mountain,  so  the 
power  of  Christ  upon  the  human  soul  is  to  the  soul  evidence  of  His  divinity  based 
upon  a  living  experience,  and  transcending  in  conclusiveness  any  convictions  of  the 
intellect  alone,  founded  Upon  a  contemplation  of  mere  ideas,  however  just  and 
sound.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ  manifestedin  the  heart  the  life  of  Eis people ; — I.  Thb 
CHARACTER  HERE  GIVEN  OF  OUR  LoRD  Jesus  Chkist — "  Him  that  is  truc,"  "  the 
true  God  and  eternal  life,"  "  the  Son  of  God."  1.  The  first  object  in  this  glorious 
description  which  claims  our  notice  refers  to  the  truth  of  our  Saviour's  character 
and  mission — "  Him  that  is  true."  This  title  is  descriptive  of  our  blessed  Lord's 
faithfulness,  and  His  punctuality  in  the  performance  of  every  engagement ;  He  is 
true  to  His  word  of  promise,  though  "  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  yet  His 
word  shall  not  pass  away  tiU  all  be  fulfilled."  This  title  also  refers  to  the  vahdity 
of  His  claim  to  the  character  of  Messiah.  He  was  no  pretender  to  a  station  which 
did  not  of  right  pertain  unto  Him — He  was  the  true  Messiah.  Jesus  Christ  is 
also  called  "  true,"  to  express  that  all  the  types  and  shadows  of  the  Levitical  dis- 
pensation received  a  complete  fulfilment  in  Him,  "  who  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  beUeveth."  2.  The  next  appellation  is,  "  the  true 
God."  This  epithet  is  not  conferred  upon  the  Redeemer  merely  as  an  honorary 
distinction — no,  it  is  given  to  Him  as  asserting  His  Divine  nature ;  a  declaration, 
that  He  is  "  very  God  of  very  God."  If  Christ  be  not  truly  and  properly  God,  He 
cannot  be  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  3.  Another  epithet  here  applied  to  Christ  is, 
"  eternal  life."  He  is  so  called  with  reference  to  His  glorious  work,  as  the  Saviour 
of  sinners.  By  the  gospel  He  has  "  abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and  immor- 
tality to  light," — has  "  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers  " ;  and  by 
His  meritorious  death  has  obtained  life  for  them  ;  hence  He  is  caUed  the  Prince  of 
hfe.    By  His  mighty  power  spiritual  life  is  revealed  in  the  hearts  of  His  people. 

4.  The  concluding  words  of  the  clause  now  under  consideration  are,  "  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ,"  which  confirms  His  claim  to  the  Divine  character.  The  Father  and 
the  Son  are  one  in  nature,  as  well  as  in  affection.  II.  The  present  state  of  trub 
believkrs.  "  We  are  in  Him  that  is  true,  even  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  To  be 
in  Christ  is  to  be  united  to  Him  by  faith,  which  worketh  by  love.  The  nature  and 
necessity  of  this  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus  are  most  beautifully  illustrated  in  His 
last  discourse  with  His  disciples  previous  to  His  sufferings  :  "  I  am  the  true  vine," 
(fee.  Believers  are  "  cut  out  of  the  olive  tree  which  is  wild  by  nature,  and  are 
graffed  contrary  to  nature  into  a  good  olive  tree,"  the  influences  of  Divine  grace 
flow  into  their  souls,  they  bring  forth  fruit  unto  perfection,  and  are  at  length 
gathered   into  the   garner  of   God.      III.   The   kno\nxedge    and   experience   or 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  465 

BELiEVEKS.  1.  "  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come."  The  import  of  these 
words  appears  to  be  this — we  are  satisfied  the  promised  Christ  has  actually  made 
His  appearance  in  the  flesh  ;  and  believe  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  that  person. 
I  apprehend  that  these  words  refer  to  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  in  the 
believer's  heart,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  2.  "He  hath  given  us  an  understand- 
ing that  we  may  know  Him  that  is  true."  We  have  already  observed  that  Jesus  is 
the  truth.  Now  we  are  not  naturally  acquainted  with  Him ;  we  know  not  His 
glorious  excellences ;  hence,  when  beheld  by  the  eye  of  carnal  reason,  the  Kedeemer 
seems  to  have  no  beauty  in  Him  ;  there  is  no  form  or  comeliness,  that  we  should 
desire  Him.  This  darkness  remains  upon  the  mind  till  dispersed  by  a  Ught  from 
heaven,  and  when  that  light  shineth,  Jesus  is  revealed  in  the  soul,  and  becomes 
the  supreme  object  of  the  believer's  affections.  Men  may,  by  dint  of  appli- 
cation, become  systematic  Christians ;  they  may  understand  the  theory  of  the 
gospel ;  but  they  carmot  thus  become  wise  unto  salvation.  {S.  Ramsey,  M.A.) 
John^s  triumphant  certainties  : — This  third  of  his  triumphant  certainties  is  con- 
nected closely  with  the  two  preceding  ones.  It  is  so,  as  being  in  one  aspect  the 
ground  of  these,  for  it  is  because  "  the  Son  of  God  is  come  "  that  men  are  born  of 
God  and  are  of  Him.  It  is  so  in  another  way  also,  for  properly  the  words  of  our 
text  ought  to  read  not  "  And  we  know,"  rather  "  but  we  know."  They  are  suggested, 
that  is  to  say,  by  the  preceding  words,  and  they  present  the  only  thought  which 
makes  them  tolerable.  •'  The  whole  world  lieth  in  the  wicked  one.  But  we  know 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  come."  Falling  back  on  the  certainty  of  the  Incarnation 
and  its  present  issues,  we  can  look  in  the  face  the  grave  condition  of  humanity,  and 
still  have  hope  for  the  world  and  for  ourselves.  I.  I  would  deal  with  the  Chbis- 
tian's  knowledge  that  the  Son  of  God  is  comb.  Now,  our  apostle  is  writing  to 
Asiatic  Christians  of  the  second  generation  at  the  earliest,  most  of  whom  had  not 
been  born  when  Jesus  Christ  was  upon  earth,  and  none  of  whom  had  any  means  of 
acquaintance  with  Him  except  that  which  we  possess — the  testimony  of  the  witnesses 
who  had  companied  with  Him.  "  We  know ;  how  can  you  know  ?  You  may  go 
on  the  principle  that  probabihty  is  the  guide  of  life,  and  you  may  be  morally  certain, 
but  the  only  way  by  which  you  know  a  fact  is  by  having  seen  it.  And  even  if  you 
have  seen  Jesus  Christ,  all  that  you  saw  would  be  the  life  of  a  man  upon  earth 
whom  you  believed  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  trifling  with  language  to  talk  about 
knowledge  when  you  have  only  testimony  to  build  on."  Well  I  There  is  a  great 
deal  to  be  said  on  that  side,  but  there  are  two  or  three  considerations  which,  I  think, 
amply  warrant  the  apostle's  declaration  here,  and  our  understanding  of  his  words, 
"  We  know,"  in  their  fullest  and  deepest  sense.  Let  me  just  mention  these  briefly. 
Eemember  that  when  John  says  "  The  Son  of  God  is  come  "  he  is  not  speaking 
about  a  past  fact  only,  but  about  a  fact  which,  beginning  in  a  historical  past,  is 
permanent  and  continuous.  And  that  thought  of  the  permanent  abiding  with  men 
of  the  Christ  who  once  was  manifest  in  the  flesh  for  thirty  years,  runs  through  th& 
whole  of  Scripture.  So  it  is  a  present  fact,  and  not  only  a  past  piece  of  history, 
which  is  asserted  when  the  apostle  says  "  The  Son  of  God  is  come."  And  aman  who 
has  a  companion  knows  that  he  has  him,  and  by  many  a  token,  not  only  of  flesh  but 
of  spirit,  is  conscious  that  he  is  not  alone,  but  that  the  dear  and  strong  one  is  by  his 
side.  Such  consciousness  belongs  to  all  the  maturer  and  deeper  forms  of  the  Chris- 
tian life.  Further,  we  must  read  on  in  my  text  if  we  are  to  find  all  which  John 
declares  is  a  matter  of  knowledge.  "  The  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us 
an  understanding."  I  point  out  that  what  is  here  declared  to  be  known  by  the 
Christian  soul  is  a  present  operation  of  the  present  Christ  upon  his  nature.  If  a 
man  is  aware  that  through  his  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  new  perceptions  and  powers  of 
discerning  solid  reality  where  he  only  saw  mist  before  have  been  granted  to  him, 
the  apostle's  triumphant  assertion  is  vindicated.  And,  still  further,  the  words  of  my 
text,  in  their  assurance  of  possessing  something  far  more  solid  than  an  opinion  or 
a  creed  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  our  relation  to  Him,  are  warranted,  on  the  considera- 
tion that  the  growth  of  the  Christian  life  largely  consists  in  changing  a  belief  that 
rests  on  testimony  for  knowledge  grounded  in  vital  experience.  "  Now  we  beheve, 
not  because  of  your  saying,  but  because  we  have  seen  Him  ourselves,  and  know  that 
this  is  indeed  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  That  is  the  advance  which 
Christian  men  should  all  make  from  the  infantile,  rudimentary  days,  when  they 
accepted  Christ  on  the  witness  of  others,  to  the  time  when  they  accepted  Him 
because,  in  the  depth  of  their  own  experience,  they  have  found  Him  to  be  all  that  they 
took  Him  to  be.  The  true  test  of  creed  is  life.  The  true  way  of  knowing  that  a 
shelter  is  adequate  is  to  house  in  it,  and  be  defended  from  the  pelting  of  every  piti- 

30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

less  storm.     The  medicine  we  know  to  be  powerful  when  it  has  cured  us.    11.  Note 

THE  NEW  POWER  OF  KNOWING  GoD  GIVEN  BY  THE  SoN  WHO  IS  TO  COME.       John  SajS  that 

one  issue  of  that  Incarnation  and  permanent  presence  of  the  Lord  Christ  with  us  is 
that  "  He  hath  given  us  an  understanding  that  we  may  know  Him  that  is  true." 
Now,  I  do  not  suppose  that  He  means  thereby  that  any  absolutely  new  faculty  ip 
conferred  upon  men,  but  that  new  direction  is  given  to  old  ones,  and  dormant 
powers  are  awakened.  That  gift  of  a  clarified  nature,  a  pure  heart,  which  is  the 
condition,  as  the  Master  Himself  said,  of  seeing  God — that  gift  is  bestowed  upon  all 
who,  trusting  in  the  Incarnate  Son,  submit  themselves  to  His  cleansing  hand.  In 
the  Incarnation  Jesus  Christ  gave  us  God  to  see ;  by  His  present  work  in  our  souls 
He  gives  us  the  power  to  see  God.  The  knowledge  of  which  my  text  speaks  is  the 
knowledge  of  "  Him  that  is  true,"  by  which  pregnant  word  the  apostle  means  to 
contrast  the  Father  whom  Jesus  Christ  sets  before  us  with  all  men's  conceptions  of 
a  Divine  nature,  and  to  declare  that  whilst  these  conceptions,  in  one  way  or  another, 
fall  beneath  or  diverge  from  reality  and  fact,  our  God  manifested  to  us  by  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  only  One  whose  nature  corresponds  to  the  name,  and  who  is  essentially 
that  which  is  included  in  it.  But  what  I  would  dwell  on  especially  is  that  this  gift, 
thus  given  by  the  Incarnate  and  present  Christ,  is  not  an  intellectual  gift  only,  but 
something  far  deeper.  Inasmuch  as  the  apostle  declares  that  the  object  of  this  know- 
ledge is  not  a  truth  about  God  but  God  Himself,  it  necessarily  follows  that  the  know- 
ledge is  such  as  we  have  of  a  person,  and  not  of  a  doctrine.  Or,  to  put  it  into  simpler 
words,  to  know  about  God  is  one  thing,  and  to  know  God  is  quite  another.  To  know 
about  God  is  theology,  to  know  Him  is  religion.  That  knowledge,  if  it  is  real  and 
living,  will  be  progressive.  More  and  more  we  shall  come  to  know.  As  we  grow 
like  Him  we  shall  draw  closer  to  Him ;  as  we  draw  closer  to  Him  we  shall  grow 
like  Him.  So,  if  we  have  Christ  for  our  medium  both  of  light  and  of  sight,  if  He 
both  gives  us  God  to  see  and  the  power  to  see  Him,  we  shall  begin  a  course  which 
eternity  itself  will  not  see  completed.  IH.  Lastly,  note  here  the  Chkistian  in- 
dwelling OF  God  which  is  possible  theough  the  Son  who  is  come.  "  We  are  in 
Him  that  is  true."  Of  old  Abraham  was  called  the  Friend  of  God,  but  an  auguster 
title  belongs  to  us.  "  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temples  of  the  living  God,  and 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  "  But  notice  the  words  of  my  text  for  a 
moment,  where  the  apostle  goes  on  to  explain  and  define  how  "  we  are  in  Him  that 
is  true,"  because  we  are  "  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  That  carries  us  away  back  to 
"  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you."  John  caught  the  whole  strain  of  such  thoughtsfrom 
those  sacred  words  in  the  upper  room.  And  will  not  a  man  "know"  that?  Will 
it  not  be  something  deeper  and  better  than  intellectual  perception  by  which  he  la 
aware  of  the  presence  of  Christ  in  his  heart?  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  That 
we  may  know  Him  that  is  true. — XJltwiates  of  knowledge  and  beginnings  of  faith : — 
How  can  we  now  reach  such  heights  of  assurance  as  are  marked  by  these  words 
of  St.  John  ?  First  of  all,  we  need  to  go  straight  through  our  own  experiences, 
thoughts,  and  questionings,  until  we  find  ourselves  facing  the  ultimates  of  our  life 
and  knowledge.  Many  a  young  man  comes  nowadays  to  church  in  a  state  of 
mental  reserve ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  real  practical  hindrances  to  clear,  bright 
discipleship.  It  hinders  the  progress  of  the  Church  as  fogs  hinder  navigation. 
Men  in  this  state  listen  to  the  great  commandments  of  the  gospel — repent,  believe, 
confess  Christ  before  men — and  while  not  intentionally  or  deliberately  rejecting 
them,  they  receive  them  and  lose  sight  of  them  in  this  great  fog-bank  of  mental 
uncertainty  which  lies  in  their  minds  all  around  the  horizons  of  present  and  near 
duties.  Back,  then,  let  us  force  ourselves  to  the  ultimates  of  our  life  I  Back  in  all 
honesty  and  urgency  let  us  go,  until  we  face  "the  flaming  bounds  of  the  universe"! 
I  find  four  ultimates,  then,  upon  which  to  stand ;  four  fundamentals  of  human 
life  and  knowledge  from  which  to  survey  all  passing  clouds  and  turmoil.  One  of 
these  ultimates — the  one  nearest  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind,  and  which  I 
only  need  to  mention — is  the  final  fact  that  there  is  some  all-embracing  Power  in 
the  universe.  This  is  the  last  word  which  the  senses,  and  the  science  of  the  senses, 
have  to  speak  to  us — force.  But  when  I  look  this  physical  ultimate  of  things  in 
the  face,  and  ask  what  it  is,  or  how  I  have  learned  to  give  this  name  of  power  to  it ; 
then  I  find  myself  standing  before  a  second  ultimate  of  knowledge.  That  is  the 
fact  of  intelligence.  I  cannot,  in  my  thought,  go  before  or  behind  that  last  fact  of 
mind,  and  reason  compels  me  to  go  up  to  it  and  admit  it ;  there  is  mind  above 
matter ;  there  is  intelligence  running  through  things.  Upon  the  shores,  then,  of 
this  restless  mystery  of  our  life  are  standing,  calm  and  eternal,  these  two  ultimatea 
of  knowledge,  Power  and  Eeason,  Intelligence  and  Force ;  and  they  stand  bound 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  467 

together — an  intelligent  Power,  a  Force  of  Mind  in  things.  But  there  is  another 
line  of  facts  in  our  common  experience,  the  end  of  which  is  not  reached  in  these 
ultimates  of  science  and  philosophy.  You  and  I  had  not  merely  a  cause  for  our 
existence ;  I  had  a  mother,  and  you  had  before  you  a  fact  of  love  in  the  mother 
who  gave  you  birth.  Love  breathes  through  life  and  pervades  history.  It  is  the 
deathless  heart  of  our  mortality.  Moreover,  this  fact  of  love  in  which  our  being  is 
cradled,  and  in  which,  as  in  our  true  element,  man  finds  himself,  has  in  it  law  and 
empire.  In  obedience  to  this  supreme  authority  men  will  even  dare  to  die.  There 
are,  then,  for  us  such  realities  as  love,  devotion,  duty.  And  with  this  it  might  seem 
as  though  I  had  gone  around  the  compass  of  our  being  and  said  all  that  can  be  said 
of  the  last  facts  of  our  lives.  But  I  have  not.  There  is  another  last  fact  in  this 
world  which  not  only  cannot  be  resolved  into  anything  simpler  than  itself,  and  with 
which,  therefore,  we  must  rest,  but  which,  also,  is  itself  the  truth  abiding  as  the 
light  of  day  over  these  fundamental  facts  of  our  knowledge.  It  is  the  illumination 
of  man's  whole  life.  I  refer,  of  course,  to  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
Person  of  the  Christ  is  the  ultimate  fact  of  light  in  the  history  of  man.  We  cannot 
resolve  the  character  of  Jesus  into  anything  before  itself.  We  cannot  explain  Him 
by  anything  else  in  history.  The  more  definite  we  make  the  comparison  between 
Jesus  and  men  the  more  striking  appears  His  final  unaccountableness  upon  the 
ordinary  principles  and  by  the  common  laws  of  human  descent.  We  can  bring  all 
human  genius  into  organic  line  with  its  ancestry,  or  into  spiritual  unity  with  its 
nationaUty  or  age.  Rome  and  the  Csesar  explain  each  the  other.  Human  nature 
in  Greece,  vexed  by  the  sophists,  must  give  birth  both  to  an  Aristotle  and  a  Socrates. 
These  two  types  of  mind  are  constantly  reproduced.  And  the  Buddha  is  the  in- 
carnation of  the  Oriental  mind.  But  Jesus  is  something  more  than  Judaea  incarnate. 
Jesus  is  something  unknown  on  earth  before  incarnated  in  a  most  human  life. 
He  was  in  this  world  but  not  of  it.  He  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  history  of  God 
in  Israel,  yet  He  was  not  the  product  of  His  times.  He  chose  to  call  Himself,  not  a 
Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,  not  a  Greek  of  the  GentUes,  but  simply  and  solely  the  Son 
of  Man.  And  we  can  find  no  better  name  for  Him.  He  is  for  us  an  ultimate  fact, 
then,  unaccounted  for  by  the  Uves  of  other  men,  unaccountable  except  by  Himself ; 
as  much  as  any  element  of  nature  is  an  original  thing  not  to  be  explained  by  any- 
thing else  that  is  made,  so  is  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ  elemental  in  history,  the 
ultimate  fact  of  God's  presence  with  man.  Now,  then,  such  being  the  fundamental 
facts  of  our  knowledge — the  ultimates  of  human  experience — it  is  perfectly  legiti- 
mate for  us  to  build  upon  them  ;  and  any  man  who  wishes  to  build  his  life  upon 
the  rock,  and  not  upon  the  sands,  will  build  upon  them.  A  Power  not  ourselves 
upon  which  we  are  dependent — a  first  intelligence  and  love,  source  of  all  our  reason 
and  life  of  our  heart — and  Jesus  Christ  the  final  proof  of  God  with  us  and  for  us — 
such  are  the  elemental  realities  upon  which  our  souls  should  rest.  He  who  stands 
upon  these  Divine  facts  in  the  creation  and  in  history  shall  not  be  confounded. 
{N.  Smyth,  D.D.)  The  Holy  Trinity  : — "  The  Son  of  God  is  come  and  hath  given 
us  an  understanding  that  we  may  know  Him  that  is  true."  That  advent  lays  open 
God's  judgment  on  good  and  evil  as  it  is  involved  in  the  Divine  nature.  That  advent 
gives  us  the  power  of  an  ever-increasing  insight  into  an  eternal  life  and  the  strength 
of  an  eternal  fellowship.  It  teaches  us  to  wait  as  God  waits.  To  this  end,  how- 
ever, we  must  use  ungrudging  labour.  "  The  Son  of  God  .  .  .  hath  given  us  an 
understanding  that  we  may  know.  .  .  ."  He  does  not — we  may  say,  without  pre- 
sumption. He  cannot — give  us  the  knowledge,  but  the  power  and  the  opportunity  of 
gaining  the  knowledge.  Eevelation  is  not  so  much  the  disclosure  of  the  truth  as 
the  presentment  of  the  facts  in  which  the  truth  can  be  discerned.  It  is  given 
through  life  and  to  living  men.  We  are  required  each  in  some  sense  to  win  for  our- 
selves the  inheritance  which  is  given  to  us,  if  the  inheritance  is  to  be  a  blessing. 
We  learn  through  the  experience  of  history,  and  through  the  experience  of  life,  how 
God  acts,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  the  very  necessity  of 
thought  we  are  constrained  to  gather  up  these  lessons  into  the  simplest  possible 
formula.  So  we  come  to  recognise  a  Divine  Trinity,  which  is  not  sterile, 
monotonous  simpUcity ;  we  come  to  recognise  a  Divine  Trinity  which  is  not  the 
transitory  manifestation  of  separate  aspects  of  One  Person  or  a  combination  of 
Three  distinct  Beings.  We  come  to  recognise  One  in  whom  is  the  fulness  of  all 
conceivable  existence  in  the  richest  energy.  One  absolutely  self-suflBcient  and 
perfect.  One  in  whom  love  finds  internally  absolute  consummation.  One  who  is  in 
Himself  a  living  God,  the  fountain  and  the  end  of  all  life.  Our  powers  of  thought 
and  language  are  indeed  very  feeble,  but  we  can  both  see  and  to  some  extent  point 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

oat  how  this  idea  of  the  Father  revealed  through  the  Son,  of  the  Son  revealed 
through  the  Spirit,  one  God,  involves  no  contradiction,  but  offers  in  the  simplest 
completeness  of  life  the  union  of  the  "  one  "  and  the  "  many  "  which  thought  has 
always  striven  to  gain  :  how  it  preserves  what  we  speak  of  as  "  personality  "  from 
all  associations  of  finiteness ;  how  it  guards  us  from  the  opposite  errors  which  are 
generally  summed  under  the  terms  Pantheism  and  Deism,  the  last  issues  of  Gentile 
and  Jewish  philosophy  ;  how  it  indicates  the  sovereignty  of  the  Creator  and  gives 
support  to  the  trust  of  the  creature.  We  linger  reverently  over  the  conception,  and 
we  feel  that  the  whole  world  is  indeed  a  manifestation  of  the  Triune  God,  yet  so 
that  He  is  not  included  in  that  which  reflects  the  active  energy  of  His  love.  We 
feel  that  the  Triune  God  is  Lord  over  the  works  of  His  will,  yet  so  that  His  Presence 
is  not  excluded  from  any  part  of  His  Universe.  We  ponder  that  which  is  made 
known  to  us,  that  when  time  began  "  the  Word  was  with  God  "  in  the  completeness 
of  personal  communion  ;  that  the  life  which  was  manifested  to  men  was  already  in 
the  beginning  with  the  Father  (1  John  i.  2)  realised  absolutely  in  the  Divine 
essence.  We  contemplate  this  archetypal  life,  self-contained  and  self-fulfilled  in 
the  Divine  Being,  and  we  are  led  to  believe  with  deep  thankfulness  that  the  finite 
life  which  flows  from  it  by  a  free  act  of  grace  corresponds  with  the  source  from 
which  it  flows.  In  this  way  it  will  at  once  appear  how  the  conception  of  the  Triune 
God  illuminates  the  central  religious  ideas  of  the  Creation  and  the  Incarnation.  It 
illuminates  the  idea  of  Creation.  It  enables  us  to  gain  firm  hold  of  the  truth  that 
the  "  becoming  "  which  we  observe  under  the  condition  of  time  answers  to  "  a 
being  "  beyond  time ;  that  history  is  the  writing  out  at  length  of  that  which  we  may 
speak  of  as  a  Divine  thought.  It  enables  us  to  take  up  on  our  part  the  words  of 
the  four-and-twenty  elders,  the  representatives  of  the  whole  Church,  when  they 
cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne  and  worshipped  Him  that  sits  thereon,  saying, 
"  Worthy  art  Thou,  our  Lord,  and  our  God,  to  receive  the  glory  and  the  honour 
and  the  power  ;  for  Thou  didst  create  all  things,  and  because  of  Thy  will  they  are 
and  were  created ;  "  they  were  absolutely  in  the  ineffable  depths  of  the  mind  of 
God,  they  were  created  under  the  limitations  of  earthly  existence.  The  same  con- 
ception illuminates  also  the  idea  of  the  Incarnation.  It  enables  us  to  see  that  the 
Incarnation  in  its  essence  is  the  crown  of  the  Creation,  and  that  man  being  made 
capable  of  fellowship  with  God,  has  in  his  very  constitution  a  promise  of  the  fulfil- 
ment of  his  highest  destiny.  It  enables  us  to  feel  that  the  childly  relation  in  which 
we  stand  to  God  has  its  ground  in  the  Divine  Being ;  and  to  understand  that  not 
even  sin  has  been  able  to  destroy  the  sure  hope  of  its  consummation,  however 
gadly  it  may  have  modified  in  time  the  course  by  which  the  end  is  reached.  Any 
one  who  believes,  however  imperfectly,  that  the  universe  with  all  it  offers  in  a  slow 
Buccession  to  his  gaze  is  in  its  very  nature  the  expression  of  that  love  which  is  the 
Divine  Being  and  the  Divine  Life  ;  who  believes  that  the  whole  sum  of  life  defaced 
and  disfigured  on  the  surface  to  our  sight  "  means  intensely  and  means  good  "  ;  who 
beheves  that  the  laws  which  he  patiently  traces  are  the  expressions  of  a  Father's  will, 
that  the  manhood  which  he  shares  has  been  taken  into  God  by  the  Son,  that  at  every 
moment,  in  every  trial,  a  Spirit  is  with  him  waiting  to  sanctify  thought,  and  word, 
and  deed ;  must  in  his  own  character  receive  something  from  the  Divine  glory  on 
which  he  looks.  What  calm  reserve  he  will  keep  in  face  of  the  perilous  boldness 
with  which  controversialists  deal  in  human  reasonings  with  things  infinite  and 
eternal.  What  tender  reverence  he  will  cherish  towards  those  who  have  seen  some- 
thing of  the  King  in  His  beauty.  With  what  enthusiasm  he  will  be  kindled  while 
he  remembers  that,  in  spite  of  every  failure  and  every  disappointment,  his  cause  is 
won  already.  After  what  holiness  he  wiU  strain  while  he  sees  the  light  fall  about 
his  path,  that  light  which  is  fire,  and  knows  the  inexorable  doom  of  everything 
which  defiles.  So  we  are  brought  back  to  the  beginning.  The  revelation  of  God  is 
given  to  us  that  we  may  be  fashioned  after  His  likeness.  "  God  first  loved  us  " 
that  knowing  His  love  we  might  love  Him  in  our  fellow-men.  Without  spiritual 
sympathy  there  can  be  no  knowledge.  But  where  sympathy  exists  there  is  the 
transforming  power  of  a  Divine  affection.  (Bji.  Westcott.)  This  is  the  true  God 
and  eternal  life.  The  eternal  life  : — These  are  the  strongest  words  that  can  be  used 
in  reference  to  any  object.  I.  The  Apostle's  knowledge  of  Christ.  1.  John 
knew  that  the  long  expected  and  earnestly  looked  for  Saviour  had  made  His 
appearance  among  men.  What  mere  man  could  talk  of  going  to  and  coming  from 
heaven,  as  though  he  were  speaking  of  going  into  and  coming  out  of  a  room  in  a 
honse  and  claim  to  be  sane?  He  was  "Emmanuel,  God  with  us,"  who,  while 
here  below,  remained  there  always.    "  And  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come." 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  JOHN.  469 

2.  The  apostle  received  a  priceless  gift  from  the  "  Son  of  God."  And  hath  given 
us  an  "  understanding."  The  importance  of  the  "  understanding  "  that  Christ 
gives  may  be  seen  in  the  object  which  it  understands.  A  teacher  who  succeeds  in 
making  a  great  and  difficult  subject  clear  to  our  minds  deserves  our  profoundest 
gratitude  and  highest  admiration.  The  "Son  of  God"  gives  mankind  an  under- 
standing that  apprehends  the  greatest  of  all  objects — "  Him  that  is  true."  The  Son 
comprehends  God  and  He  gives  us  understandings  to  apprehend  Him.  Such  an 
understanding  is  truly  a  great  gift,  the  greatest  of  its  kind  possible.  When  we  bear 
in  mind  that  by  it  Christ  places  us  in  the  light  in  which  we  may  see  and  know 
God,  we  cannot  fail  to  feel  that  it  is  indeed  such.  For,  like  all  objects  of  the 
mind,  God  can  only  be  known  in  His  own  light.  The  only  way  we  can  possibly 
understand  a  great  author  is  to  possess  the  light  in  which  he  wrote  his  work — we 
must  see  with  his  intellectual  eyes  as  it  were — then  we  shall  understand  him,  not 
otherwise.  The  understanding  which  Christ  gives  us  includes  much  more  than  a 
mere  capacity  to  apprehend  an  object,  it  includes  a  suitable  spirit  in  which  to 
enter  upon  the  study  of  it.  Indeed,  unless  we  are  in  fullest  sympathy  with  the 
spirit  of  the  object  we  are  studying  we  shall  fail  to  understand  it.  It  is  some- 
thing to  be  able  to  understand  the  great  works  that  have  been  produced  by  the 
illustrious  men  of  the  different  ages ;  their  sublime  and  inspiring  poetry,  their  wise 
and  informing  philosophy,  their  splendid  pictures,  their  fine  statuary,  and  their 
grand  architecture.  But  the  "understanding"  which  the  "  Son  of  God"  gives 
apprehends  God;  it  knows  "Him  that  is  true."  Such  a  mind  must  be  capacious 
indeed.  II.  The  apostle's  relation  to  Christ  and  God.  1.  "And  we  are  in 
Him  that  is  true,  even  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  A  closer  relationship  than  these 
words  describe  cannot  be  conceived ;  they  imply  that  the  most  thorough  and  vital 
union  subsists  between  God,  Christ,  and  the  Christian.  That  is  a  triple  union  the 
strong  hand  of  death  cannot  sever,  nor  will  the  damps  and  chills  of  the  grave  im- 
pair the  golden  cord  that  binds  the  Christian  to  God  and  the  Saviour.  Eternity 
will  only  add  to  its  power  and  perpetuity.  To  be  in  Him  that  is  true  is  to  know 
Him.  2.  They  possessed  an  intelligent  assurance  of  the  intimate  relation  which 
they  sustained  to  Christ :  "  And  we  are  in  Him  that  is  true,  even  in  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ."  They  had  entered  into  the  close  union  with  God  by  means  of  Christ,  but 
they  had  not  severed  themselves  from  Christ  in  order  to  keep  up  the  union  with 
God  ;  they  were  in  Him  that  is  true,  "  even  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  All  who 
are  in  "  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  "  see  God  from  the  only  standpoint  from  whence  it  is 
possible  for  the  soul  to  see  Him  really  and  satisfactorily.  A  visitor  who  went  to 
Trafalgar  Square  to  view  Landseer's  lions,  selected  a  position  on  low  ground  from 
which  he  could  look  up  at  them,  where  the  stately  proportions  of  the  whole  column 
could  be  seen  to  the  greatest  advantage.  Quite  another  effect  is  produced  by  look- 
ing down  upon  them  from  the  terrace  in  the  front  of  the  National  Gallery ;  the 
column  seems  dwarfed  and  the  lions  out  of  proportion.  The  standpoint  made  all 
the  difference  in  the  view.  Christ  is  the  only  standpoint  from  which  we  can  see 
God  really :  in  Christ  we  "  stand  on  the  mount  of  God,  with  sunlight  in  our  souls," 
and  see  the  Father  of  our  spirits.  HI.  The  apostle's  sublime  testimony  to 
Christ.  "  This  is  the  true  God  and  eternal  Ufe."  Jesus  Christ  was  not  a  Divine 
man  merely :  if  He  were  not  more  than  that  John  would  not  have  said  that  He 
was  "the  true  God."  He  was  the  best  of  men,  but  He  was  infinitely  more ;  He 
was  "  the  true  God  and  eternal  life.''  As  the  earth  is  the  source  of  the  life  of  all 
the  fields  and  forests — as  much  the  source  of  the  life  of  the  majestic  oak  as  the 
Bweet  and  fragrant  violet — so  Christ  is  the  source  of  the  soul's  life.  Separated 
from  the  earth,  the  most  vital  plant  or  tree  would  wither,  droop,  and  die ; 
no  plant,  however  vigorous  and  beautiful,  has  life  in  itself.  Jesus  Christ 
is,  in  the  fullest  sense,  the  source  of  the  soul's  life ;  "  For  it  pleased 
the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell.  In  Him  was  life,  and  the  life 
was  the  light  of  men."  As  the  fountain  of  eternal  life  He  imparts  it  to  aU  who 
possess  it.  "I  give  unto  them  eternal  life."  The  source  of  all  the  waters  of  the 
world  must  be  an  immense  reservoir.  If  it  were  possible  for  the  question  to  be  put 
to  all  the  waters  found  on  the  earth,  to  all  streams,  rivers,  and  lakes,  "  Where  is 
your  source  ?  "  do  you  think  that  they  would  answer,  "  Oh,  some  spring  that  takes 
its  rise  at  the  foot  of  a  distant  Uttle  hill."  No,  if  any  one  hinted  that  such  a  spring 
was  their  source  they  would  scout  the  idea  at  once  as  the  very  acme  of  absurdity. 
Their  united  answer  would  be,  "  Our  source  must  be  an  inexhaustible  ocean."  Then 
can  a  mere  man  be  the  author  of  "  eternal  life  "  ?  Impossible.  (D.  Rhys  Jenkins.) 
The  la*t  word*  of  the  last  apostle : — I.  Here  we  have  the  scth  of  at.t.  that  wb  nssd 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

TO  KNOW  ABOUT  GoD.  "  This  is  the  true  God."  When  he  says,  "  This  is  the  true 
God  "  he  means  to  say,  "  This  God  of  whom  I  have  been  affirming  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  His  sole  Eevealer,  and  of  whom  I  have  been  declaring  that  through  Jesus  Christ 
we  may  know  Him  and  dwell  abidingly  in  Him."  "  This  " — and  none  else — "  is 
the  true  God."  What  does  John  mean  by  "  true  "  ?  By  that  expression  he  means, 
wherever  he  uses  it,  some  person  or  thing  whose  nature  and  character  correspond  to 
his  or  its  name,  and  who  is  essentially  and  perfectly  that  which  the  name  expresses. 
If  we  take  that  as  the  signification  of  the  word,  we  just  come  to  this,  that  the  God 
revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  with  whom  a  man  through  Jesus  Christ  may  have 
fellowship  of  knowledge  and  friendship,  that  He  and  none  but  He  answers  to  all 
that  men  mean  when  they  speak  of  a  God ;  that  He,  if  I  might  use  such  expressions, 
fuUy  fills  the  part.  If  we  only  think  that,  however  it  comes  (no  matter  about  that) 
every  man  has  in  him  a  capacity  of  conceiving  of  a  perfect  being,  of  righteousness, 
power,  purity,  and  love,  and  that  all  through  the  ages  of  the  world's  yearnings  there 
has  never  been  presented  to  it  the  embodiment  of  that  dim  conception,  but  that  all 
idolatry,  all  worship,  has  failed  in  bodying  out  a  person  who  would  answer  to  the 
requirements  of  a  man's  spirit,  then  we  come  to  the  position  in  which  these  final 
words  of  the  old  fisherman  go  down  to  a  deeper  depth  than  all  the  world's  wisdom, 
and  carry  a  message  of  consolation  and  a  true  gospel  to  be  found  nowhere  besides. 
Whatsoever  embodiments  men  may  have  tried  to  give  to  their  dim  conception  of  a 
God,  these  have  been  always  limitations,  and  often  corruptions  of  it.  And  to  limit 
or  to  separate  is,  in  this  case,  to  destroy.  No  Pantheon  can  ever  satisfy  the  soul  of 
man  who  yearns  for  One  Person  in  whom  all  that  he  can  dream  of  beauty,  truth, 
goodness  shall  be  ensphered.  "This  is  the  true  God."  And  all  others  are  corrup- 
tions, or  limitations,  or  divisions,  of  the  indissoluble  unity.  Then  are  men  to  go 
for  ever  and  ever  with  the  blank  misgivings  of  a  creature  moving  about  in  worlds 
not  realised  ?  For,  consider  what  it  is  that  the  world  owes  to  Jesus  Christ  in  its 
knowledge  of  God.  Eemember  that  to  us  as  orphaned  men  He  has  come  and  said, 
as  none  ever  said,  and  showed  as  none  ever  showed :  "  Ye  are  not  fatherless,  there- 
is  a  Father  in  the  heavens."  "  God  is  a  Spirit."  "  God  is  love."  And  put  these 
four  revelations  together,  the  Father  ;  Spirit ;  unsullied  Light ;  absolute  Love ;  and 
then  let  us  bow  down  and  say,  "  Thou  hast  said  the  truth,  0  aged  Seer."  This  is 
our  God;  we  have  waited  for  Him,  and  He  will  save  us.  "This" — and  none 
beside — "  is  the  true  God."  I  know  not  what  the  modern  world  is  to  do  for  a  God 
if  it  drifts  away  from  Jesus  Christ  and  His  revelations.  H.  Here  we  have  the  sum 
OF  His  gifts  to  us.  "  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life."  By  "  eternal  life  " 
He  means  something  a  great  deal  more  august  than  endless  existence.  He  means 
a  life  which  not  only  is  not  ended  by  time,  but  which  is  above  time,  not  subject  to 
its  conditions  at  all.  Eternity  is  not  time  spun  out  for  ever.  That  seems  to  part  us 
utterly  from  God.  He  is  "  eternal  life  "  ;  then,  we  poor  creatures  down  here,  whose 
being  is  all  "  cribbed,  cabin'd,  and  confined  "  by  succession,  and  duration,  and  the 
partitions  of  time,  what  can  we  have  in  common  with  Him  ?  John  answers  for  us. 
For  remember  that  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  Epistle  he  writes  that  "  the  life  was 
manifested,  and  we  show  unto  you  that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father,  and 
was  manifested  unto  us,  and  we  declare  it  unto  you  ;  and  we  declare  it  unto  you,  that 
ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us,  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with 
His  Son."  But  we  are  not  left  to  wander  about  in  regions  of  mysticism  and  dark- 
ness. For  we  know  this,  that  however  strange  and  difficult  the  thought  of  eternal 
life,  as  possessed  by  a  creature,  may  be,  to  give  it  was  the  very  purpose  for  which 
JesuB  Christ  came  on  earth.  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  have  it 
more  abundantly."  And  we  are  not  left  to  grope  in  doubt  as  to  what  that  eternal 
life  consists  in  ;  for  He  has  said  :  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  Thee, 
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent."  Thus,  then,  there  is  a 
life  which  belongs  to  God  on  His  throne,  a  life  lifted  above  the  limitations  of  time, 
a  life  communicated  by  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  waters  of  some  land-locked  lake  may 
flow  down  through  a  sparkling  river,  a  life  which  consists  in  fellowship  with  God, 
a  life  which  may  be,  and  is,  ours,  on  the  simple  condition  of  trusting  Him  who  gives 
it,  and  a  life  which,  eternal  as  it  is,  is  destined  to  a  future  all  undreamed  of,  in  that 
future  beyond  the  grave,  is  now  the  possession  of  every  man  that  puts  forth  the  faith 
which  is  its  condition.  HI.  Lastly,  we  have  here  the  consequent  sum  of  Christian 
ACTION.  "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  '  idols '  " — seeing  that  "  this  is  the 
true  God  " — the  only  One  that  answers  to  your  requirements,  and  will  satisfy  your 
desires.  Do  not  go  rushing  to  these  shrines  of  false  deities  that  crowd  every  comer 
of  Ephesus — ay  !  and  every  corner  of  Manchester.     Is  the  exhortation  not  needed  ? 


OEAP.  v.]  I.  JOHN.  471 

In  Ephesus  it  was  hard  to  have  nothmg  to  do  with  heathenism.  In  that  ancient 
world  their  religion,  though  it  was  a  superficial  thing,  was  intertwined  with  daily 
life  in  a  fashion  that  puts  us  to  shame.  Every  meal  had  its  libation,  and  almost 
every  art  was  knit  by  some  ceremony  or  other  to  a  god.  So  that  Christian  men  and 
women  had  almost  to  go  out  of  the  world  in  order  to  be  free  from  compUcity  in  the 
all-pervading  idol-worship.  You  and  I  call  ourselves  Christians.  We  say  we  believe 
that  there  is  nothing  else,  and  nobody  else,  in  the  whole  sweep  of  the  universe  that 
can  satisfy  our  hearts,  or  be  what  our  imagination  can  conceive  but  God  only. 
Having  said  that  on  the  Sunday,  what  about  Monday  ?  "  They  have  forsaken  Me, 
the  Fountain  of  living  water,  and  hewed  to  themselves  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold 
no  water."  "  Little  children  " — for  we  are  scarcely  more  mature  than  that — "  little 
children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols."  And  how  is  it  to  be  done  ?  "  Keep  your- 
selves." Then  you  can  do  it,  and  you  have  to  make  a  dead  lift  of  an  effort,  or  be 
sure  of  this— that  the  subtle  seduction  will  slide  into  your  heart,  and  before  you 
know  it  you  wUl  be  out  of  God's  sanctuary,  and  grovelling  in  Diana's  temple.  But 
it  is  not  only  our  own  effort  that  is  needed,  for  just  a  sentence  or  two  before,  the 
apostle  had  said :  "He  that  is  born  of  God" — that  is,  Christ — "keepeth  us."  So 
our  keeping  of  ourselves  is  essentially  our  letting  Him  keep  us.  Here  is  the  sum 
of  the  whole  matter.  There  is  one  truth  on  which  we  can  stay  our  hearts,  on  God 
in  whom  we  can  utterly  trust,  the  God  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ.  If  we  do  not 
see  Him  in  Christ  we  shall  not  see  Him  at  all,  but  wander  about  all  our  days  in  a 
world  empty  of  solid  reality.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  Little  children,  keep  yourselvea  from  idols. — TJie  sin  of  idolising  : — ^I. 
What  is  the  eight  notion  of  idolatry,  ab  it  still  prevails  even  among  nominal 
Christians  ?  I  answer  generally  ;  whatever  is  so  desired  and  loved,  so  trusted  in 
or  honoured,  as  to  displace  God  from  His  pre-eminence  is  an  idol.  Accordingly  the 
objects  of  human  idolatry  are  exceedingly  numerous ;  and  one  individual  is  far 
from  being  constant  to  the  same.  We  see  the  idol  of  yesterday  cast  to  the  moles 
and  bats  to-day  ;  and  that  which  is  deified  to-day  may  probably  be  trampled  in  the 
mire  to-morrow.  This  multiplicity  of  idols,  this  unsteadiness  of  taste  and  affection 
appeared  among  the  heathen  polytheists.  It  is  the  proper  curse  and  punishment 
of  forsaking  the  Creator  that  the  heart  roam  from  creature  to  creature  with  a  sickly 
capriciousness,  and  never  know  where  to  settle.  Consider,  then,  whether  or  not 
you  are  immoderately  attached  to  any  earthly  object ;  to  any  friend  or  relation  ;  to 
money,  power,  learning,  reputation,  pleasure,  popularity.  II.  The  way  of  detect- 
ing THESE  idolatrous  PROPENSITIES  IN  OURSELVES.  1.  What  is  their  effect  in  filling 
your  mind,  and  memory,  and  imagination  ?  What  do  your  thoughts  chiefly  run 
npon  ?  To  what  do  they  naturally  tend — God  or  Mammon  ?  Your  memory  too, 
what  scenes  and  discourses  does  it  most  fondly  review  ?  Those  of  a  spiritual  and 
devout,  or  those  of  a  worldly  cast?  TeU  me,  also,  which  way  your  fancy  flies  when 
it  makes  excursions.  To  airy  castles  of  augumented  wealth  and  importance  in 
this  world ;  to  higher  distinctions,  and  finer  houses,  and  more  abundant  comforts  ; 
or  to  scenes  of  heavenly  holiness  and  bliss?  Try  yourselves,  again,  as  to  the 
influence  of  temporal  things  upon  your  religious  exercises.  2.  Is  your  sensibility 
to  sin  as  lively  as  ever?  If  you  have  lost  ground  in  this  respect,  and  are  less 
particular  than  once  you  were,  what  has  so  sadly  altered  you  ?  Has  it  not  been  too 
warm  an  attachment  to  this  or  that  person  ;  too  keen  a  sohcitude  for  this  or  the 
other  acquisition  ?  3.  Are  you  greatly  elated  by  gain,  and  greatly  dejected  by  loss 
in  your  worldly  affairs  and  connections  ?  In  thought  survey  your  possessions  and 
BtiU  more  your  friends.  Now,  which  of  aU  these  is  dearest  to  you  ?  Have  you  ascer- 
tained ?  Then  I  ask  whether  you  could  bear  to  part  with  that  possession  by  the 
stroke  of  misfortune  ;  with  that  friend  by  the  stroke  of  death?  Ah,  you  exclaim, 
it  would  break  my  heart  to  be  deprived  of  such  a  blessing.  Would  that  indeed  be 
the  case  ?  Then  tremble  lest  that  blessing  turn  into  a  curse  by  proving  your  idol. 
III.  Some  op  God's  methods  of  dealing  with  such  idolaters  ;  for  He  is  a  jealous 
God.  "The  idols  He  wiU  utterly  abolish."  Sometimes  He  sweeps  them  away 
as  with  a  whirlvmid.  They  are  smitten  to  the  ground  and  disappear  in  a  moment. 
Health,  strength,  beauty,  knowledge,  fame,  wealth,  just  now  they  were  flourishing 
like  a  flower ;  and  like  a  flower  they  have  faded  away.  Sometimes  the  cup  of 
idolatrous  happiness  is  not  dashed  from  our  hps,  but  wormwood  is  mingled  with  it. 
God  embitters  to  us  our  darling  enjoyments,  so  that  where  we  looked  for  peace  and 
comjEort  we  find  nothing  but  misery.  Was  it  the  husband  you  loved  more  than 
God  ?  That  husband  becomes  faithless  and  unkind.  Was  it  the  wife  ?  She  grows 
sickly  and  fretful.    The  child  ?    He  turns  out  wild ;  or  is  lost  to  you  in  some  other 


473  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

way.  Be  assured  that  the  over-eager  pursuit  of  any  worldly  good  is  full  of  mischief 
and  peril.  And  this  dreadful  consummation  occurs  when  God  leaves  us  to  our 
idols  ;  when  he  suffers  them  to  take  and  keep  possession  of  our  souls.  "  Ephraim 
is  joined  to  idols ;  let  him  alone.  Leave  him  to  his  fatal  infatuation.  Let  him 
take  his  fill  of  carnal  delights  till  the  day  of  repentance  is  closed  and  judgment 
bursts  upon  him."  Merciful  God,  sever  us  from  our  idols  by  whatever  visitation 
thou  mayest  see  fit ;  only  leave  us  not  bound  up  with  them  to  perish  in  the  day  of 
Thy  coming  I  IV.  The  means  of  keeping  oueselves  feom  idols.  1.  Exercise  a 
sleepless  vigilance,  kept  awake  by  a  sense  of  your  proneness  to  fall  into  this  evil ; 
and  be  much  in  prayer  for  Divine  help,  conscious  that  you  are  too  weak  to  preserve 
yourselves  without  assistance  from  above.  Understand,  however,  that  what  you 
have  mainly  to  guard  against  is  not  any  particular  object,  but  the  turning  of  that 
object  into  an  idol.  2.  Do  not  heedlessly  form  such  connections  and  acquaintances, 
whether  by  marriage  or  partnership  in  business  or  domestic  service,  as  threaten  to 
absorb  the  heart  and  alienate  the  affections  from  God.  EecoUect  that  it  is  easier 
to  abstain  from  making  idols  than  afterwards  to  put  them  away.  3.  Think  much 
of  the  vanity  of  human  things ;  what  they  really  are  and  of  what  account.  Often 
the  dearest  idol  gives  birth  to  the  greatest  sorrow.  How  common  the  remark  upon 
something  of  which  high  expectations  were  conceived,  "  It  has  turned  out  quite  the 
reverse."  Oh,  truly,  it  is  most  unwise  to  set  our  heart  upon  a  gourd  which  may 
wither  away  at  any  moment  and  leave  us  more  painfuUy  sensible  than  ever  of  the 
scorching  sunbeams.  4.  Never  forget  that  it  is  the  prime  end  of  the  gospel  to 
unbind  your  heart  from  the  creature  in  order  to  its  being  reunited  to  your  Father 
in  heaven.  Are  you  not  to  be  "temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost" ;  to  be  sanctified  into 
"  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit "  ?  What  then  have  you  "  to  do  any 
more  with  idols  "  ?  (J.  N.  Pearson,  M.A.)  The  true  God  and  shadoios  : — By  the 
•'true  God"  St.  John  means  the  God  not  only  truth-speaking,  but  true  in  essence, 
genuine,  real ;  by  "  shadows  "  or  "  idols"  he  means  the  false  principles  which  take 
possession  of  the  senses — the  unreal  reflections  of  the  only  Real.  There  was  in- 
deed plenty  of  need  for  this  warning  in  St.  John's  day  and  in  the  Churches  under 
his  care.  Perhaps  the  antithesis  of  Christianity  aud  the  world  is  not  now  so 
sharply  apparent.  But  the  contrast  still  exists.  Although  the  twilight  realm  may 
be  vast,  yet  broad  and  deep  are  the  shadows  which  men  take  for  realities,  and  live 
in  them,  and  worship  them,  and  believe  in  them.  Can  there  be  a  more  evident 
example  of  shadow  worship  than  the  devotion  of  the  world  to  the  material — which 
in  reality  is  the  immaterial?  In  every  form  of  matter  there  is  indeed  the  hint  of 
God,  but  it  is  a  hint  only,  the  pledge  of  the  reality,  not  the  great  Eeality  Itself.  It 
is  from  heedlessness  of  this  great  truth  that  the  First  Commandment  of  the 
Decalogue,  which  some  imagine  completely  needless  for  themselves,  is  perhaps 
really  more  necessary  than  any  of  the  other  nine.  For  all  around  us  is  a  world 
worshipping  sham  gods  of  its  own  deification.  How  then  does  Christ  teach  us  the 
eternal  distinction  between  shadows  and  realities  ?  In  His  temptation  we  have 
exhibited  to  us  the  whole  matter  in  a  nutshell.  Temptation  is  the  battle 
of  alternatives,  the  choice  between  the  high  and  the  low,  the  real  and  the  shadowy. 
Alexander,  conqueror  of  the  world,  wept  for  worlds  beyond  to  conquer :  Caesar, 
with  his  hand  grasping  Satan's  gift  of  the  world-empire,  dreamed  of  something  more 
real  when  he  told  the  Egyptian  priest  he  would  give  up  all,  even  Cleopatra  herself, 
to  discover  the  mysterious  sources  of  the  Nile.  It  is  this  reality,  this  wider  con- 
quest, this  source  of  eternal  life,  which  has  been  man's  search  in  all  his  philoso- 
phies and  religious  systems.  Napoleon,  beset  with  quagmires  in  Egypt,  bade  his 
oflScers  ride  out  ii  all  directions,  the  first  to  find  firm  ground  to  return  and  lead  the 
way  for  the  rest.  So  man's  heart  has  bidden  him  ride  out  in  every  direction  to 
seek  the  Eeal,  and  St.  John  comes  back  from  his  fellowship  with  Jesus,  and  cries, 
"  This  is  the  real  God  and  the  life  which  is  eternal.  Little  children,  guard  your- 
selves from  the  sham  gods."  {H.  H.  Goicen.)  Idolatry  : — If  an  idol  is  a  thing 
which  draws  the  heathen  away  from  the  living  God,  anything  which  does  this  for 
us  may  be  named  an  idol.  I.  Self.  Love  of  self  is  born  in  us,  and  if  not  early 
checked  will  be  our  master.  It  feeds  upon  falsehood,  unkindness,  greediness,  and 
pride.  You  must  gratify  it  at  whatever  cost,  and  then  it  demands  more  and  more. 
Self  is  a  dreadful  idol.  Beware  of  it.  II.  Dress.  You  may  forget  the  pearl  in 
anxiety  about  its  setting.  III.  Pleasure.  Do  not  children  encourage  the  passion 
for  exciting  amusements  till  they  are  miserable  without  them,  though  so  many  inno- 
cent recreations  remain  to  them?  We  have  known  children  whose  Sundays  were 
a  weariness  to  them,  and  their  studies  a  punishment.  Their  pleasures  were  their 
idols.     {British  Weekly  Pulpit.) 


THE   BIBLICAL    ILLUSTEATOR. 

II.  JOHN. 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations  ; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,  on    the  Verses  of   The    Bible 


Rev.    JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,    M.A. 


SECOND  JOHN 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.   Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOE. 

II.  JOHN. 

Vebs.  1,  2.  The  elder  onto  the  elect  lady. — Truth  the  bond  of  love : — How  much 
is  implied  very  often  by  the  phrase  or  style  with  which  a  letter  is  begun  or  ended  I 
How  different  is  the  formal  "  Sir  "  from  "  My  dear  Sir  " ;  and,  again,  how  much 
does  this  differ  from  the  intimacy  which  addresses  by  a  Christian  name !  Those 
different  styles  mean  a  great  deal ;  and  as  it  is  now,  so  it  was  in  the  Apostolic  age. 
St.  John  calls  himself  by  way  of  endearment  "the  Presbyter,"  when  writing  to  a 
family  with  which  he  has  been  long  on  terms  of  intimacy.  Nothing  is  more  welcome 
to  persons  of  simple  character  who  are  in  high  office  than  an  opportunity  of  laying 
its  formalities  aside ;  they  like  to  address  others  and  to  be  themselves  addressed  in 
their  personal  capacity,  or  by  a  title  in  which  there  is  more  affection  than  form. 
And  he  introduces  himself  to  them  by  a  description  around  which  so  much  affection 
had  gathered,  and  which  seemed  to  have  acquired  a  new  appropriateness  in  his 
advanced  age.  To  whom  does  he  write  ?  "  The  Presbyter  to  the  elect  lady  and  her 
children."  It  may  be  that  the  word  translated  "lady"  is  really  a  proper  name, 
"  Kyria."  She  was  an  elderly  person,  probably  a  widow,  hving  with  her  grovm-np 
children.  When  St.  John  says  that  she  was  loved  by  "all  them  that  knew  the 
truth,"  he  makes  it  plain  that  her  name  was  at  least  well  known  in  the  Asiatic 
Churches,  and  that  she  was  a  person  of  real  and  high  excellence.  What  Dorcas 
was  to  St.  Peter ;  what  Lydia  of  PhUippi,  and  Phoebe  of  Cenchrea,  and  Priscilla, 
and  many  others  were  to  St.  Paul,  such  was  this  Christian  lady  to  St.  John.  I. 
The  atmosphere  op  this  feiendship  was  sincerity.  "  Whom  I  love,"  not  in  the 
truth  (there  is  no  article  in  the  original),  but  "  in  truth."  Not  "  truly  " :  St.  John 
would  have  used  an  adverb  to  say  that.  What  he  means  is  that  truth — truth  of 
thought,  truth  of  feeling,  truth  of  speech  and  intercourse — was  the  very  air  in  which 
his  affection  for  this  Christian  lady  had  grown  up  and  maintained  itself.  And  the 
word  which  he  uses  to  describe  this  affection  points  to  the  same  conclusion.  It 
stands  for  that  kind  of  affection  which  is  based  on  a  reasoned  perception  of  excellence 
in  its  object ;  and  thus  it  is  the  word  which  is  invariably  used  to  describe  the  love 
that  man  ought  to  have  for  God.  But  such  a  love  as  this  between  man  and  man 
grows  up  and  is  fostered  in  an  atmosphere  of  truthfulness.  It  is  grounded  not  on 
feeling  or  passion,  but  on  a  reciprocal  conviction  of  simplicity  of  purpose;  and, 
being  true  in  its  origin,  it  is  true  at  every  stage  of  its  development.  That  the  sense 
of  a  common  integrity  of  purpose,  a  common  anxiety  to  be  true,  and  to  recognise 
truth,  is  an  atmosphere  especially  favourable  to  the  growth  of  personal  friendships, 
is  observable  at  this  moment  in  England  among  students  of  the  natural  sciences. 
The  common  investigation,  prosecuted  day  by  day,  iuto  natural  facts  and  laws ;  the 
assurance  of  a  common  nobility  of  purpose,  of  a  common  liability  to  failure,  of  a 
common  anxiety  to  pursue  and  proclaim  fact — creates  a  feeling  of  brotherhood 
which  traverses  other  differences,  and  is  an  enrichment  of  human  life.  St.  John 
loved  this  lady  and  her  children  "  in  truth  " ;  and  therefore  he  did  not  hesitate, 
when  occasion  made  it  a  duty,  to  put  a  strain  on  their  affection.  Those  who  love 
in  truth,  like  St.  John,  can,  when  it  is  necessary  to  do  so,  carry  out  St.  Paul's 
precept  about  speaking  the  truth  in  love.  St.  John,  as  a  great  master  of  faith  and 
charity,  could  be  at  once  tender  and  uncompromising.  It  was  necessary  in  these 
days  at  Ephesus.  There  were  dangers  to  which  the  apostle  could  not  close  his  eyes. 
His  love  was  not  a  vague  sentiment,  unregulated  by  any  principle ;  it  was  a  love  of 
all  men,  but  it  was  pre-eminently  a  love  of  each  man's  immortal  soul.    Therefore 

6 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


in  proportion  to  its  sincerity  and  intensity  it  was  outspoken.  It  would  be  well  if 
there  was  more  of  love  in  truth,  as  distinct  from  love  by  impulse,  among  us ;  among 
those  of  us,  for  instance,  who  are  already  bound  to  each  other  by  ties  of  natural 
affection.  Sincerity  does  not  chUl  natural  love  ;  but  it  raises  a  mere  passion  to  the 
rank  of  a  moral  power.  How  much  trouble  might  parents  not  save  their  children 
in  after  years  by  a  little  plain  speaking,  dictated,  not  by  the  desire  to  assert 
authority,  but  by  simple  affection!  Too  often  parents  love  their  children,  not 
in  truth,  but  with  a  purely  selfish  love.  They  will  not  risk  a  passing  misunder- 
standing, even  for  the  sake  of  the  child's  best  interests  hereafter.  11.  What  was 
THE  MOTivE-powEB  OF  St.  John's  LOVE?  St.  Johu  replies,  "For  the  Truth's  sake, 
which  dwelleth  in  us,  and  shall  be  with  us  for  ever."  He  adds  that  all  who  knew 
the  truth  share  in  this  affection.  By  the  truth  St.  John  here  means  a  something 
the  very  existence  of  which  appears  improbable  or  impossible  to  some  minds  in  our 
own  day.  He  means  a  body  of  ascertained  facts  about  God,  about  the  soul,  about 
the  means  of  reaching  God,  and  being  blessed  by  Him,  about  the  eternal  future, 
about  the  true  rule  of  man's  conduct,  and  the  true  secret  of  his  happiness  and  well- 
being.  Other  knowledge  which  human  beings  possess  is  no  doubt  true ;  such,  for 
instance,  as  that  which  enables  us  to  make  the  most  of  the  visible  world  in  which 
God  has  placed  us.  But  St.  John  calls  this  higher  knowledge  the  truth  ;  as  being 
incomparably  more  important ;  as  interesting  man,  not  merely  in  his  capacity  of  a 
creature  of  time,  but  in  his  capacity  of  a  being  destined  for  eternity.  And  this 
truth,  as  St.  John  conceived  it,  was  not  merely  a  set  of  propositions  resting  upon 
evidence.  It  was  that :  but  it  was  more.  It  centred  in  a  Person  whom  St.  John 
had  seen,  heard,  touched,  handled ;  who  had  died  in  agony,  and  had  risen  in 
triumph  from  death,  and  had  left  the  world  with  an  assurance  that  He  would  return 
to  judge  it.  To  share  this  faith  was  to  share  a  bond  of  common  affection.  To  have 
the  same  ideal  of  conduct  before  the  soul ;  the  same  view  of  the  meaning  of  life  ; 
the  same  hopes  and  fears  about  that  which  will  follow  it ;  above  aU,  the  same 
devotion  to  a  Person — the  Incomparable  Person  of  Jesus  Christ — was  to  have  a 
vast  fund  of  common  sympathy.  To  us  it  might  have  seemed  that,  with  the  Church 
expanding  around  him,  St.  John's  mind  would  have  been  wholly  occupied  with  the 
larger  interests  of  administration ;  and  that  he  would  have  had  no  leisure  to  attend 
to  the  wants  of  individuals.  And  if  St.  John  had  been  only  a  statesman, 
endeavouring  to  carry  out  a  great  policy,  or  only  a  philosopher  intent  upon 
diffusing  his  ideas,  he  would  have  contented  himself,  to  use  the  modern  phrase, 
with  "  acting  upon  the  masses."  But  as  an  apostle  of  Christ  he  had  a  very  different 
work  to  do :  he  had  to  save  souls.  And  souls  are  to  be  saved,  not  gregariously,  but 
one  by  one.  They  who  are  brought  out  of  darkness  and  error  into  a  Imowledge  and 
love  of  God  and  His  Blessed  Son,  generally  are  brought  by  the  loving  interest  and 
care  of  some  servant  of  Christ.  No  philosophy  can  thus  create  and  combine.  The 
philosophers  of  all  ages,  even  if  good  friends  among  themselves,  can  only  set  up  a 
fancied  aristocracy  of  intellect  for  themselves,  and  are  very  jealous  about  admitting 
the  people  into  the  Olympus  of  their  sympathies.  No  poUtical  scheme  can  do  this : 
history  is  there  to  answer.  But  love,  with  sincerity  for  its  sphere,  and  with  Jesus 
Christ  for  its  object,  can  do  it.  Love  did  it  of  old,  love  does  it  now.  And,  among 
the  counteracting  and  restorative  influences  which  carry  the  Church  of  Christ 
unharmed  through  the  animated  and  sometimes  passionate  discussion  of  publio 
questions,  private  friendships,  formed  and  strengthened  in  the  atmosphere  of  a 
fearless  sincerity,  and  knit  and  banded  together  by  a  common  share  in  the  faith 
of  ages,  are,  humanly  speaking,  among  the  strongest.  One  and  all,  we  may  at 
some  tine  realise  to  the  letter  the  language  of  St.  John  to  this  Christian  mother. 
(Canon  Liddon.)  The  elect  lady  : — I.  What  the  apostle  bats  as  DESCRiPTiva 

OF  HER  CHABACTEB.  1.  John  does  Hot  mean  to  represent  her  as  faultless.  He 
views  her  not  as  infallible  and  impeccable,  not  beyond  the  need  of  cautions  and 
admonitions,  which  he  therefore  administers.  2.  Neither  does  he  furnish  ua  with 
a  fuU  delineation  of  her  character,  but  gives  us  a  few  intimations  which  will  enable 
ns  to  estimate  her  worth.  (1)  The  foundation  of  aU  her  excellencies  was  her 
personal  and  evangelical  godliness.  (2)  Her  regard  to  the  truth  is  expressed  by 
her  "walking  in  it."  Walking  Implies  life,  action,  and  progress;  and  she 
exemplified  the  influence  of  the  principle  by  walking  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth ;  in  the  practice  of  the  truth ;  in  the  profession  of  the  truth ;  and  in  the 
service  of  the  truth  ;  or,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  in  being  a  "  fellow-helper 
to  the  truth."  (3)  She  seems  to  have  been  a  woman  of  some  rank  and  distinction, 
(4)  Again,  we  see  that  this  excellent  lady  was  in  wedded  life.    Nothing,  however, 


II.  JOHN.  7 

is  said  of  her  husband.  This  may  be  accounted  for  in  two  ways.  First,  he  may 
not  have  been  a  Christian :  and  if  so,  and  if  when  she  married  him  she  was  herself 
a  Christian,  she  disregarded  the  requisition  to  marry  "  only  in  the  Lord  " ;  and  she 
had  no  reason  to  complain  of  any  trials  resulting  from  it.  But  she  may  have  been 
herself  converted  after  the  union ;  while  he  remained  in  the  same  state  as  before. 
Or,  secondly,  her  husband  might  have  been  dead :  and,  considering  the  representation 
given  here  of  the  state  of  her  family,  this  appears  to  be  much  more  probable  than 
that  he  was  a  heathen  or  an  infidel.  Now,  if  this  was  true,  she  had  been  called  to 
sustain  the  most  painful  of  all  bereavements,  and  was  a  widow ;  and  a  "  widow 
indeed,"  for  she  was  a  maternal  widow.  Her  "  children,"  like  herself,  were  "  found 
walking  in  truth."  (5)  Finally,  this  "  elect  lady  "  had  not  only  holy  offspring,  but 
pious  connections  and  relatives.  "  The  children  of  thine  elect  sister  greet  thee."  If 
you  say  this  was  no  part  of  her  character,  yet  it  was,  surely,  no  inconsiderable  part 
of  her  happiness.  And  who  can  tell  how  far  it  was  in  answer  to  her  prayers,  and 
the  result  of  her  example,  endeavours,  and  influence?  11.  What  the  apostle  does 
AS  EXPRESSIVE  OF  HIS  EEGABD.  1.  He  writes  her  an  epistle.  How  vain  would  many 
feel,  if  they  could  show  a  letter  addressed  to  themselves  from  an  extraordinary 
scholar,  or  genius,  or  statesman,  or  warrior — a  Chatham,  or  a  Wellington.  What 
was  it  then  to  receive  a  letter  thus  indited  and  directed — "  The  elder  unto  the  elect 
lady  and  her  children,  whom  I  love  in  the  truth."  2.  He  honours  her  not  only  with 
a  letter,  but  with  a  visit.  (1)  We  ought  to  be  thankful  for  ink  and  paper.  They 
identify  information  ;  they  perpetuate  intelligence ;  they  annihilate  distance ;  they 
enable  us  to  talk  without  being  heard.  StUl,  however  nimble  the  pen  of  a  ready 
writer  may  be,  it  cannot  utter  a  thousandth  part  of  the  overflowings  of  the  tongue. 
(2)  We  know  not  the  place  of  the  residence  of  this  lady ;  and  therefore  we  know 
not  how  far  John  had  to  travel :  nor  can  we  tell  the  mode  of  his  conveyance ;  for 
he  could  hardly,  at  his  age,  travel  on  foot.  He  speaks  of  his  intended  journey  with 
pleasure ;  yet  he  could  not  be  insensible  of  the  difficulties,  dangers,  and  uncertainties 
of  travelling ;  especially  in  those  days,  and  under  a  weight  of  years.  He,  therefore, 
expresses  himself  concerning  it  dependently  and  piously;  and  says,  "I  trust  to 
come  unto  you";  acknowledging  the  providence  of  God,  and  confiding  for  the 
issue  in  Him.  (3)  But  see  the  advantage  which  John  desires  and  expects  from 
the  journey  itself — "  That  our  joy  may  be  full."  They  were  to  be  blessings  to  each 
other ;  not  only  the  apostle  to  the  disciple,  but  the  disciple  to  the  apostle.  There  is 
no  such  thing  as  independence  :  all  are  needful,  aU  are  useful.  We  are  not  only 
"  one  body  in  Christ,"  but  "  every  one  also  members  one  of  another."  3.  The  power 
of  the  social  principle ;  and  the  value,  not  only  of  friendship,  but  of  actual  inter- 
course. (1)  How  pleasing  is  it  to  meet  "  face  to  face,"  and  commune,  after  long 
separation  and  absence ;  especially  if,  during  that  separation,  we  have  experienced 
trying  cucumstances  and  perilous  events.  (2)  How  pleasing  to  meet  "  face  to  face," 
and  commune,  in  the  apartments  and  confinements  of  trouble.  (3)  How  pleasing 
to  meet  "  face  to  face,"  in  the  exercises  of  social  devotion  in  the  sanctuary.  (4) 
What  will  it  be  to  meet  "  face  to  face  "  in  heaven  ?  Then  our  joy  will  be  fuU. 
(W.  Jay.)  The  salutation : — Present-day  pressure  has  driven  the  good  old  style  of 
epistolary  writing  out  of  the  market.  The  Church  of  Christ  has  weU-nigh  forgotten 
the  power  of  the  pen.  We  intrust  all  teaching  to  the  tongue  and  the  press.  Parents, 
ministers,  and  Sunday-school  teachers  may  keep  in  touch  with  the  hearts  of  their 
children  and  scholars  by  an  occasional  letter,  brimful  of  holy  thoughts  and 
aspirations.  I.  The  person  who  salutes.  "  The  elder."  Many  of  the  best 
expositors  have  naturally  inferred  that  the  apostle  used  the  term  elder  because 
it  had  become  an  appellative  among  the  people  owing  to  his  old  age.  John 
was  the  only  survivor  of  the  wonderful  Apostolic  band.  H.  The  persons 
SALUTED.  "  The  elect  lady  and  her  children."  1.  We  know  that  she  was  a 
Christian.  Elect  in  Christ  Jesus  is  the  full  meaning,  for  the  election  of  grace 
must  not  be  separated  from  the  means  which  bring  it  about.  Salvation  is  not 
favouritism,  but  agreement.  It  is  the  effect  that  points  to  the  cause,  as  the 
river  reminds  one  of  the  source.  This  view  of  election  is  in  harmony  with 
human  Uberty  and  responsibility.  2.  We  know  that  she  was  a  mother.  With 
the  cares  of  the  household  and  anxiety  about  their  children,  mothers  are  often 
depressed.  The  truly  pious  mother  is  more  anxious  about  the  salvation  of  her 
children  than  about  any  other  matter.  3.  We  know  that  she  was  a  mother 
surrounded  by  her  family.  IH.  The  ground  of  mutual  union.  "  Whom  I 
love  in  truth."  Everything  tends  to  show  that  the  "elect  lady"  was  possessed 
of  many  embellishments  such  as  society  delights  to  recognise,  and  the  worth  of 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

which  the  Apostle  John  would  be  the  last  to  undervalue,  and  yet  love  for  the  trath 
ifl  the  only  ground  of  affection  which  he  acknowledges.    Christian  love  can  only 
be  excited  by  character  built  upon  Divine  truth.     IV.  The  devout  invocation. 
"Grace,  mercy,  peace,  shall  be  with  us,"  &c.    V.  The  sotjeoe  of  all  blessino. 
••  From  God  the  Father,  and  from  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Father."    VI.  Thb 
FINAL  CONDITION.    "In  tiuth  and  love."    (T.  Davies,  M.A.)        Honour  of  women 
in  the  old  world : — ^We  are  sometimes  told  by  Christian  apologists  that  women  have 
acquired  an  honour  since  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  which  was  almost  denied 
them  in  the  old  world ;  and  that  because  the  feminine  type  of  character  is  com- 
mended to  us  by  the  example  of  Him  who  was  emphatically  the  sufferer.    I  beUeve 
both  assertions  have  a  foundation  of  truth  in  them ;  but  that  they  are  not  true,  and 
therefore  would  not  have  been  adopted  or  commended  by  the  apostle.    It  is  not  true 
that  women  were  not  honoured  in  the  old  world.    I  might  allude  to  the  Jewish 
feeling  about  mothers.    In  that  character  the  highest  and  Divinest  promises  rested 
upon  them.    But  they  do  not  only  appear  as  mothers.    Deborah  is  a  judge  and  a 
prophetess  of  the  people.    Miriam  leads  the  songs  which  celebrate  the  deliverance 
of  the  nation  from  Pharaoh.    Greek  history,  again,  pays  high  honour  to  women. 
The  Trojan  war,  the  subject  of  its  earliest  legends,  of  its  noblest  song,  is  undertaken 
in  vindication  of  female  honour  and  the  sacredness  of  the  marriage  bond.    In  the 
Homeric  poems,  the  freewoman  is  treated  with  reverence ;  even  the  captive  taken  in 
war  is  not  without  honour.    The  Roman  State,  which  almost  rests  on  the  authority 
of  fathers,  was  anything  but  neglectful  of  the  mother  and  the  wife.    The  traditional 
origin  of  the  Eepublic  is  the  retribution  for  the  wrong  done  to  Lucretia.  One  of  the 
earliest  stories,  that  of  Coriolanus,  illustrates  the  honour  which  even  the  proudest, 
most  wilful  son  paid  to  her  who  had  borne  and  nursed  him.    Some  of  the  noblest 
recollections  of  the  perishing  commonwealth  are  connected  with  the  name  of  Cornelia, 
the  mother  of  the  Gracchi,  and  Portia,  the  wife  of  Brutus.    It  is  dishonest  to  over- 
look these  facts ;  and  being  dishonest,  it  is  unchristian.    We  do  not  honour  Christ 
by  disparaging  that  which  took  place  before  He  dwelt  on  earth.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 
Whom  I  love  In  the  truth. — Christian  friendship : — "  Whom  I  love  in  -the  truth." 
It  was  not  an  ordinary  kind  of  friendship.    It  did  not  rest  on  kindred,  nor  on 
neighbourhood,  nor  on  business,  nor  on  country,  nor  on  common  tastes  and  pur- 
suits, nor  even  on  services  rendered  and  gratitude  for  these  returned ;  it  was  a 
friendship  shared  by  "  all  who  knew  the  truth,"  it  was  "  for  the  truth's  sake  which 
dwelleth  in  us  and  shall  be  with  us  for  ever."    The  Truth  meant  much  for  John 
and  for  such  as  he  reckoned  friends.      It  was  a  certain  body  of  doctrine,  no 
doubt,  held  by  him  and  them  very  dogmatically  indeed ;  but  it  was  not  abstract 
doctrine,  it  was  doctrine  subsisting  in  the  personal,  historical,  living  Christ.    It  is 
plain  that  friends  who  hold  a  common  relation  to  the  truth  thus  understood  will  be 
friends  after  a  quite  distinct  and  very  lofty  fashion.  They  have  a  birth  and  kinship 
not  of  this  world  (1  Pet.  i.  22,  23).    They  live  by  virtue  of  a  principle  the  world 
cannot  understand,  even  "  the  truth  which  dwelleth  in  us."    And  they  are  prac- 
tically influenced  in  their  daily  conduct  by  the  hope  of  sharing  the  "many 
mansions  of  the  Father's  house."     1.  Those  who  love  one  another  "  in  the  truth  " 
will  love  in  truth ;  sincerity  marks  all  friendship  worthy  to  be  called  Christian.    2. 
2.  This  friendship  is  always  fruitful.    Ten  thousand  little  things  done  or  not  done, 
and  which  the  friend  who  benefits  by  them  may  not  always  know,  are  the  habitual 
outcome  of  friendship  for  the  truth's  sake.    And  there  is  one  fruit  which  from  its 
nature  is  least  of  all  seen  or  talked  about,  which  yet  is  both  the  commonest  and  the 
best  that  friendship  can  yield— prayer  for  one  another.    3.  Christian  friendship 
may  sometimes  be  severe.    A  friend,  in  proportion  to  the  purity  and  spiritual 
intensity  of  his  love,  will  discern  faults  and  weaknesses  and  dangers  which,  for 
friendship's  sake,  he  must  not  wink  at.     4.  This  friendship  hallows  and  strengthens 
all  the  other  ties  that  bind  us  to  one  another.    6.  It  is  another  distinguishing 
excellence  of  Christian  friendship  that  it  bears  strain  best.     This    love  yields 
mutual  gentleness  and  forbearance  and  tender-heartedness.     6.  Christian  friend- 
ship has  the  widest  reach.    It  boasts  of  its  comprehensiveness  here — "And  not  I 
only,  but  also  all  they  that  have  known  the  truth."     7.  The  crowning  distinction 
of  this  friendship  is  that  it  is  not  dissolved  by  death  itself.     (A.  M.  Symington, 
D.D.)        The  permanent  love  of  friendship : — Some  love  for  pleasure.     Isaac  loved 
Esau  because  venison  was  his  delight.    An  adulterer  loves  an  harlot  for  the  satisfy- 
ing of  his  filthy  lust.     Some  love  for  profit :  they  love  their  friends  as  they  do  their 
cows,  horses,  and  grounds— for  the  benefit  they  reap  by  them.     Some  love  for 
beauty :  so  Shechem  loved  Dinah.    Some  love  for  honour  and  promotion,  m  hope 


II.  JOHN.  9 

to  be  preferred  by  such  a  great  man.  All  these  stand  upon  a  tickle  ground ;  plea- 
sure vanisheth,  and  that  quickly  too,  then  love  vanisheth  together  with  it.  When 
Amnon  had  gotten  his  pleasure  of  Tamar  he  hated  her  more  than  before  he  loved 
her.  Kiches  betake  themselves  to  their  wings,  as  Solomon  speaketh,  and  fly  away, 
then  love  flies  away  too.  If  a  rich  man  become  a  poor  man  we  set  not  much  by 
him.  Honour  is  mutable :  the  nail  that  is  now  aloft  is  in  the  dirt,  as  it  feU  out 
with  Haman,  then  he  is  little  regarded  of  any  of  his  followers.  Beauty  fades  away 
like  a  flower,  then  love  fades  away  too  ;  love  for  the  truth's  sake,  for  Christ's  sake, 
for  the  gospel's  sake,  and  that  will  be  a  permanent  love.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Christ 
the  inspiration  of  Christian  love : — The  enthusiasm  of  humanity  may  be  caught 
from  the  example  and  inspiration  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  mill-wheel  will  cease  to 
revolve  when  the  waters  of  the  rushing  stream  are  cut  off ;  the  moving  train  wiU 
stop  when  the  glowing  heat  cools  within  the  hidden  chamber,  and  charity  in  this 
world  will  degenerate  into  a  professional  schedule  without  inspiration  and  without 
power  unless  we  keep  Jesus  as  our  example.     {J.  MitcheU.) 

Ver.  3.  Grace  be  with  you,  mercy,  peace. — Grace,  mercy,  and  peace : — Grace  in 
Scripture  comprehends  all  the  senses  that  it  bears,  separately  and  apart,  in  our 
common  dialects.  When  you  say  of  a  royal  person,  "How  gracious  he  is"; 
when  you  say  of  a  beautiful  woman,  "  What  grace  there  is  in  her  "  ;  when  you 
speak  of  a  man  not  having  the  grace  to  return  a  benefit  that  has  been  done 
to  him ;  you  indicate  some  aspect  of  that  grace  which  the  Source  of  aU  good 
bestows  upon  men ;  which  becomes  in  them  a  comeliness  answering  to  His 
from  whom  it  is  derived ;  which  awakens  the  reaction  that  we  call  gratitude 
or  thanksgiving.  And  this  grace  being  manifested  towards  creatures  who 
have  need  of  daily  forgiveness  is  inseparable  from  mercy,  which,  like  it,  pro- 
ceeds from  the  nature  of  the  being  who  shows  it,  and  becomes  an  element  in  the 
nature  of  the  being  to  whom  it  is  showed — the  merciful  obtaining  mercy.  And 
this  grace  or  mercy  flowing  forth  towards  creatures  who  have  been  alienated  from 
their  Creator,  who  have  been  at  war  with  Him — and,  being  at  war  with  Him,  have 
been,  necessarily,  at  war  with  each  other  and  themselves — becomes  peace  or  atone- 
ment. But  that  the  grace,  because  it  is  royal,  free,  and  undeserved,  may  not  be 
supposed  to  be  capricious ;  that  the  mercy  may  not  be  taken  as  dependent  on  the 
mercy  which  it  calls  forth  ;  that  the  peace  may  not  be  judged  by  the  results  which 
it  produces  here,  where  oftentimes  the  proclamation  of  it  is  the  signal  of  fresh 
fighting ;  they  are  declared  to  come  from  God  the  Father  and  from  Jesus  Christ 
the  Son  of  the  Father,  in  truth  and  love ;  these  being  the  essential  Godhead  ;  these 
dwelling  absolutely  in  the  Father ;  shining  forth  to  all  in  the  life  of  the  Son ;  while 
the  Spirit  in  whom  they  are  eternally  united  imparts  them  to  the  family  in  heaven 
and  earth.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  Grace  first: — Our  poverty  wants  grace,  our 
guUt  wants  mercy,  our  misery  wants  peace.  Let  us  ever  keep  the  apostle's  order. 
Do  not  let  us  put  peace,  our  feeling  of  peace,  first.  The  emotionalists'  is  a  topsy- 
turvy theology.  Apostles  do  not  say  "  peace  and  grace,"  but  "  grace  and  peace." 
{Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  The  common  salutation : — In  this  short  letter  John  does 
not  grudge  space  for  a  salutation.  It  is  the  common  salutation  or  benediction  that 
might  be  pronounced  on  any  Christian,  whether  having  little  more  than  a  decent 
profession,  or  distinguished,  as  this  lady  was,  by  works  truly  good.  What 
familiarity  has  made  words  of  course  to  us  were  not  words  of  course  or  empty  form 
to  John,  although  he  must  have  repeated  and  heard  them  oftener  than  any  of  us. 
That  is  one  thought :  we  should  liiiger  over  the  words  till  they  get  a  firm  grip  on 
our  hearts,  tUl  we  feel  their  Divine  meaning.  And  another  thought  is  this :  each 
individual  needs  the  whole  of  this  benediction.  Do  we  not  often  lose  ourselves  in 
the  mass  ?  Grace,  mercy,  peace :  the  blessings  stand  in  their  due  order,  the  first 
leading  to  the  second,  and  the  second  securing  the  third.  There  is  a  fourth  word, 
indeed,  which  includes  all  the  three,  the  greatest  word  in  any  language — love. 
John  reaches  to  it  at  the  end  of  his  sentence.  But  it  could  not  have  been  used 
instead  of  grace  and  mercy.  For  grace  expresses  the  Divine  favour  viewed  as 
undeserved.  It  is  the  formtain  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift  coming  down  from 
the  Father  of  hghts  to  us  who  have  no  claim  on  Him,  who  have  nothing  of  our  own 
to  call  forth  love.  Mercy,  again,  is  more  than  simple  grace ;  it  is  sovereign  love 
pitying  and  pardoning  sinners,  those  who  positively  deserve  ill  from  God.  Then 
peace  comes  in  its  place  and  order.  If  that  peace  with  God,  a  clear  and  substantial 
reality  in  a  crucified  and  interceding  Mediator,  then  all  other  peace.  The  Elder  is 
careful  to  make  prominent  the  source  from  whence  the  supreme  blessing  comes.    It 

31 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

is  from  God  indeed,  but  from  God  in  His  new  covenant  relation  to  man — "  from 
God  the  Father."  God  was  now  for  them  not  less  the  Creator,  the  Lawgiver,  the 
Judge,  but  He  was,  in  Christ,  also  and  above  all  the  Father.  "  And  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Here  there  is  no  distracting  perplexity,  there  is  only  fuhiess  and 
rest,  when  the  heart,  rather  than  the  head,  is  engaged  about  grace,  mercy,  and 
peace.  In  John's  mind  the  holy  mystery  of  the  Trinity  was,  while  none  the  less 
sublime,  more  a  fact  than  a  mystery,  for  he  had  beheld  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
manifesting  the  glory  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth,  and  bearing  away  the 
sin  of  the  world.  This  benediction  is  distinguished  by  the  words  being  added,  "  In 
truth  and  love."  {A.  M.  Symington,  D.D.)  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  : — "  Grace, 
mercy,  and  peace  "  stand  related  to  each  other  in  a  very  interesting  manner.  The 
apostle  starts,  as  it  were,  from  the  fountain-head,  and  slowly  traces  the  course  of 
the  blessing  down  to  its  lodgment  in  the  heart  of  man.  Grace,  referring  solely  to 
the  Divine  attitude  and  thought ;  mercy,  the  manifestation  of  grace  in  act,  referring 
to  the  workings  of  that  great  Godhead  in  its  relation  to  humanity ;  and  peace, 
which  is  the  issue  in  the  soul  of  the  fluttering  down  upon  it  of  the  mercy  which  is 
the  activity  of  the  grace.  "Grace  from  God  the  Father  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Father."  These  two,  blended  and  yet  separate,  to  either  of 
whom  a  Christian  man  has  a  distinct  relation,  these  two  are  the  sources,  equally,  of 
the  whole  of  the  grace.  The  Scriptural  idea  of  grace  is  love  that  stoops  and  that 
pardons  and  that  communicates.  The  first  thing,  then,  that  strikes  me  in  it,  is 
how  it  exults  in  that  great  thought  that  there  is  no  reason  whatsoever  for  God's 
love  except  God's  will.  The  very  foundation  and  notion  of  the  word  "  grace  "  is  a 
free,  undeserved,  unsolicited,  self-prompted,  and  altogether  gratuitous  bestowment, 
a  love  that  is  its  own  reason.  God's  love  is  like  an  artesian  well ;  whensoever  you 
strike  up  comes,  self-impeUed,  gushing  into  light  because  there  is  such  a  central 
store  of  it  beneath  everything,  the  bright  and  flashing  waters.  Grace  is  love  that  is 
not  drawn  out,  but  that  bursts  out,  self-originated,  undeserved.  And  then  let  me 
remind  you  that  there  lies  in  this  great  word  the  preaching  that  God's  love,  though 
it  be  not  turned  away  by,  is  made  tender  by  our  sin.  Grace  is  love  extended  to  a 
person  that  might  reasonably  expect,  because  he  deserves,  something  very  different. 
Then,  if  we  turn  for  a  moment  from  that  deep  fountain  to  the  stream,  we  get  other 
blessed  thoughts.  The  love,  the  grace,  breaks  into  mercy.  As  grace  is  love  which 
forgives,  so  mercy  is  love  which  pities  and  helps.  God's  grace  softens  itself  into 
mercy,  and  all  His  dealings  with  us  men  must  be  on  the  footing  that  we  are  not 
only  sinful,  but  that  we  are  weak  and  wretched,  and  so  fit  subjects  for  a  compassion 
which  is  the  strangest  paradox  of  a  perfect  and  Divine  heart.  The  mercy  of  God 
is  the  outcome  of  His  grace.  And  as  is  the  fountain  and  the  stream,  so  is  the 
great  lake  into  which  it  spreads  itself  when  it  is  received  into  a  human  heart. 
Peace  comes,  the  all-sufficient  summing  up  of  everything  that  God  can  give,  and 
that  men  can  need,  from  His  loving-kindness  and  from  their  needs.  The  world  is 
too  wide  to  be  narrowed  to  any  single  aspect  of  the  various  discords  and  dishar- 
monies which  trouble  men.  Peace  with  God ;  peace  in  this  anarchic  kingdom 
within  me,  where  conscience  and  will,  hopes  and  fears,  duty  and  passion,  sorrows 
and  joys,  cares  and  confidence,  are  ever  fighting  one  another ;  where  we  are  torn 
asunder  by  conflicting  aims  and  rival  claims,  and  wherever  any  part  of  our  nature 
asserting  itself  against  another  leads  to  intestine  warfare  and  troubles  the  poor 
soul.  All  that  is  harmonised  and  quieted  down,  and  made  concordant  and  co- 
operative to  one  great  end,  when  the  grace  and  the  mercy  have  flowed  silently  into 
our  spirits  and  harmonised  aims  and  desires.  There  is  peace  that  comes  from 
submission ;  tranquillity  of  spirit,  which  is  the  crown  and  reward  of  obedience ; 
repose,  which  is  the  very  smile  upon  the  face  of  faith,  and  all  these  things  are 
given  unto  us  along  with  the  grace  and  mercy  of  our  God.  And  as  the  man  that 
possesses  this  is  at  peace  with  God  and  at  peace  with  himself,  so  he  may  bear  in 
his  heart  that  singular  blessing  of  a  perfect  tranquillity  and  quiet  amidst  the  dis- 
tractions of  duty,  of  sorrows,  of  losses,  and  of  cares.  And  now  one  word  as  to 
what  this  great  text  tells  us  are  the  conditions  for  a  Christian  man,  of  preserving, 
vivid  and  full,  these  great  gifts,  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  be  unto  you,"  or,  as  the 
Revised  Version  more  accurately  reads,  "  shall  be  with  us  in  truth  and  love." 
Truth  and  love  are,  as  it  were,  the  space  within  which  the  river  flows,  if  I  may  so 
say,  the  banks  of  the  stream.  Or,  to  get  away  from  the  metaphor,  these  are  set 
forth  as  being  the  conditions  abiding  in  which,  for  our  parts,  we  shall  receive  this 
benediction — "In  truth  and  in  love."  To  "abide  in  the  truth  "is  to  keep  our- 
selves conscientiously  and  habitually  under  the  influence  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 


II.  JOHN.  11 

Christ,  and  of  the  Christ  who  is  Himself  the  Truth.  They  who,  keeping  in  Him, 
realising  His  presence,  believing  His  word,  founding  their  thinking  about  the 
unseen,  about  their  relations  to  God,  about  sin  and  forgiveness,  about  righteousness 
and  duty,  and  about  a  thousand  other  things,  upon  Christ  and  the  revelation  that 
He  makes,  these  are  those  who  shall  receive  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace."  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  I  rejoiced  greatly  that  I  found  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth. — 

The  old  apostle's  chief  joy  : — The  affairs  of  the  soul  are  not  so  entirely  hidden  as 
we  may  sometimes  imagine.  I  do  not  see  the  roots  of  my  plants ;  but  if  they  grow, 
and  are  fragrant,  and  bear  fruit,  I  know  better  than  if  I  could  look  at  them  that  the 
roots  are  thriving.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  tell  whether  a  man  is  walking  or 
standing  still ;  and  agaia,  whether  firmly  or  with  weary  and  fainting  steps ;  and 
again,  in  what  direction.  Walking  in  the  truth  is  that  which  is  expected  of  all 
Christians  ;  yet  it  does  not  so  uniformly  or  so  fully  accompany  a  Christian  profes- 
sion but  that  the  seeing  of  it  and  the  hearing  about  it  cause  lively  joy.  It  brings 
into  the  relations  of  friend  and  friend  the  best  kind  of  gladness  ;  for  friendship  ia 
more  concerned  about  the  inside  than  the  outside,  and  a  good  walk  seen  is  taken  as 
hopeful  evidence  of  a  prosperous  state  within,  sure  to  end  well.  1.  For  one  thing, 
the  life  of  one  who  walks  in  the  truth  will  be  governed  by  Divine  principles.  The 
standard  of  the  new  life  is  fixed  by  God,  not  by  us ;  the  reason  of  it  is  the  will  of 
the  Father,  not  our  will ;  the  strength  to  enter  on  and  to  keep  going  forward  in  it  is 
His  strength,  not  ours.  2.  For  another  thing,  if  a  man  is  walking  in  the  truth,  his 
life  wiU  be  pure  and  consistent.  Veracity  in  speech,  integrity  in  all  dealing  with 
man,  a  sense  of  honour,  are  sure  fruits  of  a  life  governed  by  Christ.  Such  clear, 
sterling  integrity  before  man  is  not  all  by  any  means  that  is  intended  by  "  walking 
in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light,"  but  it  certainly  is  part  of  that.  No ;  not  all. 
For  mark  in  what  terms  John  expounds  to  the  elect  lady  his  conception  of  what 
walking  in  the  truth  means  (vers.  6,  7).  For  a  man  to  have  ascertained  the  due 
balance  of  truth  and  love  in  the  government  of  his  conduct  is  to  have  made  the 
most  important  of  all  discoveries.  Love,  without  the  backbone  of  truth,  is  weakness 
and  sentimentalism.  Truth  wanting  love  is  a  grinning  skeleton,  is  not  true. 
3.  Looking  to  the  case  of  the  elect  lady  we  find,  for  one  thing,  that  walking  in  thetruth 
means  careful  orthodoxy.  4.  For  another  thing,  it  appears  that  walking  in  the  truth 
means  the  maintaining  of  Christian  influences  at  home.  {A.  M.  Symington,  D.D.) 
A  Christian  family : — I.  A  Christian  mother.  1.  A  praying  mother.  Every 
mother  is  a  praying  mother  in  the  sense  of  wishing  well,  or  of  entertaining  some 
hopes  of  the  future  prosperity  of  her  children.  A  truly  praying  mother  is  anxious 
for  the  salvation  of  her  children.  Eichard  Cecil  tried,  when  a  boy,  to  be  an  infidel, 
but  his  mother's  prayers  blocked  the  way.  Garibaldi  never  lost  his  courage  on  the 
field  of  battle,  because  he  saw  his  mother  on  her  knees  praying  for  him.  The  wife 
of  the  late  Eev.  William  Jones,  Castle  Street,  Swansea,  held  a  separate  family  worship 
with  her  children.  A  gentleman  came  one  day  to  see  Mr.  Jones  on  business,  and 
when  he  was  told  by  the  eldest  boy,  who  opened  the  door,  that  his  father  was  from 
home,  he  asked  to  see  Mrs.  Jones.  The  boy  said,  "  You  will  have  to  wait,  sir,  until 
she  finishes  praying  with  the  children."  He  immediately  left  the  room  to  join  the 
little  party.  The  gentleman,  while  alone,  said  to  himself,  "  I  am  the  father  of  six 
children,  and  have  never  offered  a  prayer  with  them."  The  example  of  the  praying 
mother  made  a  new  man  of  him.  2.  An  exemplary  mother.  The  power  of  imita- 
tion is  great  in  children,  and  the  example  sometimes  is  more  powerful  than  prayer. 
Take  a  homely  illustration.  The  hen  has  a  swarm  of  a  dozen  little  ones  hopping 
about  her.  As  she  moves,  how  careful  she  is  in  putting  down  her  foot,  lest  they  be 
trampled  upon.  Unguarded  mothers  stamp  on  their  children  and  crush  the  good 
out  of  them.  3.  A  watchful  mother.  The  young  heart  is  impressible,  and  will  more 
readily  receive  evil  impressions  than  good  ones.  The  Christian  mother  will  not  tolerate 
indulgence  in  sin.  The  "  elect  lady  "  was  the  guardian  angel  of  the  hearts  of  her 
children,  which  she  often  found  "  prone  to  wander  "  from  the  paths  of  truth  and 
virtue.  4.  A  happy  mother.  Agleamof  joy  on  the  countenance,  a  beam  of  hope  in  the 
speech,  and  a  loving  touch  of  the  hand  will  recommend  religion  to  the  child  beyond 
our  expectation.  The  poet  Cowper  said  of  his  mother's  likeness,  "  I  had  rather 
possess  that  picture  than  the  richest  jewel  in  the  British  crown."  Years  never 
effaced  her  love  and  devotion  from  his  heart.  The  "  elect  lady,"  as  we  may  infer 
from  the  following  verses,  had  learnt  that  love  is  the  essence  of  the  gospel.  II.  Thb 
CHILDREN.     1.  They  believed  the  truth.     They  were  converted  children.     There  is 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

here  no  reference  to  natural  beauty  or  grace  of  manner.  There  are  many  attrac- 
tions both  in  the  persons  and  the  lives  of  children.  It  is  a  perpetual  entertainment 
to  live  with  some  children.  But  on  all  points  of  natural  endowment  the  apostle  is 
silent.  Their  spiritual  state  alone  engaged  his  attention.  2.  They  loved  the  truth. 
The  tendrils  of  the  Divine  vine  had  extended  from  the  intellect  to  the  heart.  When 
the  heart  is  won  for  Christ  the  whole  life  will  follow.  3.  They  lived  the  truth. 
The  meaning  of  TrepiTrareaj  in  the  New  Testament  in  reference  to  character  signifies 
"  habit  and  practice."  The  Apostle  John  had  sufficient  evidence  that  the  children 
of  the  "  elect  lady "  were  consistent  followers  of  Christ.  III.  The  religious 
EDUCATION  OF  CHiLDBEN  IS  A  DUTT,  "  as  wc  rcccived  Commandment  from  the 
Father."  It  is  a  very  old  commandment  (Deut.  vi.  6,  7).  {T.  Davies,  M.A.) 
The  right  mother: — My  answer  to  the  question,  "How  I  was  educated,"  ends 
where  it  began.  "  I  had  the  right  mother."  (T.  Dwight,  LL.D.)  A  good 
mother  : — Of  his  mother  the  late  John  Stuart  Blackie  said,  "  My  mother  died  when 
I  was  ten  years  old,  and  I  remember  her  only  as  everything  that  was  womanly 
and  motherly.  I  have  no  doubt  that  I  owe  much  of  what  is  best  in  my  moral  and 
emotional  nature  to  her." 

Ver.  5.  Not  as  though  I  wrote  a  new  commandment. — The  feminine  danger: — 
No  one  was  more  likely  than  a  woman  to  think  that  the  precept  of  loving  was  some- 
thing altogether  different  in  kind  from  the  precepts  of  the  old  law ;  no  one  was 
more  Ukely  to  say,  "  Love  has  nothing  to  do  with  precepts ;  it  springs  up  unbidden 
in  the  heart."  And  no  one  was  more  likely  than  a  woman  to  suffer  from  these  very 
natural  opinions  ;  to  turn  love  into  a  mere  taste  and  sentiment ;  to  suppose  it  had 
its  origin  in  herself,  and  that  its  continuance  might  be  trusted  to  her  strong  feelings ; 
to  separate  it  from  obedience  ;  to  make  it  unpractical ;  so  to  divorce  it  from  self-denial 
and  endurance.  Nothing  would  be  so  fatal  to  aU  that  is  noblest  in  the  female 
character,  to  the  sacrificing  and  persevering  affection  for  which  women  have  been 
80  eminent,  as  this  temper  of  mind.  Nothing,  therefore,  appears  more  entirely 
appropriate  than  the  apostle's  double  admonition,  which  is  enforced  in  the  following 
verse :  "  This  is  love,"  &c.     (F.  B.  Maurice,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  This  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  His  commandments. — Love,  the  prin- 
ciple of  obedience : — I.  Love  ab  the  PBiNcrPLE  of  obedience.  1.  The  excellency 
of  this  principle.  It  renders  obedience.  (1)  Divinely  acceptable.  (2)  Delightfal 
to  ourselves.  "  What  are  the  most  pleasing  actions  you  ever  performed?"  was  a 
question  once  addressed  to  a  man,  and  who  answered,  "  The  services  I  have  per- 
formed for  those  whom  I  love."  (3)  Perpetual.  Christ's  people  are  not  detained 
in  His  service  against  their  will ;  they  are  volunteers,  "  made  willing  in  the  day  of 
His  power."  (4)  Impartial,  (a)  In  avoiding  all  sins.  (5)  In  performing  all  duties. 
2.  How  is  this  love  produced  and  maintained  ?  Power  may  cause  a  man  to  be 
feared  ;  authority,  to  be  reverenced  ;  wealth,  to  be  envied;  learning,  to  be  admired; 
genius,  to  be  praised  ;  but  it  is  only  goodness  that  chains  one  heart  to  another. 
And  this  is  the  grand  and  only  expedient  that  God  has  devised  and  revealed  to 
bring  back  the  minds  of  His  alienated  creatures  to  Himself.  "  Keep  yourselves  in 
the  love  of  God."  II.  Obedience  as  the  fbuit  of  love.  1.  It  is  practical,  con- 
sisting in  nothing  less  than  walking.  In  Scripture  you  will  observe,  that  walking 
never  refers  to  a  single  action,  but  always  to  our  conduct  at  large.  Everything 
else,  however  valuable  in  connection  with  this,  will  be  found  vain  without  it.  Even 
endowments  and  exertion  wiU  not  be  substitutes  for  obedience.  2.  It  is  prescribed. 
Walking  shows  that  religion  is  not  a  speculation,  a  notion,  a  pretence,  for  we  are 
not  merely  to  walk,  but  we  are  to  walk  after  His  commandments — not  after  the 
course  of  this  world — not  according  to  the  lusts  of  men — not  according  to  the 
imagination  of  our  hearts,  but  to  walk  after  His  commandments.  (W.  Jay.) 
Love  the  great  commanding  commandvient : — Love  is  in  the  heart,  "  the  great  com- 
manding commandment,  that  commands  all  other  duties  whatsoever.  It  is  the  first 
wheel  that  turns  the  whole  soul  about."     {R.  Sibbes.) 

Yet.  7.  For  many  deceivers  axe  entered  into  the  world. — The  prevalence  and 
danger  of  negative  error  in  matters  of  faith :  —  I.  The  nature  of  the  ebeob 
denounced.  It  did  not  consist  so  much  in  openly  impugning  the  principles  of  the 
gospel  as  in  "  not  confessing  them."  It  was  insinuated  rather  than  avowed.  II. 
The  tendency  of  the  euror  denounced.  In  temporal  matters,  that  form  of  evil 
which  is  most  injurious  is  not  always  that  which  is  most  so  in  appearance.     "  The 


II.  JOHN.  13 

pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness  "  is  not  less  fatal  than  the  '•  destruction  which 
wasteth  at  noonday."  In  our  religious  concerns  it  is  the  same.  The  description 
•will  apply  to  those  of  the  present  day  who,  without  openly  patronising  Socinianism, 
secretly  advance  it  by  the  systematic  omission  of  the  Scriptural  doctrines  of 
Christ's  deity  and  atonement.  1.  The  relation  which  the  points  omitted  have  to 
the  other  facts  and  doctrines  of  the  Christian  system.  (1)  The  object  of  Christ's 
advent.  (2)  The  tendency  and  results  of  Christ's  advent.  (3)  The  demerit  of  sin. 
(4)  The  love  of  God  in  our  redemption.  (5)  The  motives  of  Christian  obedience. 
2.  The  tendency  which  the  omission  has  to  subvert  the  principles  omitted.  Never 
hearing  any  distinct  ideas  in  regard  to  the  person  and  work  of  the  Redeemer,  the 
people  come  to  regard  them  as  matters  of  "  doubtful  disputation,"  if  not  as  positively 
unscriptural.  Lessons — 1.  Let  this  subject  furnish  a  criterion  of  truth  and  error. 
2.  Let  us  learn  the  danger  of  erroneous  principles  in  matters  of  religion.  3.  Let  ua 
avoid  those  connections  which  would  lead  to  the  adoption  of  erroneous  principles. 
(R.  Brodie,  M.A.)  Warning  against  false  teachers  : — 1.  False  teaching  is  injurious 
to  faith,  especially  the  faith  of  young  Christians.  Gnosticism  is  not  actively 
taught  in  our  day,  but  other  forms  of  evil  teaching  abound.  As  a  system  of 
ethics,  they  say,  the  gospel  is  the  best  which  has  reached  us  from  ancient  times, 
but  its  miracles  are  legendary.  We  ask — Are  not  the  Incarnation  and  the  Resur- 
rection the  two  piUars  on  which  the  whole  fabric  rests  ?  How  much  of  the  litera- 
ture of  the  New  Testament  wiU  remain  after  the  removal  of  these  pillars  ?  Some 
would  say  that  it  matters  not  what  our  sons  and  daughters  believe,  so  long  as 
their  character  is  good.  But  does  not  belief  shape  character  ?  Character  is  built 
on  the  great  principles  of  the  gospel,  and  our  whole  energy  is  required  to  complete 
it.  2.  The  great  fact  which  is  fundamental  to  the  gospel,  and  animates  the  faith 
of  the  believer,  is  that  "  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh."  The  very  mystery 
which  envelops  the  fact  stamps  it  with  Divinity.  That  one  of  the  gods  should 
descend  from  heaven,  become  incarnate,  and  bear  universal  sway,  was  a  thought 
and  a  desire  which  haunted  the  ancients.  Their  philosophers,  thinkers,  and  poets 
felt  the  need  of  a  restorer  of  purity,  prosperity,  and  joy  to  the  human  race.  The 
best  of  mortals  had  failed  in  the  attempt  to  do  so,  and  the  gods  were  too  far  off, 
and  too  unsympathetic,  to  undertake  the  task.  Some  one  of  heavenly  birth  must 
come,  and  He  came,  who  would  unite  in  Himself  power,  wisdom,  love,  goodness, 
holiness,  and  method,  at  once  both  Divine  and  human.  This  regulating  thought 
is  also  the  all-animating  thought  of  faith.  3.  To  profess  this  truth  is  both  a  duty 
and  a  privilege.  The  verb  oixoXoykw,  to  speak  the  same  language,  suggests  a 
beautiful  thought  in  this  connection.  The  "  elect  lady"  had  taught  her  sons  the 
language  of  Bethlehem,  Bethany,  and  the  Cross.  The  deceivers  did  not  speak  that 
spiritual  language.  There  was  an  imminent  danger  lest  the  children  might  pick 
up  their  shibboleth.  For  is  it  not  the  case  that  we  are  influenced  by  the  words 
we  speak?  (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  The  ingratitude  of  deceivers: — The  VolucellsB 
have  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  humble  bee.  Certain  kinds  make  use  and  abuse 
of  this  resemblance  to  introduce  themselves  fraudulently  into  its  nests,  and  to 
deposit  their  eggs  therein.  When  these  eggs  have  hatched,  the  larvae,  which  have 
two  mandibles,  devour  the  larvae  of  their  hosts  the  bees.  This  is  the  return  they 
make  for  the  hospitality  they  have  received.     {Scientific  Illustrations.) 

Ver.  8.  Look  to  yourselves. — Self-inspection : — I.  Look  to  your  cbeed,  whether 
rr  BE  SCRIPTURAL.  We  know  too  well  there  may  be  a  scriptural  creed  without 
real  piety ;  but  it  does  not  appear  how  there  can  be  the  latter  where  faith  in  the 
gospel  is  entirely  wanting.  Every  one  that  impartially  reads  the  Scriptures  must 
see  how  decidedly  they  speak  of  the  really  Divine  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  of  the  cause  and  design  of  those  sufferings  which  He  endured  in  our 
world  ;  also  the  weight  and  value  that  are  attached  to  those  subjects,  and  our 
reception  in  a  believing  manner  of  .those  Divine  representations.  H.  Look  to  youb 
STATE,  WHETHER  IT  BE  ONE  OF  CONVERSION  TO  GoD.  Howcver  excellent  religion  is  in 
theory,  its  theory  is  insufficient  for  your  salvation.  An  artificial  flower  may 
strikingly  resemble  a  natural  one,  but  a  nearer  inspection  will  detect  the  difference. 
The  delicate  tints  and  scents  of  nature  cannot  be  supplied  by  the  most  practised 
hand  in  art,  so  as  long  to  deceive.  The  difference  between  a  mere  nominal  and  a 
real  Christian  is  immense.  But  immense  as  it  is,  it  cannot  be  detected  but  by 
examination ;  and  that  examination  must  be  by  yourself.  What  are  you  to 
examine  ?  "  Look  to  yourselves,"  to  see  whether  you  are  born  again  ?  If  there  be 
the  new  birth,  there  will  be  spiritual  life  in  the  soul.     If  there  be  life  there  will 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

be  spiritual  feelings.  You  feel  that  you  have  a  soul  to  be  saved  or  lost  for  ever, 
and  you  are  anxious  to  be  instructed  in  the  will  of  God,  to  cease  to  be  what  is 
wrong,  and  to  become  all  that  is  right.  And  do  you  feel  sin  to  be  a  burden  ?  Souls 
bom  again  do.  "  Look  to  yourselves  "  and  see  whether  you  do.  What  thoughts 
and  feelings  have  you  concerning  Christ?  We  read,  "To  them  that  believe  He  is 
precious."  And  not  less  necessary  is  it  that  you  look  to  your  temper  and  walk. 
Everything  in  its  proper  place.  The  cause  of  our  justification  before  God  is  not 
in  our  own  goodness,  but  if  grace  does  not  infuse  its  goodness  into  us,  we  are  not 
Christians.  III.  In  case  you  are  compelled  to  come  to  a  conclusion  unfavour- 
able TO  your  present  condition,  "  look  to  yourselves  "  WITH  APPREHENSION.  Are 
you  satisfied  to  be  irreligious  because  others  are?  Will  it  be  any  palliation  of 
your  guilt,  or  diminution  of  your  final  misery,  to  be  lost  with  the  multitude? 
Begin  at  once  to  "look  to  yourselves" — to  look  to  your  souls.  (T.  Pinchback.) 
Danger  of  inattention : — "  Her  pilot  was  asleep  below  "  is  given  as  the  simple  and 
sufiicient  explanation  of  the  disaster  that  happened  to  the  steamer  Montana, 
which  was  grounded  and  wrecked  upoh  a  rock  off  the  English  coast.  Of  how 
many  shipwrecked  souls  might  the  same  thing  be  said,  "  The  pilot  was  asleep 
below."  The  duty  of  self-inspection : — It  will  not  do  for  the  sailor,  however  many 
dangers  he  may  have  passed  safely  through,  or  however  far  he  may  have  advanced 
upon  the  voyage,  to  become  unwatchful.  While  he  is  upon  the  sea  he  is  in  peril. 
So  is  it  with  the  Christian,  who  is  called  so  to  pass  through  the  waves  of  this 
troublesome  world.  It  will  not  do  for  him  to  furl  his  sails,  to  neglect  his  compass, 
or  to  drop  his  hold  upon  the  helm.  I.  "  Look  to  yourselves."  There  is  a  looking 
to  ourselves  that  is  wrong,  which  we  are  to  be  careful  to  avoid,  and  which  we  are 
bound  to  overcome.  Selfishness — the  looking  to  ourselves,  keeping  always  in  view 
what  we  think  is  for  our  own  personal  interest  or  advantage — is  one  of  the  surest 
signs  of  a  worldly  and  unbelieving  mind.  There  is  also  a  looking  to  ourselves  in 
carnal  confidence — putting  confidence  in  our  own  goodness.  What,  then,  are  we 
to  understand  by  "looking  to  ourselves?"  When  a  man  is  going  upon  a 
dangerous  journey,  in  which  he  may  be  very  apt  to  make  a  false  step  or  a  slip — 
and  that  slip  may  cost  him  his  life — you  would  naturally  say  to  him,  "  Look  to 
yourself."  "  Do  not,"  you  would  say,  "  let  your  attention  be  distracted,  or  taken 
up  by  the  things  you  see  upon  the  road ;  do  not  let  anything  carry  you  out  of 
your  way,  but  '  look  to  yourself ' ;  see  that  you  are  going  right,  see  that  you  do 
not  get  betrayed  into  an  unexpected  snare,  where  you  may  lose  yourself."  Pay 
perpetual  attention  to  the  motives  by  which  you  are  governed — to  the  ends  you 
have  in  view,  to  the  plans  you  are  laying — see  that  they  are  all  in  accordance  with 
God's  truth  and  will ;  see  that  they  are  such  as  become  the  disciples  of  Christ ; 
see  that  you  are  "  walking  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  you  are  called."  Do 
not  suppose  it  is  all  right  with  you,  because  you  are  comfortable  and  at  ease,  but 
suspect  yourselves.  We  look  at  others  often  when  we  are  hearing  God's  Word,  and 
think  how  suitable  the  word  is  to  such  and  such  an  individual,  and  how  exactly  it 
fits  the  case  of  another.  But  are  we  looking  to  ourselves  ?  II.  Note  how  beauti- 
fully this  venerable  and  ripened  servant  of  God,  who  stood  prominent  among  the 
twelve,  and  who  was  now,  we  have  every  reason  to  suppose,  a  hoary-headed  soldier 
in  the  army  of  Christ ;  look  how  he,  with  all  humility,  brings  in  himself ;  how 
he  slips  out  of  the  address  to  others  into  an  address  that  includes  himself.  At 
first  he  says,  "  Look  to  yourselves  " ;  but  he  adds,  "  that  we  lose  not  the  things 
which  we  have  wrought."  What  are  we  to  understand  by  "  the  things  which  we 
have  wrought "  ?  and  what  by  "  losing  those  things  which  we  have  wrought  "  ?  By 
"  those  things  which  we  have  wrought "  is  meant  that  work  which  through  God's 
grace  has  been  accomplished  in  us  and  by  us,  in  the  times  that  are  gone  past.  Is 
there  any  Christian  that  has  not  a  recollection  of  this?  Yet  all  need  to  have 
their  recollection  revived  and  refreshed.  To  look  back  upon  your  high  privileges : 
you  have  been  taught  from  your  earliest  days  that  you  ought  to  be  "  born  again"; 
you  can  recollect  when  God  led  you  to  know  and  see  the  way  of  reconciliation  for 
your  sin,  and  to  find  your  peace  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ  your  Saviour. 
What  holy  thankfulness  !  What  fervour  of  first  love  filled  your  hearts  I  You  can 
recollect  how  careful  and  anxious  you  were  not  to  offend — how  you  studied  to 
know  the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  Consider  the  things  that  you  wrought  in 
former  days.  Where  are  they  now?  Are  they  still  with  you,  or  have  they  passed 
away  ?  They  may  be  lost.  Can  any  man  in  a  world  like  ours,  with  a  mind  hke 
ours,  and  Satan's  machinations  ever  against  him,  decline  he  is  not  in  danger  "of 
losing  what  he  hath  wrought"?     III.  And  let  us  take  heed  for  others,  because  if 


II.  JOHN.  15 

we  lose  the  "  things  which  we  have  wrought "  we  shall  also  fail  in  the  "  recompense 
of  the  reward."  "  That  we  receive  a  full  reward."  It  is  called  a  reward  in  this 
sense  because,  though  it  is  the  free  gift  of  God,  it  pleased  God  to  ordain  that  in 
this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come  it  should  be  proportionate  to  a  man's  diligence, 
and  to  the  fruits  he  brings  forth.  We  are  judged  solely  with  regard  to  our  works ; 
and  the  measure  of  our  fidehty  will  be  the  measure  of  our  "  recompense  of 
reward."  And  this  is  true  in  this  present  world.  "  Every  one  that  hath,"  says 
Christ,  "  is  to  make  more  of  the  talent  that  is  given  to  him,  whether  it  be  money 
or  diligence,  and  he  shall  have  more."  "  He  that  is  a  righteous  man  shall  hold  on 
his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  wax  stronger  and  stronger."  Such  an 
one  "  shall  be  as  a  shining  light  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day." 
What  a  sad  thing  to  have  laboured  in  vain !  What  a  sad  thing  for  the  Christian  to 
lose  the  ground  he  has  gained  !  Just  as  in  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  where  the 
traveller  Zion-ward  is  toiling  up  the  hill  to  reach  the  City  of  Life.  With  many  a 
weary  step  and  many  a  straining  muscle  he  has  reached  high  upon  the  hill ;  but 
becoming  weary  or  languid,  or  amusing  himself  with  the  landscape  around  him,  or 
beguiled  by  the  conversation  of  his  fellow-pilgrims,  or  looking  anxiously  back  at 
something  left  behind  at  the  bottom  of  the  mountain,  he  begins  to  sUp  back- 
wards —  he  slips  backwards  unawares,  step  by  step,  till  he  finds  himself  not 
midway  but  wholly  down  at  the  bottom  where  he  started  from.  What  a  sad 
and  bitter  thought — "I  have  lost  all!  I  had  just  got  up  high;  I  have  to  go 
through  all  the  mire  and  dust  again  1  I  have  to  begin  again  !  "  "  Wherefore  the 
rather,  give  dihgence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure,"  and  do  not  lose  the 
things  which  you  have  wrought ;  but  rather  go  on  from  grace  to  grace  and  from 
strength  to  strength.  {H.  Stoiuell,  M.A.)  Look  to  self: — In  the  text  itself  we 
have  two  general  parts  considerable.  First,  the  caution  propounded.  Secondly, 
the  argument  whereupon  the  caution  is  urged,  or  the  matter  wherein  to  be 
exercised.  We  begin  with  the  first,  the  caution  in  its  general  and  indefinite  pro- 
position, "Look  to  yourselves."  This  is  that  which  belongs  to  all  Christians.  The 
ground  hereof  is  this  : — First,  the  danger  which  they  are  exposed  to,  and  the 
assaults  which  are  upon  them.  Those  which  are  subject  to  very  much  hazard,  they 
had  need  to  take  very  much  heed.  St.  John  before  said,  "  that  there  were  many 
deceivers  entered  into  the  world  " ;  adds  presently,  "  Look  to  yourselves,"  as  a 
caution  very  fitly  consequent  upon  that  intimation ;  where  there  are  cheaters  and 
cutpurses  in  the  crowd  people  have  need  to  look  to  their  pockets.  Secondly,  aa 
there  are  assaults  upon  them,  so  themselves  without  better  heed  are  too  apt  to  be 
overtaken  with  them.  There  is  not  more  deceitfulness  and  malice  in  Satan  and 
his  instruments  than  there  is  likewise  naturally  in  our  own  hearts  to  yield  and 
comply  with  them  ;  therefore  we  had  need  to  look  to  ourselves.  As  it  is  in  matter 
of  the  body,  where  people  are  more  apt  to  take  such  infection  or  contagion  in  them, 
they  conceive  it  does  more  concern  them  to  be  more  heedful  and  regardful  of  their 
health;  even  so  it  is  here.  We  are  ready  ever  to  comply  with  every  evil  sugges- 
tion and  temptation  which  is  administered  unto  us  ;  we  are  like  dry  tinder  to  these 
sparks  which  are  struck  upon  us,  which  is  the  difference  betwixt  us  and  Christ. 
Thirdly,  add  also  hereunto  the  grievousness  of  the  miscarriage.  The  Apostle  John 
does  in  this  case  with  these  believers  as  some  physician  would  do  with  his 
patient ;  who,  when  he  has  done  all  for  him  that  belongs  to  him  and  lies  in  his 
power,  bids  him  now  to  beware  and  take  care  of  his  own  health  and  to  look  to 
himself,  and  accordingly  it  behoves  all  Christians  so  to  do.  And  that  for  this 
reason  especially,  forasmuch  as  they  may  not  always  have  other  helps  near  unto 
them.  This  caution  here  of  the  apostle  was  not  a  word  of  negligence,  but  rather 
of  prudent  forecast  for  them.  He  had  done  his  part  already  with  them,  and  now 
does  but  provoke  them  to  make  good  use  of  what  they  heard  from  him  and  to  put 
those  his  doctrines  into  practice.  I  might  here  also  further  seasonably  observe, 
that  God  will  make  use  of  ourselves  in  our  passage  to  heaven.  The  second  is  the 
AEGUMENT  or  matter  which  it  is  conversant  about,  which  is  laid  down  two  manner 
of  ways : — First,  in  the  negative,  "  That  ye  love  not,"  &c. ;  and  secondly,  in  the 
affirmative,  "  But  that  we  receive  a  full  reward."  We  begin  with  the  first,  the 
negative,  "  That  ye  love  not,"  &c.  Some  copies  read,  "  That  we  love  not,"  &c.  We 
may  understand  it  of  either.  First,  "  That  ye  love  not,"  &c.  People  have  cause 
to  look  to  it  that  they  do  not  frustrate  the  labours  of  the  ministers  by  losing  those 
doctrines  and  instructions  which  are  tendered  unto  them.  First,  that  we  may  not 
lose  things  out  of  our  memory.  Secondly,  meditation,  that  is  also  a  good  conduce 
ment  hereunto.     Thirdly,  conference  and  holy  communion.     This  does  imprint 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

them  more  (Deut.  vi.  7).  Lastly,  practice  and  conscientious  improvement.  There 
is  no  such  way  for  us  to  remember  any  doctrine  as  to  draw  it  forth  into  exercise, 
which  is  the  truest  memory  of  all.  That  is  the  first  particular  in  which  we  are  to 
take  heed  of  losing,  viz.,  in  regard  of  memory.  The  second  is  in  regard  of  judg- 
ment. Then  we  are  said  to  lose  any  doctrine  when  we  alter  our  opinion  of  it,  and 
so  let  it  go  from  us.  Thirdly,  in  regard  of  affection.  Take  heed  ye  lose  not 
herein  neither.  Now  therefore  let  us  be  careful  to  put  this  caution  in  practise ; 
losses  are  for  the  most  part  unacceptable.  We  see  in  matters  of  the  world  how  men 
do  not  love  to  lose  anything ;  if  they  do,  it  is  very  grievous  to  them.  And  how  much 
more  does  it  then  concern  them  to  avoid  it,  and  shun  it  all  they  can  in  such  things 
as  these  are,  which  are  of  such  weighty  importance.  Like  some  young  scholars 
that  lose  more  in  a  breaking  up  than  they  get  in  many  weeks'  schooling  and  learn- 
ing besides.  I  would  not  it  should  be  so  with  you  ;  I  warn  you  of  it.  There  are 
divers  ways  of  losing  in  other  things,  as  well  as  this,  which  accordingly  are  now  to 
be  avoided  by  you.  First,  by  fraud  and  circumvention.  Secondly,  there  is  loss 
also  by  force  and  open  violence.  Thirdly,  by  mere  carelessness  and  neglect. 
There  is  many  a  jewel  which  is  lost  thus  for  want  of  due  and  proportionable  care 
in  him  that  has  it.  But  then  further,  take  it  in  reference  to  their  own  works, 
"  that  ye  lose  not  the  things  which  ye  have  wrought."  The  apostle,  as  he  would 
not  have  them  to  frustrate  his  labours  towards  them,  so  neither  their  own  labours 
to  themselves.  And  so  it  is  an  exhortation  to  constancy.  First,  they  lose  their 
labour,  and  there  is  a  great  matter  in  that.  Secondly,  they  lose  that  expediteness 
and  facility  of  doing  good,  or  of  resisting  evil.  Thirdly,  take  it  as  to  the  reward  ; 
they  are  losers  of  what  they  have  wrought  as  to  this  likewise.  If  a  man  will  watch 
his  house,  how  much  more  should  he  watch  his  soul  ?  Now  further,  secondly, 
take  it  in  the  first  as  it  is  here  in  our  own  textual  translation,  "  That  we  lose  not 
what  we  have  wrought."  First,  I  say,  the  heedlessness  of  people  frustrates  the 
labours  of  their  ministers ;  it  makes  them  lose  the  things  which  they  have  wrought. 
Now  secondly,  for  what  also  is  expressed,  that  ministers  are  justly  very  tender  of 
the  frustrating  of  their  labours.  First,  the  Person  they  work  from,  and  that  is 
God  Himself.  The  miscarriages  of  the  ministry  redound  to  the  dishonour  of  God. 
Secondly,  the  persons  they  work  for,  and  that  is  the  church  and  people  of  God 
(Eph.  iv.  12).  "They  watch  for  your  souls"  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  They  would  not 
lose  their  work  in  reference  to  those  they  work  for.  Thirdly,  for  the  work  itself, 
and  that  in  sundry  respects.  First,  the  labour  of  it ;  it  is  a  painful  work,  and  there- 
fore is  it  so  often  in  Scripture  set  forth  by  such  an  expression.  The  more  pains 
that  any  man  takes  the  less  willing  is  he  to  lose  it.  Secondly,  the  dignity  of  it ; 
there  is  somewhat  also  in  that.  Men  may  take  pains  in  a  thing  of  nought.  To 
lose  such  a  work  as  this  is,  the  work  of  the  ministry,  this  is  no  ordinary  business, 
nor  so  to  be  accounted.  Thirdly,  add  to  this  the  extent  of  it,  and  that  which  goes 
along  with  it,  for  if  we  lose  our  work  there  is  somewhat  more  lost  besides  that, 
as  is  implied  afterwards ;  and  that  is  of  yourselves,  "  it  is  unprofitable  for  you  " 
(Heb.  xiii.  17).  And  the  rather  upon  this  added  still  to  it,  that  it  is  irrecoverable, 
for  BO  it  is.  If  the  work  of  the  ministry  take  not  there  is  nothing  hereafter  to  be 
expected.  The  second  is  the  affirmative,  "  But  that  ye,  or  we,  receive  a  full  reward." 
Here  is  another  piece  of  a  motive  why  believers  should  "  look  to  themselves,"  not 
only  that  they  might  not  lose,  but  that  moreover  they  might  gain  and  their  teachers 
gain  with  them.  We  will  take  notice  of  both.  First,  take  it  as  to  themselves, 
"  that  ye  may  receive  a  full  reward."  It  is  true  indeed  we  have  other  things  to 
move  us,  even  the  excellency  which  is  in  goodness  itself,  and  that  example 
which  we  have  of  it  in  God  and  regard  to  Him,  that  requires  it  of  us.  But  yet 
moreover  we  may  take  in  this  with  it,  that  recompense  which  it  brings  in  vnth  it 
in  a  better  world.  Secondly,  observe  this,  that  perseverance  in  goodness  hath  its 
reward  belonging  to  it  (Gal.  vi.  9).  There  is  no  man  serves  God  for  nought  who 
is  a  free  and  bountiful  pay-master.  When  we  hear  of  reward  we  may  not  dream 
of  merit.  But,  thirdly,  here  is  the  word  of  amplification,  a  full  reward.  First, 
take  it  denominatively  as  a  description  of  heaven  and  the  condition  of  glory  to 
come,  it  is  a  full  reward — it  is  that  which  will  make  sufficient  recompense.  First, 
a  fulness  of  sufficiency.  There  is  nothing  which  is  in  any  way  desirable  but  it  is 
to  be  found  in  this  reward.  Take  the  best  things  of  this  life  and  they  have  an 
emptiness ;  they  are  not  sufficient,  there  is  a  great  deal  wanting  in  them.  Secondly, 
a  fulness  of  expectation.  Whatever  can  be  looked  for  shall  be  enjoyed.  Thirdly, 
a  fulness  of  compensation.  Here  is  in  this  reward  that  which  makes  amends  for 
all  which  has  been  undergone  in  reference  to  it.     The  wages  is  not  here  short  of 


11.  JOHN.  17 

the  work,  but  infinitely  transcendent.  This  shows  the  fondness  and  vanity  of  those 
therefore  which  will  deprive  themselves  of  it ;  seeing  it  is  a  full  reward,  who  would 
then  not  be  partaker  of  it,  and  especially  lose  it  for  the  want  of  a  Uttle  care  and 
heedfuhiess  about  it  ?  Secondly,  it  is  called  so  emphatically,  as  implying  that 
there  is  a  reward  which  is  not  fuU  belonging  to  those  which  are  inconstant,  and 
declining  in  religion.  Now,  further,  secondly,  as  they  refer  to  the  apostles  and  other 
ministers,  "that  we  may  receive  a  full  reward."  This  reward  was  not  temporal, 
and  from  them  which  he  did  not  so  much  look  at ;  but  from  God,  a  reward  in 
heaven.  The  apostle  did  hereby  imply  that  these  Christians,  if  they  were  careless, 
would  be  apt  to  deprive  him  of  this.  What  is  that  ?  namely,  of  joy  and  rejoicing. 
Ministers,  when  people  miscarry  under  their  hands,  they  will  miss  of  this,  though 
not  of  their  glory.  And  this  the  apostle  signifies  there  in  that  place  (Heb.  xiii.  17). 
That  we  may  do  with  joy  and  not  with  grief.      (T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Self-pre- 

tervation : — 1.  Look  to  yourselves,  that  ye  lose  not  those  gracious  principles 
which  seemed  to  be  planted  in  your  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (Heb.  ii.  1 ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  1 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  1).  2.  Look  to  yourselves,  that  ye  lose  not  those  vivid  and 
vigorous  impressions  of  Divine  truth,  which  marked  the  early  part  of  your  Chris- 
tian career.  3.  Look  to  yoarselves,  that  ye  lose  not  the  spirit  of  secret  prayer,  and 
proper  seasons  for  attending  to  it.  The  lifeless  performance  of  this  duty  is 
generally  the  forerunner  of  open  sin  or  absolute  apostasy  (Jude  20).  4.  Look  to 
yourselves,  that  ye  lose  not  your  taste  for  domestic  duties,  and  your  reUsh  for  the 
public  ordinances  of  the  gospel.  5.  Look  to  yourselves  that  ye  lose  not  the  power 
and  practical  influence  of  the  gospel  upon  your  hearts  and  lives.  6.  Look  to  your- 
selves that  ye  lose  not  a  good  conscience,  the  favour  of  God,  the  affections  of  His 
people,  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  and  the  eternal  salvation  of  your  souls.  (The 
Christian  Herald.)  Looking  after  one's  own  interest : — This  is  a  glorious  subject! 
Looking  after  our  own  interest ;  looking  after  Number  One !  It  is  a  motto  most  men 
believe  in.  Never  mind  about  anybody  else,  at  any  rate  till  your  own  turn  is  served. 
"  Men  will  praise  thee  when  thou  doest  well  to  thyself."  What  will  God  do  ?  Lot  was 
a  man  who  believed  in  looking  after  himself.  His  uncle  Abraham  and  himself  were 
large  farmers,  their  herds  pasturing  together.  The  grass  and  water  supply  was 
scarcely  sufficient  for  all,  and  as  a  result  there  were  frequent  quarrels  between  their 
herdmen.  What  was  the  result  of  Lot's  seK-care  ?  It  left  him  poor  indeed ;  his 
property  was  burnt  in  Sodom  ;  his  wife  became  a  pillar  of  salt  upon  the  plain  1 
Gehazi  was  another  man  who  believed  in  looking  after  his  own  interest.  A  lie  is 
soon  framed,  carried  out ;  Gehazi  is  enriched,  and  his  spoil  safely  under  lock  and 
key.  What  then  ?  Judas  also  firmly  believed  in  looking  after  Number  One.  The 
rich  farmer  held  the  same  doctrine  about  self-care.  They  were  his  grounds  that 
brought  forth  so  plentifully.  Dives  quite  believed  in  taking  every  care  of  himself. 
Listen  to  what  Jesus  Christ  will  one  day  say  to  men  who  have  done  nothing  but 
study  their  own  interest — "  I  was  hungry,  ye  gave  Me  no  meat,"  &c.  Eemember 
Jesus  Christ,  our  great  Example,  came  not  to  study  His  own  interest,  but  to 
minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.  1.  Christian  men,  look  to  your- 
selves. See  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  your  high  vocation,  as  becometh  sons  of  God ; 
that  ye  let  your  light  shine  before  men ;  that  ye  obey  Jesus  Chi'ist's  commandments. 
2.  Unconverted  men,  look  to  yourselves.  You  have  a  priceless  treasure ;  your  soul. 
"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own 
soul  ?  "  Your  body  and  its  interests,  what  you  call  Number  One,  is  really  Number 
Two :  the  soul  is  most  important.  It  may  be,  you  have  insured  your  house,  and 
your  life,  against  fire,  accident,  or  death.  What  have  you  done  for  your  soul? 
Look  to  yourselves.  (1)  You  have  tremendous  responsibiUties.  God  has  given  His 
Son  to  die  for  you.  Look  to  yourselves.  (2)  You  are  running  terrible  risk  out  of 
Christ.  Life  is  uncertain ;  with  it  ends  the  day  of  grace.  Look  to  yourselves. 
(3)  Don't  expect  that  some  day  some  extraordinary  influence  will  be  brought  to 
bear  upon  you,  and  that  you  wUl  be  suddenly  anxious  for  salvation.  (G.  B. 
Foster.)  Concerning  spiritual  property  : — Persecution  had   to   a    large   extent 

ceased  at  the  time  when  this  Epistle  was  written,  but  a  far  more  dangerous 
form  was  assumed,  viz.,  the  preaching  of  false  doctrines.  The  difference  is  that 
between  open  violence  and  stealth.  The  banditti  storm  the  dwelling,  and  if  the 
tenant  is  able  to  show  any  resistance  he  is  at  liberty  to  do  so  ;  but  the  thief  creeps 
in  silently  into  the  house,  and  while  the  inmates  sleep  peaceably  he  steals  all  their 
valuables.  I.  Protect  the  good  which  is  in  tou,  "  That  ye  lose  not  the  things 
which  we  wrought."  The  Churches — we  seem  much  more  anxious  to  make  converts 
than  to  retain  them.    1.  Remember  the  services  of  others,    in  the  mansion  you  will 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

see  some  old  pictures  of  no  great  artistic  value,  and  others  of  value  but  not  of  a 
iinodem  style.  You  say,  "  These  are  old,  valuable  heirlooms  of  the  family." 
ISacred  memories  cluster  around  them.  They  speak  of  old  times.  These  old 
ipictures  look  at  you  from  their  elevated  stations  on  the  wall  and  say,  "  See  that 
lye  lose  none  of  the  inheritance  which  your  noble  ancestors  have  gained  for  you." 
The  "  elect  lady "  alone  knew  the  significance  of  the  words  "  which  we  have 
■wrought."  Did  he  not  use  all  the  persuasion  of  his  soul  to  lead  her  and  her 
children  to  the  truth  ?  2.  Exercise,  watchfulness,  and  prayer.  Even  the  valuable 
old  pictures  will  decay  unless  they  are  protected  from  the  ravages  of  time.  Hold 
the  fort  of  truth,  and  defend  the  citadel  of  faith.  Remember  that  there  are 
enemies  ready  to  despoil  you  of  your  precious  experience.  3.  Guard  the  entrances. 
There  is  danger  within  as  well  as  without.  II.  Expect  the  rewakd  which  is 
BEFORE  you.  There  is  a  present  reward  in  any  Christian  act.  Full  reward  here- 
after. (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  That  we  lose  not  those  things  which  we  have  wroug'ht. 
— The  wrought  work  of  the  Divine  Spirit  within  the  soul. — I.  The  wrought  work 
OF  OUR  SPIRITUAL  STATE.  (1)  The  wrought  work  of  God.  That  we  are  what  we 
are  is  due  to  the  working  of  the  Eternal  Father  in  all  His  providential  ruling, 
and  of  the  Divine  Son  in  His  special  redemptive  work  in  this  world :  but  more 
particularly  to  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  His  direct  and  immediate  action 
on  the  heart.  If  there  be  lines  of  beauty,  tracings  of  truth  on  the  tablet  of  our 
soul,  it  is  because  we  bear  within  the  imprint  of  His  gentle  but  mighty  hand. 
(2)  The  wrought  work  of  the  Christian  minister.  Probably  John  wrote,  "  The 
things  which  we  have  wrought."  So  far  as  the  truth  which  is  held  in  their 
minds,  and  the  convictions  which  stir  their  conscience,  and  the  principles  which 
rule  their  life,  are  due  to  the  fidelity  of  the  minister  of  Christ,  to  that  extent  their 
spiritual  state  is  the  wrought  work  of  the  Christian  teacher.  (3)  The  wrought 
work  of  the  soul  itself.  Paul  speaks  (Gal.  vi.  3)  of  a  man's  character  as  being 
his  "  own  work."  We  have  thought  seriously,  felt  deeply,  prayed  earnestly, 
resolved  strenuously,  chosen  deliberately,  wrestled  manfully,  persisted  patiently. 
Our  spiritual  condition  is  the  outcome  of  much  expenditure  of  our  own  vital 
energy.  II.  Its  possible  effacement.  Can  these  lines  of  heavenly  beauty  and 
Divine  truth,  traced  by  the  finger  of  God,  be  so  crossed  and  counter-marked  as  to 
present  nothing  but  a  mass  of  senseless  hieroglyphs  ?  To  this  question  we  give — 
'  1)  The  answer  of  a  very  sensible  philosophy.  In  theory  it  certainly  may  be  so. 
The  waters  wear  the  stones — not  only  the  lashings  of  the  mighty  and  furious 
waves  of  the  Atlantic  flinging  themselves  on  the  rock,  but  the  nearly  noiseless  drip 
of  a  single  drop  falling  on  the  slab  of  stone  below.  And  surely  the  powerful 
forces  of  evil  companionship,  of  frivolous  or  sceptical  literature,  of  unwise  self- 
indulgence,  of  excessive  pleasure-seeking,  acting  daily,  hourly,  on  the  sensitive 
responsive  spirit,  will  wear  the  soul  and  disfigure  it.  (2)  The  answer  of  a  too 
common  experience  ;  in  fact  it  often  is  so.  III.  Our  practical  wisdom  m  beoard 
10  it.  We  had  better  (1)  own  to  ourselves  how  disastrous  would  be  the  entire  loss 
of  it.  What  other  loss  will  compare  with  this  ?  (2)  Count  the  cost  of  a  partial  loss 
of  it.  If  we  do  not  heed  there  will  be  those  who  will  fail  to  attain  a  "  full 
reward."  These  may  be  the  ministers  who  wiU  miss  something  of  the  blessedness 
that  would  be  theirs  if  their  converts  were  presented  complete  in  Him  ;  or  they  may 
be  our  own  spirits,  for  there  will  be  those  who  will  rule  over  a  few  cities  that  might 
have  ruled  over  many,  who  will  be  saved  as  by  fire  instead  of  having  the  "  abun- 
dant entrance."  (3)  Take  the  most  vigorous  measures  against  spiritual  loss.  (W, 
Clarkson,  B.A.) 

Yer.  9.  Whosoever  transgresseth,  and  abldeth  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ — 
The  doctrine  of  Christ : — The  words  "doctrine  of  Christ"  may  signify  either  thai 
doctrine  which  Christ  taught  when  He  was  here  on  earth,  or  that  doctrine  of 
which  Christ  is  the  subject — the  doctrine  which  sets  forth  the  truth  concerning 
Him.  I  believe  it  is  in  the  latter  sense  that  the  phrase  is  used  here.  By 
"doctrine"  here  we  are  not  to  understand  what  that  term  commonly  means  as 
used  in  the  present  day,  viz.,  a  dogmatic  or  speculative  affirmation  of  truth.  The 
original  word  means  simply  teaching,  and  it  embraces  all  kinds  and  matters  of 
teaching — the  assertion  of  facts,  the  elucidation  of  beliefs,  as  well  as  the  affirmation 
and  proof  of  dogmatic  propositions.  The  doctrine  of  or  concerning  Christ,  then, 
here  referred  to,  is  the  whole  body  of  truth  made  known  to  us  by  Christ  and  His 
apostles  concerning  Him.  Now,  you  will  observe  that  to  this  the  apostle  here 
assigns  a  supremely  important  place.    A  real  religion  must  have  a  basis  in  real 


II.  JOHN.  19 

beliefs.  As  a  fountain  which  is  itself  poisoned  will  not  send  forth  waters  that  are 
wholesome,  as  little  will  beliefs  that  are  false  or  erroneous  conduct  to  a  religion 
that  is  true  and  beneficent.  From  this  it  follows  that,  as  Christianity  is  offered  to 
men  as  the  only  true  religion,  its  teachers  are  shut  up  to  the  necessity  of  requiring 
the  belief  of  the  facts  and  truths  upon  which  it  is  founded  as  the  indispensable 
condition  of  a  man's  receiving  the  benefits  of  this  religion  or  being  recognised  as  a 
true  professor  of  it.  "  Whosoever  transgresseth,  and  abideth  not  in  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  hath  not  God."  The  apostle  regards  the  doctrine  of  Christ  as  coming  to  us 
under  Divine  authority,  as  a  command  to  which  we  are  bound  to  submit,  and  con- 
sequently he  speaks  of  all  departures  from  the  truth  thus  binding  on  us  as 
"transgressions."  I.  The  grand  fundamental  fact  of  Christianity  is  the  incab- 
NATioN,  the  assumption  by  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity  of  human  nature  into 
personal  union  with  the  Divine,  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  flesh  of  man. 
This  is  a  great  mystery  which  we  cannot  comprehend  or  explain.  The  fact  tran- 
scends human  reason,  and  therefore  never  could  have  been  discovered  by  human 
reason,  which  can  no  more  rise  above  itself  than  the  eagle  can  outsoar  the  atmo- 
sphere in  which  it  floats.  But,  though  reason  cannot  discover  this,  the  history  of 
man's  efforts  after  a  religion  give  ample  proof  that  this  is  a  felt  necessity  of  the 
human  soul.  How  can  the  weak  and  sinful  come  before  the  All-perfect  ?  How  can 
the  finite  enter  into  relation  with  the  Infinite  ?  How  can  the  weak  voice  of  man  be 
heard  across  that  tremendous  guH  which  yawns  between  him,  the  creature  of  a  day, 
and  the  Eternal  ?  Who  shall  bring  God  nigh  to  him  ?  His  soul  cries  out  after  a 
Living,  a  Personal,  an  Incarnate  God.  This  shows  that  the  faot  of  an  Incarnation 
is  not  foreign  to  our  nature ;  nay,  that  it  is  felt  by  the  human  consciousness  to 
be  essential  to  religion.  And  this  great  want  the  "doctrine  of  Christ"  alone 
supplies.  God  "  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  is  the  solution  of  man's  sorest  difficulty  as 
a  religious  being,  the  grand  accomplished  fact  on  which  he  can  securely  rest  in  his 
approaches  to  God.  II.  Another  fundamental  truth  of  Christianity  is  the  atone- 
ment. That  in  some  sense  it  is  only  through  Christ  that  we  can  come  unto  God  so 
as  to  be  accepted  of  Him,  is  admitted  on  all  hands  by  those  who  profess  to  be 
Christians.  Now,  no  attentive  reader  of  the  New  Testament  can  faU  to  see  that 
that  on  which  stress  is  everywhere  laid  in  this  respect  is  Christ's  offering  Himself 
as  a  ransom  and  sacrifice  for  men.  He  has  taken  our  sins  upon  Him,  and  by  His 
obedience  unto  death  hath  removed  the  obstacle  which  our  sin  placed  in  the  way  of 
our  acceptance  with  the  Father.  And  thus  has  He  made  atonement  for  us.  Now, 
this  also  meets  an  acknowledged  and  widely  felt  want  of  man.  Everywhere,  and 
in  all  ages,  man  is  seen  acting  upon  the  principle  that  some  satisfaction  must  be 
rendered  to  the  Divine  justice  before  man  can  be  accepted  by  God.  Man,  conscious 
of  guilt,  condemned  at  the  bar  of  his  own  conscience,  has  asked  himself  the 
question,  "  How  shall  man  be  just  before  God  ?  "  "  Wherewith  shaU  I  come  before 
the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God?  "  That  it  is  with  something  he 
must  appear  is  a  settled  point ;  the  only  question  is.  What  shall  that  be  ?  And  the 
only  answer  he  has  been  able  to  find  to  this  is  that  which  tradition  has  handed 
down  from  the  earliest  times,  namely,  sacrifice — in  which  the  offering  up  of  an 
animal  to  the  Deity  was  an  acknowledgment  that  the  sin  of  man  deserved  death, 
and  a  petition  that  a  substitute  might  be  accepted  for  him.  Now,  what  all  men 
thus  feel  they  want,  the  Scriptures  tell  us  Christ  has  supplied.  He  offered  for  us  a 
real  and  all-sufiScient  atonement  when  He  offered  up  Himself.  He  took  on  Him 
our  sins.  He  bore  them  away,  made  "an  end  of  sins,"  made  "reconciliation  for 
iniquity,"  and  brought  in  "  everlasting  righteousness."  Man,  with  his  conscious 
weakness  and  his  deep  wants,  finds  here  at  length  that  which  meets  his  wants, 
satisfies  his  convictions,  and  gives  peace  to  his  conscience,  so  that  he  is  filled  with  a 
joy  which  is  "  unspeakable  and  fuU  of  glory."  (W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  "  Who- 
soever goeth  onward  "  (E.V.)  may  be  interpreted  in  two  ways — (1)  Every  one  who 
sets  himself  up  as  a  leader ;  (2)  Every  one  who  goes  on  beyond  the  gospel.  The 
latter  is,  perhaps,  better.  These  anti-Christian  gnostics  were  advanced  thinkers ; 
the  gospel  was  all  very  well  for  the  unenlightened,  but  they  knew  something  higher. 
{Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools.)  The  law  of  self-restraint: — This  ninth  verse 
appears  to  contain  one  of  the  counsels  that  occurred  to  the  apostle,  as  he  thought 
on  the  one  hand  of  youthful  impulsiveness  and  love  of  novelty,  and  on  the  other  of 
the  fascinations  that  are  wont  to  attach  to  dubious  doctrines  and  to  evil  deeds. 
Its  real  meaning  may  be  seen  in  the  rendering  of  the  Eevised  Version.  St.  John 
wrote,  not  "  whosoever  transgresseth  "  (for  he  was  not  thinking  of  general  breaches 
of  the  law  of  God),  but  specifically  "  whosoever  goeth  onward,  and  abideth  not  in 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

the  teaching  of  Christ,  hath  not  God."  If  that  be  taken  in  connection  with  the 
preceding  verse,  where  a  man  is  represented  as  through  half-heartedness,  losing 
whatever  he  has  gained,  the  unexpected  but  important  lesson  is  obtained,  that  "to 
advance  over-eagerly  and  to  hang  back  are  alike  violations  of  duty."  I.  The  fibst 
THING  TO  AVOID  IS  ovER-EAGEBNEss.  "  Whosocvcr  gocth  OH  Ward  "  (at  too  great  a  rate, 
it  means,  or  impelled  by  a  hot  fancy  that  has  broken  away  from  every  restraint) 
"  hath  not  God."  It  is  possible  to  imagine  that  the  phrase  might  be  interpreted  La 
a  different  way,  as  denoting  that  all  progress  in  the  statement  or  application  of 
rehgious  truths  is  for  ever  barred,  and  that  the  incapacity  or  the  refusal  to  see  in 
them  any  other  bearings  than  have  been  found  in  the  past  must  be  classed  amongst 
the  virtues.  But  with  such  teaching  no  sympathy  can  be  found  in  the  Bible.  The 
body  of  revealed  truth  is  not  a  dictionary,  and  when  Christ  teaches.  He  teaches 
free  men,  providing  them  not  with  endless  minute  rules  which  they  must  mechanic- 
ally follow,  but  with  great  principles  which  they  must  use  their  own  wits  in 
interpreting  and  their  own  responsible  skill  in  applying.  The  gei-ms  of  religious 
truth  will  be  perpetually  unfolding  themselves,  expanding  into  new  conceptions  of 
the  glory  of  God  and  of  the  spiritual  privileges  possible  to  man ;  and  through  all 
the  future,  one  of  the  rewards  of  loyalty  to  Christ  is  to  be  that  the  loyal  will  be 
continually  advancing  in  Christian  thought,  ever  more  completely  knowing  as  they 
are  known.  To  make  this  or  similar  paragraphs,  therefore,  an  old  man's  protest 
against  progress,  or  an  apology  for  intolerance,  is  to  sin  against  the  entire  Scripture. 
The  warning  is  against  needless  progress,  a  progress  that  is  suicidal  and  unworthy 
the  name,  the  impulsiveness  and  the  haste  that  ignore  all  the  restraints  of  reason. 
It  is  more  than  doubtful  whether  any  Christian  can  get  to  know  much  about  God, 
unless  he  be  stirred  by  an  ambition  to  know,  or  can  make  much  progress  in  per- 
sonal religion,  unless  he  be  taken  possession  of  by  the  ambition  to  be  made  Uke  his 
Saviour.  The  mistake  is  in  allowing  the  ambition  to  separate  itself  from  Christ, 
and,  as  men  say,  to  run  away  with  them,  so  that  no  influence  from  above  or  from 
■within  can  withhold  them  from  extravagance,  but  the  force  of  every  reasonable 
restraint  is  broken.  Of  the  serious  mistakes,  in  matters  of  opinion  and  in  matters 
of  practice,  to  which  this  over-eagerness  leads,  the  disposition  that  sweeps  onwards 
under  the  dominancy  of  a  single  idea,  and  consents  neither  to  look  back  upon  the 
point  from  which  it  started,  nor  to  glance  around  at  the  facts  with  which  relations 
should  be  maintained,  there  are  instances  enough.  One  man,  for  instance,  is  led  to 
no  good  result  by  his  own  investigations  into  God's  existence,  and  quickly  pro- 
nounces that  all  such  investigations  must  prove  sterile,  and  founds  an  entire  system 
upon  the  alleged  impossibility  of  attaining  any  certainty  in  certain  branches  of 
knowledge.     II.  At  the  other  extreme  there  is  the  equal,  perhaps  the  more 

COMMON  FAULT  OF  HANGING  BACK,  AND  SO,  AS  THE  APOSTLE  TEACHES,  GRADUALLY  LETTING 
BLIP    AND    LOSING    EVERY    BENEFICENT    TRUTH    AND    EVERY    HOLY    PRIVILEGE    WE    HAVE 

GAINED.  It  is  a  fault  that  goes  by  many  names — half-heartedness,  colourlessness, 
lack  of  principle,  of  decision,  of  earnestness ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is 
one  of  the  most  prevalent  defects  in  the  modern  Church,  tending  throughout  the 
Christian  world  to  destroy  the  force  and  very  vitality  of  personal  religion.  The 
fashion  is  to  hold  opinions  and  views  that  are  as  colourless  as  possible,  and  carefully 
to  refrain  from  committing  oneself  to  anything ;  to  remember  that  every  question 
has  "  80  many  sides  that  life  is  not  long  enough  for  men  to  examine  them  all,"  and 
that  therefore  a  man  should  not  venture  to  be  positive  about  anything.  Accordingly 
men  compromise  with  obligation,  hesitate  in  their  allegiance  to  truth,  and  make  a 
disposition  to  hang  back,  and  a  lack  of  thoroughness  in  opinion  and  in  practice,  the 
most  prominent  feature  of  their  lives.  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  effect. 
The  man  who  hangs  back,  permitting  his  convictions  to  become  indefinite,  and  his 
sense  of  duty  to  die  down  into  silent  weakness,  must  in  reason  hold  himself 
responsible  for  so  much  of  the  evil  in  the  world  as  is  done,  because  he  provides  the 
opportunity,  or  at  least  removes  the  hindrance.  But  that  is  not  all.  Let  a  man  try 
to  discover  the  reason  why  his  progress  in  religion  is  slow,  why  he  does  not  throw 
off  evil  habits  that  have  disturbed  him  for  years,  why  his  influence  for  good  in  his 
own  neighbourhood  is  so  limited  and  uncertain  ;  and  he  will  generally,  though  not 
always,  find  that  the  secret  of  it  all  is  his  own  half-heartedness,  the  superficiality  of 
his  religion.  III.  Those  being  the  fiuilts  at  either  extreme  against  which  the 
apostle  warns  us,  the  conclusion  is  obvious,  that  the  best  and  most  perfect  Chris- 
tian LIFE   is  one   in   which   BOTH   ARE  AVOIDED,  AND   THE   PATH    MIDWAY   BETWEEN   THH 

TWO  IS  TRODDEN.  The  ideal  Christian  life,  according  to  this  old  apostle,  is  one  in 
which  the  progress  of  the  fancy  in  regard  to  religious  truth  or  duty  is  restrained  by 


n.  JOHN.  21 

the  reins  of  a  sanctified  reason,  in  which  all  backwardness  is  for  ever  prevented  by 
thorough  religious  earnestness.  There  is  a  tendency  at  tinaes  to  imagine  that  such 
matters  are  merely  a  question  of  temperament ;  that  the  vivacious  man  will  be 
certain  to  go  forward,  and  the  languid  man  to  hang  back ;  and  that  neither  can  be 
held  responsible  for  faults  that  arise  from  the  peculiarities  of  their  very  natures.  But 
that  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  Bible  looks  at  the  matter.  To  plead  personal 
temperament  in  excuse  for  the  habit  of  over-eagerness  or  of  backwardness,  is  to 
overlook  the  grace  of  God.  But  it  is  well  to  look  a  little  more  closely  at  the  reason- 
ableness and  advantage  of  maintaining  this  intermediate  position  between  the  two 
extremes.  That  it  avoids  on  the  one  hand  presumptuous  positiveness  concerning 
everything,  and  on  the  other  the  faltering  that  turns  religious  conviction  and 
obligation  into  matters  for  compromise,  is  in  itself  a  sufficient,  but  far  from  the 
only,  commendation.  It  is  also  the  course  that  should  be  adopted,  the  state  of 
mind  that  is  most  defensible  and  helpful,  in  relation  to  the  fluctuations  of  religious 
opinion  and  the  controversies  that  periodically  shake  the  kingdom  of  God.  In  the 
department  of  Christian  service  similarly,  most  men  will  agree  that  the  best  human 
qualifications  for  doing  it  well  are  not  over-eagerness,  still  less  backwardness,  but 
steady  earnestness  or  well-controlled  zeal.  The  man  who  in  his  work  hangs  back, 
never  manages  to  get  much  done ;  and  the  man  who  is  always  apt  to  go  a  little  too  far 
forward,  is  also  always  apt  to  miss  his  mark,  and  to  awaken  in  others  suspicions  of 
his  discretion  that  seriously  weaken  his  influence.  The  strongest  man  is  he  whose 
enthusiasm  is  disciplined  by  seK-control,  whose  devotion  to  Christ  is  whole-hearted 
and  weU-nigh  incapable  of  increase,  but  yet  is  closely  regulated  by  a  sanctified 
reason,  and  thus  made  provident  of  its  resources  and  unalterable  in  its  purposes. 
In  all  associated  warfare  or  service,  the  perfect  heart  of  devotion  is  good,  but 
waste  and  failure  follow  unless  there  is  also  the  power  to  keep  rank.  But  the  teach- 
ing of  the  verse  applies  quite  as  much  to  personal  religious  life  as  it  does  to  service 
or  to  opinions  ;  and  what  it  urges  as  the  condition  of  swift  progress  to  the  highest 
spiritual  attainments,  is  that  the  spirit  and  the  life  should  be,  as  it  were,  ringed 
round  with  the  teaching  of  Christ,  never  advancing  far  forward  from  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Him,  never  drifting  far  behind,  but  keeping  day  by  day  as  closely  as 
possible  within  the  circle  which  His  influence  fills.  If  he  be  tempted  to  advance 
beyond  the  Saviour,  the  master-passion  of  love  for  Him  will  hold  him  back ;  or  if 
he  be  tempted  to  linger  behind,  the  love  will  draw  him  on.  A  more  blessed  kind  of 
life  no  man  can  conceive ;  and  that  becomes  our  kind  of  life,  according  as  we  crush 
out  the  disposition  to  regulate  our  ways  in  independence  of  Christ,  and  pour  our 
hearts  upon  Him  in  continuous  trustfulness.  {R.  W.  Moss.)  Doctrine  and 
character: — Some  one  may  say,  "  Oh,  I  do  not  want  doctrines,  I  look  at  doctrines 
as  so  many  dry  bones."  True,  we  may  compare  doctrines  to  bones,  but  they  are  like 
the  bones  in  your  body,  and  they  need  not  be  dry.  The  skeleton  is  not  a  live  body, 
it  is  true,  but  what  would  that  body  be  without  the  skeleton?  In  the  natural 
world  there  are  living  creatures  that  have  no  vertebras,  and  they  consist  of  a  soft 
gelatinous  mass,  very  yielding  and  compresible.  And  in  the  moral  world  there  are 
those  whose  religion  is  of  the  same  sentimental  kind.  They  are  accommodating, 
because  it  has  no  backbone.  How  different  is  that  reUgion  from  the  robust 
Christianity  that  we  see  exemplified  in  the  Apostle  Paul !  He  taught  that  the 
framework  of  definite  truth  or  doctrine  was  essentially  the  strength  and  stabihty 
of  the  Christian  character.  {E.  H.  Hopkins,  B.A.)  Error  affects  conduct: — 
As  a  small  mistake  in  leveUing  an  arrow  at  the  hand  makes  a  great  difference 
at  the  mark,  so  a  smaU  mistake  in  the  notion  of  truth  makes  a  wide  difference  in 
the  practice  of  the  ungodly.  (Ibid.)  Abide  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ: — The 
text  itself  consists  of  two  general  parts,  a  negative  and  an  affirmative.  We 
begin  with  the  first,  viz.,  the  negative,  "  Whosoever  transgresseth  and  abideth," 
&c.,  which  is  a  censure  of  all  such  persons  as  do  withdraw  from  the  doctrine 
of  Christ.  First,  no  knowledge  of  God  without  Christ,  because  it  is  He  that 
manifests  Him  (Job  i.  18).  Secondly,  no  knowledge  of  God  neither  out  of 
Christ,  because  it  is  He  that  represents  Him:  as  we  cannot  look  upon  the  sun 
directly.  So  that  those  who  deny  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  they  have  not  God.  First, 
in  point  of  knowledge.  Secondly,  they  have  not  God  neither  in  point  of  worship. 
God  out  of  Christ  is  an  idol,  as  to  any  true  adoration  of  Him,  or  religious  service 
exhibited  to  Him.  This  is  true  both  in  regard  of  the  object  of  worship,  as  also  in 
regard  of  the  medium.  Thirdly,  they  have  not  God  in  point  of  interest,  they  have 
not  that  relation  to  God  as  is  desirable  for  them.  They  have  God  indeed  in  the 
common  relation  of  a  Creator.    But  they  have  not  God  as  a  God  in  covenant. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


Those  that  think  to  come  to  God  upon  the  terms  of  nature  and  common  pro- 
vidence they  will  have  little  comfort  in  such  approaches ;  for  God  considered 
out  of  Christ  He  is  a  consuming  fire.  Lastly,  they  have  not  God,  i.e.,  they 
have  Him  not  in  point  of  influence.  And  that  according  to  all  these  kind  of 
influences  which  are  to  be  desired,  and  those  benefits  which  are  of  the  greatest 
concernment.  As  first,  of  grace  and  holiness ;  they  have  not  God  to  sanctify 
them  and  to  communicate  His  Holy  Spirit  unto  them.  God  is  the  God  of  all 
grace,  but  it  is  God  in  Christ ;  He  is  the  channel  of  the  grace  of  God  unto  us  in 
all  the  several  kinds  and  particulars  of  it  wherein  it  is  communicated.  We  musl 
rightly  understand  this  method  and  order  which  God  has  set  for  the  conveying  of 
saving  grace  unto  us.  We  have  not  grace  from  the  Spirit  immediately  but  from 
the  Spirit  in  reference  to  Christ.  Secondly,  as  not  to  the  influences  of  grace  so 
neither  to  the  influences  of  comfort ;  no  true  comfort  or  peace  of  conscience  but  from 
God  in  Christ ;  He  is  our  peace,  both  in  the  thing  itself  as  also  in  the  discovery  and 
manifestation  of  it.  The  spirit  of  comfort,  it  is  of  His  sending  and  comes  from 
Him.  He  that  hath  not  Christ  and  His  Spirit,  he  hath  not  God  to  comfort  him. 
Thirdly,  as  to  matter  of  salvation,  not  God  to  save  him.  There  is  no  salvation  out 
of  Christ  (Acts  iv.  12).  And  thus  we  have  the  point  in  the  several  explications  of  it, 
wherein  it  holds  good  unto  us,  that  he  that  transgresseth,  that  is,  rejects  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  he  hath  not  God.  The  use  and  improvement  of  this  point  by  way  of 
application :  First,  it  comes  home  to  sundry  sorts  of  persons  who  are  hence  con- 
cluded in  a  very  sad  condition.  This  is  so  much  the  more  grievous  as  it  is  the  less 
thought  of  and  expected ;  for  these  persons  which  we  have  now  mentioned,  they 
make  a  full  account  they  have  God  whatever  they  have  else.  At  least  they  have 
Him  not  in  that  way  and  to  that  purpose  for  which  they  would  have  Him.  They 
have  God  to  judge  them,  but  they  have  not  God  to  save  them.  Therefore 
we  see  what  cause  we  have  to  pity  and  to  bewail  such  persons  as  these  are. 
Here  is  the  misery  of  all  unregenerate  persons ;  these  come  under  this  censure 
likewise,  who  though  they  should  hold  this  doctrine  in  judgment,  yet  deny 
it  in  affection  and  practice ;  forasmuch  as  they  do  not  submit  to  the  power  and 
efiicacy  of  it.  Therefore  in  the  second  place,  let  us  make  this  use  of  the  point, 
even  to  acknowledge  Christ  and  His  doctrine  and  the  grace  of  God  which  is 
revealed  in  it.  First,  this  conveyance  of  aU  good  to  us  in  the  covenant  of 
grace  and  in  the  name  of  Christ,  it  is  the  safest  and  surest  dispensation.  We  are 
now  upon  very  good  terms  which  we  may  rest  upon.  If  salvation  with  the 
appurtenances  of  it  had  been  in  any  other  hands  besides  we  had  not  been  so  sure  of 
it.  Secondly,  there  is  the  sweetness  of  it  also ;  there  is  a  great  deal  of  delightfulness 
also  in  it  if  we  were  capable  of  it ;  to  see  everything  coming  to  us,  strained  through 
the  love  of  God  in  Christ ;  it  is  wonderful  pleasing  and  satisfying,  and  the  heart  of  a 
true  believer  does  exceedingly  rejoice  in  it.  The  second  is  of  unworthy  recession  in 
apostacy  or  departure  from  it,  and  abideth  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  He  that 
abides  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not  God.  First,  as  to  matter  of  judg- 
ment :  here  is  a  censure  upon  declining  in  this ;  for  any  that  have  formerly 
embraced  Christ  and  His  doctrine  to  depart  from  it  thus,  it  is  a  business  of  great 
danger  to  them  and  does  exclude  them  from  interest  in  God  Himself.  But 
secondly,  as  this  may  be  extended  to  matter  of  judgment,  so  likewise  to  matter  of 
practice.  A  man  may  in  some  sort  abide  in  Christ's  doctrine  so  as  to  give  assent 
and  credence  to  it,  and  yet  not  abide  in  it  so  as  to  improve  it  and  to  live  answerable 
to  it.  Therefore  this  must  be  taken  in  likewise  together  with  the  other ;  then  do  we 
indeed  abide  in  it  when  it  abides  in  us  and  has  an  influence  and  efficacy  upon  us. 
The  second  is  laid  down  in  the  affirmative,  "  He  that  abideth  in  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son."  The  sum  of  all  is  this,  that  he  that 
hath  not  both,  hath  neither;  and  he  that  hath  one,  hath  both.  This  having 
may  admit  of  a  threefold  interpretation.  First,  hath  them  in  him,  by  way  of 
abode  and  habitation.  Secondly,  hath  them  with  him,  by  way  of  society  and 
communion.  Thirdly,  hath  them  for  him,  by  way  of  assistance  and  approbation, 
(r.  Horton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Receive  him  not  into  your  house,  neither  bid  him  God  speed. — 

Loyalty  to  Christ : — The  man  who  comes  to  undermine  men's  faith  in  Christ  is  on 
an  evil  errand.  His  work  is  an  "  evil  work."  Let  no  false  motives  of  courtesy  or 
toleration  lead  you  to  give  any  assistance  or  encouragement  to  such.  Let  not 
your  tolerance  to  men  have  for  its  other  side  indifference  to  Christ.  A  tremendous 
responsibility   rests   upon   us   to-day.     Christ   is  the  sole  remaining  hope  of  the 


II.  JOHN.  23 

world.  For  the  sake  of  our  own  souls,  and  all  the  souls  around  us,  and  for  all  that 
are  coming  to  be  born  into  this  world,  let  us  be  faithful.  Polycarp,  said  Dr.  Duncan, 
would  have  stood  a  bad  chance  in  an  examination  by  John  Owen ;  but  he  was  a 
famous  man  to  burn.  He  was  offered  his  life  if  he  would  just  say,  "  Ctesar  is  Lord," 
and  fling  a  few  grains  of  incense  on  the  altar.  No ;  life  at  that  price  was  too  dear. 
He  could  not  afford  to  live  at  such  a  cost.  Would  he  swear,  then  ?  Kevile  Christ 
by  a  word  ?  No.  "  Eighty  and  six  years,"  said  the  old  man,  "  have  I  served  Him, 
and  He  hath  done  me  no  wrong.  How,  then,  can  I  speak  evil  of  my  King?  "  And 
then  they  put  him  in  the  fire.  He  was  but  a  simple,  commonplace,  pious  old  man. 
But  he  burned  well.  He  has  left  no  system  of  theology.  That  was  his  theology — 
to  burn  for  Christ,  to  be  faithful  unto  death.  God  give  us  to  be  equally  faithful 
under  different  and  less  arduous  circumstances,  that  at  the  last  we  too  may  "  receive 
the  crown  of  life."  [J.  M.  Gibbo7i.)  No  toleration : — -1.  Intercourse  with  anti- 
christian  teachers  is  very  injurious  to  the  faith  of  young  Christians.  The  faith  of 
young  Christians  is  itself  young  and  tender.  Any  fellow  may  knock  about  the 
babe  in  the  cradle,  but  he  would  not  lift  up  his  hand  against  its  father.  What  is 
very  painful  in  the  conduct  of  the  infidels,  agnostics,  and  secularists  of  the  day,  is 
the  eifort  they  make  to  get  young  men  together  to  their  meetings.  2.  It  also  incurs 
a  grave  responsibility.  "  For  he  that  giveth  him  greeting  partaketh  in  his  evil 
works."  That  is,  he  is  reckoned  by  others  to  be  in  partnership  with  him.  To 
countenance  evil  is  as  bad  as  to  commit  it,  and  to  be  where  evil  is  done  is  to 
countenance  it.  Let  religious  teachers  often  show  to  the  young  the  perils  and 
responsibilities  of  mixing  up  in  unchristian  and  immoral  society.  {T.  Davies,  M.A.) 
The  contagion  of  evil  to  be  avoided  : — When  a  man  is  known  to  suffer  from  a  sadly 
contagious  disease  none  of  his  friends  will  come  near  the  house.  There  is  little 
need  to  warn  them  off :  they  are  all  too  alarmed  to  come  near.  Why  is  it  men  are 
not  as  much  afraid  of  the  contagion  of  vice  ?  How  dare  they  run  risks  for  them- 
selves and  children  by  allowing  evil  companions  to  frequent  their  house  ?  Sin  is 
as  infectious  and  far  more  deadly  than  the  sinallpox  or  fever.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
He  that  biddeth  him  God  speed  is  partaker  of  his  evil  deeds. — Our  share  in 
other  men^s  sins  : — There  are  few  more  remarkable  sayings  in  Holy  Writ  than  that 
of  our  blessed  Eedeenier,  "He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet 
shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward."  But  the  principle  which  pervades  this  saying  of 
Christ  is  not  limited  in  its  operations  ;  and,  if  one  application  of  it  be  encouraging, 
another  may  be  alarming.  May  it  not  be  possible  to  identify  yourself  with  an  evil 
man  as  well  as  with  a  good,  so  that,  though  you  may  not  yourself  actually  commit 
the  evil  man's  deeds,  yet  you  shall  be  reckoned  with  as  though  you  had  done  the 
deeds  ?  That  the  principle  admits  of  this  application  is  but  too  clearly  proved  by 
our  text.  These  words  of  St.  John  are,  indeed,  precisely  parallel  to  what  our 
Saviour  says  in  regard  of  a  prophet.  To  bid  the  heretic  God  speed  would  be  to 
give  the  weight  of  your  authority  to  his  heresy.  In  mercantile  phrase,  as  has  been 
well  said,  it  would  be  to  endorse  his  false  doctrines ;  and  the  day  of  reckoning  shall 
come.  But  this  opens  before  us  a  great  and  solemn  subject  of  discourse  One  is 
disposed  at  first  to  hope  that  it  may  be  merely  through  some  metaphysical  subtlety 
that  human  beings  are  represented  as  so  interwoven  with  each  other,  that  the  same 
actions  may  be  charged  on  a  variety  of  agents  :  but  metaphysical  subtlety  there  is 
absolutely  none ;  the  apostle  speaks  of  our  partaking  in  other  men's  evil  deeds  with 
the  same  plainness  which  he  would  use  if  speaking  of  our  obeying  any  one  of  the 
Ten  Commandments.  Oh,  this  wonderfully  enlarges  the  power  or  opportunity  of 
destroying  our  souls  ;  this  amazingly  magnifies  the  dread  business  of  the  judgment. 
I  could  tremble  at  being  told,  "Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden  " — at  hearing, 
"  So,  then,  every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God";  but  I  do  net 
apprehend  all  the  awfulness  of  appearing  at  the  tribunal  of  the  Most  High  till  I 
ponder  this  assertion  of  St.  John,  "  He  that  biddeth  him  God  speed  is  partaker  of 
his  evil  deeds."  Now,  examine  more  definitely  the  modes  in  which  we  may  have 
share  in  other  men's  sins.  We  will  select  two  modes :  the  first  is  that  of  giving 
evil  counsel,  or  diffusing  wrong  principles  ;  the  second  is  that  of  setting  a  bad 
example.  To  illustrate  the  first  mode,  we  will  take  an  extreme  case,  but  which 
cannot  be  examined  without  our  discovering  a  principle  which  may  equally  be 
applied  in  various  lesser  instances.  The  case  is  that  of  an  author,  who,  having 
committed  to  writing  hcentious  or  sceptical  thoughts,  applies  the  vast  power  of  the 
Press  to  the  gaining  for  them  currency  through  the  world.  You  will  hardly  require 
of  us  to  show  you  that  this  author  participates  in  the  sins  of  other  men.  Where- 
soever his  book  is,  there  may  he  be,  undermining  the  foundations  of  morality  and 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

religion,  poisoning  the  springs  of  life,  and  instigating  others  to  be  as  sceptical  or  as 

debauched  as  himself.    Repentance,  for  the  most  part,  is  utterly  unavailing  ;   the 

author  may  become  altogether  a  reformed  man,  being  changed  from  the  infidel  into 

the  sincere  believer,  and  from  the  immoral  into  the  righteous  ;  but  he  may  have  no 

power  whatsoever  of  recalling  his  writings :  they  have  gone  forth  as  upon  wings  to 

the  farthest  ends  of  the  earth.     What  a  perpetuity  of  evil-doing  has  thus  been 

acquired  by  many  of  the  dead !    And  though  you  may  think  that  this,  however 

clear  an  illustration  of  the  partaking  in  the  sins  of  other  men,  furnishes  but  little 

of  practical  lesson  to  yourselves,  I  would  remind  you  that  the  author  only  does 

that  in  a  higher  degree  that  is  done  by  any  one  in  a  lower,  who  gives  bad  advice  or 

sanctions  wrong  principles.     The  act  of  printing  does  but  enlarge,  so  to  speak,  the 

sphere  of  the  author's  individuality,  and  cause  him  to  act  on  a  broader  surface ; 

but  evidently  if,  in  place  of  printing,  he  confines  himself  to  speaking,  deUvering  to 

the  comparatively  few  who   are  brought  within  sound   of   his  voice  the   same 

sentiments  that  we  suppose  scattered  by  the  Press  over  half  a  community,  why,  he 

will  partake  of  the  sins  of  those  few,  even  as  under  the  other  supposition  he  would 

of  the  sins  of  the  whole  host  of  his  fellow-men.    And  if  you  still  further  reduce 

the  position  of  the  author,  so  that  in  place  of  blasphemous  sentiments  you  put 

mere  worldly  words  into    his    mouth,   and  without  making  him   a  pattern  of 

immorality  simply  ascribe  to  him  indifference  as  to  religion,  it  is  clear  you  do 

not  touch  the  argument  upon  which  participation  in  other  men's  sins  is  established, 

though  you  may  diminish  the  likelihood  of  his  making  other  men  to  sin,  or  the 

enormity  of  the  crimes  to  which  he  may  be  accessory.     Do  you  never  let  slip  an 

opportunity  of  reproving  vice,  of  recommending  virtue  ?    Do  you  never,  when  you 

have  given  an  opinion  on  points  of  difference  between  men  of  the  world  and 

disciples  of  Christ — do  you  never  lean  to  the  side  of  the  world,  because  not  honest 

enough  to  despise  the  risk  of  giving  offence  ?    There  is  not  one  of  you  whose 

actions  do  not  operate  on  the  actions  of  others — operate,  we  mean,  in  the  way  of 

example.    He  would  be  insignificant  who  could  only  destroy  his  o\vn  soul ;  but  you 

are  all,  alas  !  of  importance  enough  to  help  also  to  destroy  the  souls  of  others  ;  and 

henceforward  we  would  have  you  remember  that  whensoever  you  act  you  act  for 

a  multitude ;  eyes  are  upon  you,  many  or  few,  according  to  the  position  that  you 

occupy ;  some  are  either  watching  to  take  pattern  or  waiting  for  your  halting.    Be 

vicious,  and  viciousness  may  go  down  as  an  heirloom  in  half  a  hundred  farnilies ; 

be  inconsistent,  and  enmity  to  the  gospel  may  be  propagated  over  a  parish  ;   give 

occasions  of  offence,  and  many  may  fall ;  those  who  are  entering  in  the  narrow 

way  may  be  discouraged,  and  those  who  have  already  entered  may  be  made  to 

stumble.    Well,  then,  if  such  be  the  fact — if,  through  our  necessary  connection 

with  numbers  of  our  fellow-men,  a  connection  resulting  from  the  circumstances  of 

our  nature — if,  through  the  giving  evil  counsel,  which  it  seems  almost  impossible 

to  avoid,  and  through  the  setting  evil  example,  which  must  be  done  in  some  sense 

by  all  but  the  perfect — if  in  these  ways  we  become  partakers  in  other  men's  sins — 

better  fly  the  world  at  once ;  better  retire  to  the  desert,  where,  altogether  separated 

from  our  kind,  we  should  at  least  have  no  guilt  to  add  to  our  own  1     Vain  thought  1 

Suppose,  then,  that  we  flee  from  active  life  and  bury  these  powers  in  solitude,  we 

shall  still  be  chargeable  with  all  the  evil  which  might  have  been  counteracted,  had 

we  stood  to  our  posts  and  made  use  of  our  talents.  We  might  have  stayed  the  torrent 

of  vice  and  ungodliness ;  we  might  have  turned  some  sinners  from  the  error  of  their 

ways.     What,  then,  have  we  obtained  by  flight?    Have  I  striven  up  to  the  measure 

of  the  ability  conferred  on  me  by  God  to  promote  the  diffusion  of  sound  principles, 

and  to  subdue  the  aboundings  of  iniquity  ?    You  ask,  in  a  sort  of  terror,  for  some 

specific  by  which  to  guard  against  this  partaking  in  the  sins  of  other  men.    I  have 

but  one  answer  to  give.     The  only  way  not  to  partake  in  other  men's  sins  is  not  to 

sin  yourselves.     The  great  use  which  we  make  of  this  subject  of  discourse  is  the 

furnishing  another  motive  to  you  to  the  walking  circumspectly  and  the  living 

righteously.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Having  many  things  to  write  unto  you. — Christian  intercourse: — 
I,  The  fulness  or  John's  heakx.  His  heart,  doubtless,  was  full  of  what  con- 
cerned the  fruits  of  his  ministry  in  the  Church  of  Christ ;  of  what  he  had  seen 
and  heard,  of  the  results  of  his  long-continued  and  laborious  exertions  for  the 
salvation  of  men  ;  of  his  own  feelings  and  prospects  in  his  advanced  stage  of  life, 
and  of  his  cheering  hopes  of  soon  being  in  a  better  world,  where  he  would  have  a 
eight  of  Christ.    And  his  heart  might  be  full  of  those  tender  emotions  which  would 


II.  JOHN.  25 

express  themselves  in  sacred  admonitions  and  directions,  which  he  designed  to  give 
to  the  pious  family  whom  he  was  shortly  to  visit.  1.  What  are  those  things  which 
should  fill  our  hearts  ?  We  may  be  afraid,  if  our  hearts  are  not  full  of  good  things, 
it  is  not  because  there  is  any  scantiness  in  the  word  or  works  of  God  ;  but  because 
the  ground  is  already  preoccupied,  or  because  there  is  in  us  too  little  relish  for  what 
is  good  and  profitable.  2.  Keligion  is  social  and  communicative.  Selfishness  and 
exclusiveness  are  as  unchristian  as  they  are  unamiable.     II.  John  expresses  his 

DEFERENCE    TO   AND   RELIANCE    ON    THE    DiVINE    PROVIDENCE    FOR    THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT 

OF  HIS  INTENDED  VISIT.  1.  We  are,  in  all  things,  dependent  on  God.  We  may 
propose,  but  should  ever  remember  there  is  one  that  disposes  of  us,  and  of  all 
things,  according  to  His  good  pleasure.  2.  Trusting  in  God  for  the  fulfilment 
of  our  designs  is  justifiable  only  on  the  supposition  that  such  designs  are  well- 
pleasing  in  H,is  sight.  III.  John,  in  the  expectation  of  an  interview  with  his 
PIOUS  friends,  looked  for  mutual  and  ample  jot.  1.  Inquire  into  the  nature  of 
that  joy  which  he  expected  in  his  visit.  We  doubt  not  it  was  a  religious  joy. 
There  John  expected  to  witness  Christian  order  and  decorum,  reciprocal  proofs  of 
affection,  and  lovely  demeanour.  There  he  would  expect  to  find  that  humbleness 
of  mind,  that  holy  walking,  that  devotedness  of  heart  and  life  to  God,  and  that 
active  piety  which  so  finely  illustrate  the  gospel.  He  would  also  expect  to  have  an 
interchange  of  feeUng  on  the  subhmest  and  most  interesting  of  all  subjects,  relative 
to  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  find  in  the  hearts  of 
all  in  that  family  a  response  to  what  he  felt  in  his  own,  in  reference  to  the  progress 
then  making  or  made  of  the  gospel  in  the  world  by  the  instrumentality  of  his 
fellow  apostles  ;  and  thus  heart  would  kindle  heart,  and  Christian,  holy  fellowship 
would  produce  joy  with  which  a  stranger  to  such  themes  could  never  intermeddle. 
2.  We  see  how  mistaken  many  are  in  their  view  of  religion  as  incapable  of 
affording  joy.  This  must  arise  either  from  their  disbelieving  the  word  of  Ck)d, 
or  because,  irrespective  of  its  testimony,  they  form  their  judgment  from  their  own 
inability  to  feel  any  pleasure  in  it.  {Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  Face 
to  face  : —  The  social  feeling  is  a  vital  element  of  our  nature,  and  fit  society  is 
indispensable  to  the  perfection  of  happiness.  Indeed  it  would  seem  that  this 
is  necessary  not  only  for  beings  constituted  and  related  as  we  are,  but  for  every 
intelligent  being.  There  is  society  among  the  angels  of  heaven ;  there  is  sociely 
in  the  beiag  of  God  Himself.  Conceive  of  the  creation  of  one  solitary  being  to 
occupy  the  vast  physical  universe.  He  finds  himself  surrounded  with  the  grandeur 
and  the  ever-varying  beauty  of  the  material  wreation.  1.  This  view  of  the 
necessity  of  Christian  communion  to  the  perfection  of  religious  joy  teaches  na 
that  a  monkish  seclusion  from  the  world  is  contrary  to  the  whole  genius  of  the 
gospel.  2,  This  view  of  Christian  communion  suggests  the  wisdom  and  the 
desirableness  of  those  ordinances  and  arrangements  that  are  designed  to  facilitate 
that  communion.  3.  This  view  of  Christian  communion  suggests  delightful 
anticipations  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven.    {J.  P.  TTwmpson.) 


32 


i 


THE  BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOB. 

III.  JOHN. 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations ; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,  on    the  Verses  of   The    Bible 


BY 

Rev.    JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,   M.A. 


THIRD  JOHN 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.   Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE. 

III.  JOHN. 

Vbb.  1.  The  elder  imto  the  well-beloved  Gaiua. — Some  first  century  Chwrch 
membert : — It  has  been  said  that  in  the  drama  of  life  the  scenery  shifts  and  the 
draperies  change,  but  the  plot  is  the  same  and  the  characters  the  same.  This  is 
true ;  and  because  of  this  the  most  ancient  history  is  in  its  essentials  the  story  of 
to-day.  Gains,  Diotrephes,  and  Demetrius  are  ancient  names,  but  modem  characters; 
dead  men,  but  living  spirits.  I.  Gaius,  ob  the  Cheistian  in  complete  aemotjb.  Of 
his  position  in  the  Church,  of  his  personal  history,  we  know  nothing.  The  light 
falls  on  him  only  for  a  moment ;  but  in  that  moment  we  can  see  clearly  that  he 
was  a  fuU-orbed,  symmetrical  Christian.  1.  His  soul  prospered — i.e.,  his  inner  life 
of  prayer  and  fellowship  with  the  Father  was  going  on  so  well — the  man  was 
making  such  manifest  progress  in  spiritual  life — that  St.  John  could  form  no  higher 
wish  for  him  than  that  he  might  prosper  in  all  things  and  be  in  health,  as  his  soul 
was  prospering.  2.  But  his  spirituality  did  not  evaporate  in  feeling.  There  was 
nothing  flabby  or  weak  about  the  man.  He  was  strong  in  the  Lord.  "  I  rejoiced 
greatly  when  brethren  came  and  bare  witness  to  thy  truth."  We  do  not  know  all 
that  hes  beneath  this  sentence.  Evidently  truth  had  been  attacked,  and  Gaius  had 
stood  up  in  defence.  3.  And  as  he  prayed  and  spoke,  so  he  lived :  "  even  as  thou 
walkest  in  the  truth."  The  true  defenders  of  the  faith,  the  invincible  champions  of 
truth,  are  all  the  souls  that  do  the  truth.  Holiness  is  an  unanswerable  argument. 
4.  He  was  an  active  Christian  (vers.  5-7).  Here  we  catch  just  a  glimpse  of  the 
evangehsing  activity  of  the  early  Church.  Error  was  busy.  Many  deceivers  had 
gone  forth  into  the  world.  But  truth  was  busy  also.  She  had  taken  the  field. 
Christian  men  had  "gone  forth"  "for  the  sake  of  the  Name."  Gaius  probably 
could  not  "go  forth,"  but  he  could  help  those  who  did.  He  could  give  them  a 
home,  could  secure  for  them  a  favourable  hearing,  and  send  them  on  their  way 
rejoicing.  And  he  did  so,  thoroughly.  He  did  this,  as  he  did  everything  else,  as 
unto  the  Lord.  Gaius  did  this,  and  so  became  "  a  fellow-worker  with  the  truth." 
People  often  speak  of  "the  workers"  in  the  Church  as  if  they  were  a  small  and 
easily  defined  class.  But  who  are  the  workers  ?  Those  who  preach,  and  teach, 
and  visit,  and  sing,  and  organise  ?  Yes ;  but  not  these  only.  Those  who  can  only 
give  smaU  gifts  from  their  poverty — those  who  pray  for  us  in  secret,  who  snule  on 
our  efforts,  who  wish  us  well,  who  love  us — behold,  these  too  are  workers,  feUow- 
workers  with  the  truth  !  Thank  God  for  quiet  people,  kind  people,  hopeful  people  I 
What  could  the  "  workers  "  do  without  the  f  eUow- workers  ?  H.  Dioteephes  repkb- 
BBNTS  OFFICIALISM  OUT  AND  OUT.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  there  is  little  doubt  that 
he  was  the  minister  of  the  Church  in  which  Gaius  was  a  member — a  minister  in 
name — in  fact,  a  tyrant,  a  slanderer,  a  bad  man.  1.  "  He  loveth  to  have  the  pre- 
eminence among  them."  He  did  not  call  it  by  that  name.  He  called  it  "  principle," 
or  "  conscience,"  or  "  high  sense  of  duty,"  for  if  you  want  to  find  the  worst  things 
you  must  not  look  for  them  under  the  words  "  crime,"  or  "  despotism,"  or  "  sin," 
but  under  "  conscience,"  "  duty,"  "patriotism,"  and  "principle."  But  fine  words 
notwithstanding,  the  core  of  this  man's  character  was  love  of  power  and  pride  of 
place.  2.  "If  I  come,"  says  the  apostle,  "I  will  bring  to  remembrance  his  works 
which  he  doeth,  prating  against  us  with  wicked  words."  Yes,  "  if  I  come,"  Dio- 
trephes will  find  that  John  was  not  called  the  son  of  thunder  for  nothing.  It 
ought  not  to  be  left  to  St.  John  to  bring  Diotrephes  to  book.  The  Church  ought  to 
have  done  this.     The  Church  was  partly  guilty  of  this  tyrant.    "  I  know  mother'll 

5 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


give  it  me  if  I  scream,"  said  a  child.  Ay,  ay,  that  is  the  policy  of  most  agitatora. 
"  I  believe  in  screaming  "  is  the  one  article  of  Diotrephes'  creed  in  every  age.  Weak 
mothers,  weak  nations,  weak  Churches  alike  surrender  to  the  scream.  We  owe  it 
to  Diotrephes  to  tell  him  the  truth.  Whether  St.  John  come  or  not,  slander  should 
be  condemned  and  tyranny  opposed.  3.  But  the  real  danger  to  the  Church  lay,  not 
in  this  man's  despotic  action,  but  in  the  infectious  nature  of  his  tyranny.  There  is 
a  little  Diotrephes  in  all  men — all  love  to  lead  ;  and  there  was  a  danger  lest  this 
outside  Diotrephes  should  stir  up  and  call  out  the  Diotrephes  inside  other  members 
— lest  opposing  him  they  should  still  imitate  him.  Therefore  St.  John  implores 
even  Gaius,  "Beloved,  imitate  not  that  which  is  evil,  but  that  which  is  good."  4. 
"  He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God  :  he  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God."  Let  who 
wUl  be  bad,  be  you  good.  Though  the  very  angels  fall,  do  you  stand.  "  By  AUah," 
said  Mahomet,  when  he  was  tempted,  "  if  they  placed  the  sun  on  my  right  hand 
and  the  moon  on  my  left  to  persuade  me,  yet  while  God  bids  me  I  will  go  on." 
Yes  !  heed  not  the  sun  or  moon.  Hear  God.  Though  even  Diotrephes  turn  tyrant, 
let  Gaius  be  Gaius  still,  "A  single  man  with  God  is  the  majority."  HI.  Deue- 
TKiua  STANDS  FOK  THE  iNsri...xG  Chbistian.  He  was  a  man  whose  life  was  such 
that  John  felt  he  had  only  to  name  him  in  order  to  inspire  Gaius  with  courage. 
Yes,  we  all  know  names  that  for  us  are  charged  with  inspiration.  To  see  them  or 
hear  them  makes  us  stronger,  braver,  better.  We  need  not  be  rich,  nor  famous, 
nor  learned  in  order  to  inspire  men — only  to  be  good,  and  honest,  and  loving,  and 
pure.  We  too,  by  faith  in  Christ  and  by  God's  grace,  may  live  in  such  a  way  that 
even  our  names  may  be  to  some  few  souls  words  of  inspiration  and  means  of  grace. 
(J.  M.  Gibbon.)       The  quietness  of  true  religion: — I.  Let  us  see  whetheb,  without 

iPASSINQ   OVEB   THE   BOUNDS   OF    HISTOBICAL    PEOBABILITY,    WE    CAN    FILL   UP   THIS   BABE 

OUTLINE  WITH  SOME  coLouEiNQ  OP  ciEcuMSTANCE.  1.  Three  pcrsons  of  the  name 
Gaius  or  Caius  appear  in  the  New  Testament  (Acts  xix.  29 ;  xx.  4 ;  Kom.  xvi.  23 ; 
1  Cor.  i.  14).  2.  Demetrius  is,  of  course,  a  name  redolent  of  the  worship  of 
Demeter,  the  Earth-Mother,  and  of  Ephesian  surroundings.  No  reader  of  the  New 
Testament  needs  to  be  reminded  of  the  riot  at  Ephesus,  which  is  told  at  such 
length  in  Acts  xix.  The  conjecture  that  the  agitator  of  the  turbulent  guild  of  silver- 
smiths who  made  sUver  sturines  of  Diana  may  have  become  the  Demetrius,  the 
object  of  St.  John's  lofty  commendation,  is  by  no  means  improbable.  The  very 
words  of  Demetrius  about  Paul  evince  that  uneasy  sense  of  the  powers  of  fascina- 
tion possessed  by  the  apostle  which  is  often  the  first  timid  witness  of  reluctant  con- 
viction.     II.    We   may   now  ADVEBT    to    the    contents   and   GENEEAL   STTLE   of   THIS 

liETTEB.  1.  As  to  its  contents.  (1)  It  supplies  us  with  a  valuable  test  of  Christian 
life,  in  what  may  be  called  the  Christian  instinct  of  missionary  affection,  possessed 
in  such  full  measure  by  Caius.  (2)  The  Church  is  beset  with  different  dangers 
from  very  different  quarters.  As  the  second  Epistle  warns  the  Church  of  peril  from 
Bpeculative  ambition,  so  the  third  Epistle  marks  a  danger  from  personal  ambition, 
arrogating  to  itself  undue  authority  within  the  Church.  (3)  This  brief  Epistle 
contains  one  of  those  apparently  mere  spiritual  truisms,  which  make  St.  John  the 
most  powerful  and  comprehensive  of  all  spiritual  teachers.  He  had  suggested  a 
warning  to  Caius,  which  serves  as  the  link  to  connect  the  example  of  Diotrephes 
which  he  has  denounced,  with  that  of  Demetrius  which  he  is  about  to  commend. 
*»  Beloved  !  "  he  cries,  "  imitate  not  that  which  is  evil,  but  that  which  is  good."  A 
glorious  little  "  Imitation  of  Christ,"  a  compression  of  his  own  Gospel,  the  record 
of  the  Great  Example  in  three  words.  2.  The  style  of  the  Epistle  is  certainly  that 
of  an  old  man.  It  is  reserved  in  language  and  in  doctrine.  Religious  language 
should  be  deep  and  real,  rather  than  demonstrative.  It  is  not  safe  to  play  with 
sacred  names.  To  pronounce  them  at  random  for  the  purpose  of  being  effective 
and  impressive  is  to  take  them  in  vain.  What  a  wealth  of  reverential  love  there  is 
in  that — "  for  the  sake  of  the  Name ! "  This  letter  says  nothing  of  rapture,  or 
prophecy,  of  miracle.  It  lies  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  Church,  as  we  find  it  even 
now.  It  has  a  word  for  friendship.  It  seeks  to  individualise  its  benediction.  A 
hush  of  evening  rests  upon  the  note.  May  such  an  evening  close  upon  our  old  age  I 
{Abp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Christian  character: — I.  The  ideal  Chrlstian.  1.  A 
renewed  heart.  2.  A  loving  deportment.  U.  The  highest  ATFiNiTy.  The  Christian 
character  draws  to  itself — 1.  Our  esteem.  2.  Our  kindness.  3.  Our  fellowship.  {The 
Weekly  Pulpit.)  The  ideal  Christian : — This  is  not  a  salutation  in  the  sense  of  Chris- 
tian greeting  usual  at  the  beginning  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul  and  Peter,  but  a  simple 
address,  to  point  out  the  person  for  whom  the  Epistle  was  intended.  I.  The  tbos 
chaeacteristio  of  a  believer  in  Jesus  Christ — "  Beloved."    This  term  is  applied 


III.  JOHN.  7 

both  to  the  Son  of  God  and  to  the  saints,  and  frequently  used  by  the  apostles.  It 
is  a  term  of  endearment,  and  implies  a  relationship  and  an  affinity  of  the  highest 
order.  1.  Loved.  One  with  a  renewed  heart,  one  of  tenderness  and  sympathy 
instead  of  hardness,  ill-feeling,  and  cruelty.  2.  Loving.  The  love  of  God  in  his 
heart  was  not  a  stagnant  pool,  but  a  running  rill.  Take  the  Christian  life  in  its 
composite  character,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  love  permeates  the  whole.  As  to  the 
inner  resources  of  thought  and  desire,  there  is  in  them  a  sweetness  which  reveals 
the  weU  of  love  in  the  heart.  In  the  life  of  Gains,  St.  John  saw  the  reflection  of 
the  greater  love  which  laid  down  its  life  for  its  friends.  3.  Jjovable.  It  is  almost 
unnecessary  to  state  that  the  object  of  God's  love  will  have  attractions  for  all  pure 
minds.  II.  The  recipeocai,  affinity — "  Whom  I  love  in  truth."  The  remem- 
brance of  the  beloved  Gains  awakens  the  love  of  the  beloved  John.  1.  Whom  I 
love  by  the  power  of  truth.  The  gospel  reveals  in  us  the  force  of  love,  and  in  our 
fellow-Christians  the  worthy  object  of  that  force.  The  Christian  character  draws  to 
itseh  our  esteem.  2.  Whom  I  love  for  the  sake  of  truth.  No  effect  has  a  greater 
influence  on  the  Christian  heart  than  the  saving  influence  of  the  gospel.  A  more 
effective  spectacle  to  win  the  affection  of  an  apostle  could  not  be  found.  3.  Whom 
I  love  in  furtherance  of  truth.  Tell  the  Christian  worker  that  you  honour  bim  and 
love  him  for  his  work's  sake,  and  you  will  strengthen  his  hands  and  rejoice  his 
heart.     (T.  Davies,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  Beloved,  I  wish  above  all  things  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in 
health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth. — "  Gams  the  beloved  " ; — I.  Deprivation.  Gains 
was  deprived  of  physical  health.  John's  prayer  for  him  implies  that  his  affliction 
was  severe,  that  it  was  not  a  mere  passing  ailment.  For  the  present  affliction  is  not 
"  joyous,"  but  "  grievous  "  ;  and  pain  is  felt  as  keenly  by  the  sensitive  nerves  of  the 
pious  as  by  the  most  abandoned  of  mankind.  And  there  is  an  element  in  affliction 
that  pains  the  good  man  that  the  godless  know  nothing  about.  The  fact  that  the 
state  of  his  bodily  health  prevents  him  from  carrying  out  certain  purposes  for  the 
benefit  of  his  fellow-men  is  a  severe  and  painful  trial  to  him.  The  afflicted  are  not 
able  to  meet  with  their  brethren  in  their  public  gatherings.  This  is  a  serious  loss 
to  them.  However  anxious  Gaius  might  have  been  to  assist  in  the  world's  work,  the 
probability  is  that  the  state  of  his  health  precluded  the  possibility  of  his  doing  so. 
And  yet  there  was  one  very  important  thing  he  could  do — he  could  endure  affliction 
patiently.  That  is  no  httle  matter.  To  suffer  affliction,  showing  an  example  of 
submission,  of  meekness  and  sweetness  of  temper,  is  one  of  the  highest  and  noblest 
services  God  has  given  His  truest  children  to  do.  II.  Compensation.  Though  his 
body  was  afflicted,  his  soul  was  in  health  and  prospered.  His  soul  grew  strong  and 
flourished  on  truth.  Such  men  are  invaluable  blessings  to  their  age  ;  they  are  the 
pillars  upon  whom  the  moral  fabric  of  their  time  rests.  Their  integrity,  their 
transparent  honesty,  their  pure  motives,  and  their  faithfulness  in  all  they  attempt 
to  do,  is  what  makes  the  world  what  it  is — a  place  worth  living  in.  A  soul  that  has 
some  truth  has  the  germs  of  spiritual  health ;  a  soul  that  is  filled  with  truth  is 
vigorous  and  will  grow  apace.  "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make 
you  free,"  free  from  all  that  hinders  the  development  of  the  spirit's  life.  So 
thoroughly  was  Gaius  possessed  of  the  truth,  that  he  walked  in  it;  it  was  the 
potent  principle  that  guided  his  whole  conduct  in  his  relation  to  men  and  God.  He 
would  not  swerve  the  slightest  degree  to  the  right  or  to  the  left  from  its  dictates. 
The  vessel  that  is  to  arrive  at  the  "  desired  haven  "  must  not  be  allowed  to  run  out 
of  the  lines  of  the  compass.  Gaius  "  walked  in  the  truth,"  as  the  only  path  that 
leads  to  the  home  on  high.  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  saves  the  soul.  Further, 
Gaius  possessed  charity.  "  Brethren  and  strangers  .  .  .  bear  witness  to  thy 
charity  before  the  Church."  In  his  case,  love  was  not  a  weak  sentiment,  an 
effervescence  merely,  but  a  strong  and  rational  passion  of  the  soul.  He  was  not 
content  to  love  in  "  word  or  in  tongue  "  only,  he  showed  his  love  in  kind  deeds. 
He  was  not  a  little  fragment  of  human  nature,  like  a  diminutive  island  in  mid 
ocean  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  the  earth ;  but  a  noble  part  of  the  great  whole  of 
mankind,  and  a  model  member  of  the  universal  Church  of  the  living  God.  HI. 
Compassion.  John  felt  keenly  for  Gaius  in  his  affliction.  Genuine  brotherly 
sympathy,  which  is  the  utterance  of  a  warm  and  true  heart,  is  like  rich  and  copious 
showers  of  rain  that  fall  upon  the  scorched  and  chapped  earth,  and  seem  to  hasten 
to  run  into  the  many  crevices  to  soften  the  divided  parts  and  to  bring  them  together 
again  that  the  many-pieced  earth  might  be  healed.  Observe,  John's  sympathy  in 
this  instance  took  the  form  of  a  prayer  ;  he  prayed  that  Gaius  might  prosper  and 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

be  in  health,  even  as  his  soul  prospered.  The  measure  of  physical  health  he  desired 
for  him  was  the  measure  of  spiritual  health  which  he  then  enjoyed.  If  this  were 
the  rule  for  prayer,  how  poor,  and  frail,  and  sickly  would  the  health  of  the  great 
majority  of  mankind  be !  "  What  is  the  value  of  this  estate  ?  "  said  a  gentleman  to 
another  with  whom  he  was  riding,  as  they  passed  a  fine  mansion  and  through  rich 
fields.  " I  don't  know  what  it  is  valued  at;  I  know  what  it  cost  its  late  possessor." 
"  How  much  ?  "  "  His  soul."  A  solemn  pause  followed  this  brief  answer.  The 
late  possessor  referred  to  was  the  son  of  a  pious  man  who  supported  his  family  by 
the  labour  of  his  hands.  The  son  early  obtained  a  subordinate  position  in  a 
mercantile  establishment  in  this  city.  He  was  then  a  professor  of  religion.  He 
continued  to  maintain  a  reputable  profession  until  he  became  a  partner  in  the 
concern.  He  then  gave  increasing  attention  to  business,  and  less  to  religion.  Just 
before  he  died,  he  said,  "  My  prosperity  has  been  my  ruin."  Many  may  wonder 
why  they  are  kept  so  poor  here ;  they  don't  seem  to  know  that  spiritual  wealth  is 
essential  to  the  wise  and  safe  handling  of  material  riches.  (Z).  Rhys  Jenkins.) 
St.  John's  prayer  for  Gams  : — I.  Pbosperiti  of  soul  is  the  chief  and  most 
VALTJABLB  PROSPERITY.  Sin  is  the  disease  of  the  soul ;  and  when  the  power  of  it  is 
subdued,  and  the  principles  and  habits  of  holiness  implanted  and  cherished,  by  the 
Divine  and  almighty  Physician,  then  the  health  of  the  soul  is  restored  and  it 
becomes  prosperous.  It  is  in  some  measure  healthful  and  prosperous  when  it  is 
filled  with  useful  knowledge ;  when  it  is  able  to  discern  those  things  that  differ ; 
and  hath  a  clear  understanding  of  the  Divine  wUl,  and  the  various  motives  by 
which  obedience  to  it  is  enforced.  But  knowledge  is  only  the  foundation  of  rehgion. 
Health  of  soul  chiefly  consists  in  piety  and  righteousness ;  in  an  ardent  love  to  God, 
a  high  delight  in  the  exercises  of  devotion ;  in  a  sincere  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  a 
regular  and  circumspect  conversation,  founded  upon  the  principles,  and  conducted 
by  the  rules,  of  His  gospel.  II.  A  person  mat  have  a  prosperous  soul,  and  tet 
WANT  EXTERNAL  PROSPERITY.  Their  souls  are  ill  lodged ;  and  the  tabernacles  in 
which  they  dwell  do  not  appear  to  suit  the  dignity  and  worth  of  the  inhabitants. 
This  is  sometimes  owing  to  disorders  conveyed  to  them  from  their  parents.  It  is 
frequently  owing  to  the  ill-judged  indulgence  of  their  parents.  "Many"  (as  Mr. 
Baxter  observes,  who  was  himself  an  instance  of  it)  "  struggle  all  their  days  with 
pain  and  sickness,  through  the  folly  of  their  mothers  ;  who  breed  them  up  delicately, 
and  deny  them  nothing  which  they  like  and  crave,  how  injurious  soever  to  their 
health."  Sometimes  they  are  made  to  "possess  the  iniquities  of  their  youth"; 
particularly  impurity,  intemperance,  idleness,  or  ungoverned  passions.  In  many 
cases  the  immediate  hand  of  God  is  to  be  acknowledged  in  the  weaknesses  and 
languors  of  our  frame.  He  exerciseth  His  servants  with  this  painful  disciphne,  to 
make  their  hearts  better,  to  quicken  their  diligence  and  excite  their  sympathy  and 
concern  for  the  good  of  others.     HI.  We  may  very  properly  wish  and  pray  that 

OUB   FBIENDS   MAY   ENJOY   TEMPORAL   PROSPERITY,    ESPECIALLY   HEALTH.       Much    Of    the 

comfort  of  life  depends  upon  health.  Where  that  is  enjoyed,  we  can  discharge 
those  active  services  which  our  several  relations  and  connections  demand,  and  can 
enjoy  the  bounties  of  providence  with  relish  and  pleasure.  If  an  instnunent  be  out 
of  tune,  the  most  skilful  hand  can  produce  no  harmony.  If  the  body  be  disordered 
by  pain  and  sickness,  the  soul  cannot  act  by  it  with  ease,  freedom,  and  cheerfulness. 
It  needs  great  strength  and  prosperity  of  soul  to  behave  well,  amidst  wearisome 
days  and  nights,  and  months  of  vanity.  Therefore  it  is  reasonable  and  proper  that 
we  should  pray  to  that  God  who  raised  this  curious  frame  and  hath  all  nature 
under  His  control,  that  we  may  prosper  and  be  in  health.  And  if  we  hope  for  His 
interposition,  it  should  be  our  care  to  avoid  everything  that  would  injure  the 
health,  and  to  take  proper  methods  to  restore  and  confirm  it,  when  it  is  impaired. 

IV.    It    is    happy   for    our   friends    when    we    can   wish   them    to    be   AS   PROSPEROUS 

AND  HEALTHFUL  AS  THEY  ARE  GOOD.  Application :  1.  To  those  who  have  no 
prosperity,  neither  temporal  nor  spiritual.  2.  To  those  who  have  temporal,  but  no 
spiritual  prosperity.  3.  To  those  whose  souls  prosper,  but  they  want  temporal 
prosperity ;  who,  like  Gains,  have  sickly  constitutions,  but  healthy  souls. 
The  instance  in  the  text  shows  how  unreasonable  it  is  to  conclude  that 
your  souls  do  not  prosper,  because  the  outward  man  doth  not.  {J.  Orton,  D.D.) 
Sold  prosperity  : — I.  The  character  of  Gaius.  1.  The  indwelling  of  the  truth 
of  God.  He  walked  in  the  truth — he  was  a  fellow-helper  of  the  truth— -he  was 
beloved  for  the  truth's  sake.  By  the  indwelling  of  God's  truth,  living  principles 
are  implanted  in  the  soul.  They  are  a  fountain  spring,  whence  well  forth  love, 
benevolence,   active  well-doing,  and  the   end   is   eternal   life  and  glory.     2.  The 


III.  JOHN.  9 

external  manifestation  of  his  piety.  The  truth  moulded  and  shaped  his  cater  life. 
His  daily  actions  bore  its  holy  impress.  His  creed  was  not  one  thing,  and  hig  , 
walk  another.  As  a  citizen  of  the  world,  and  as  a  member  of  Christ's  Church, 
'his  entire  conduct  was  influenced  by  what  he  beheved  and  professed.  3.  The 
fidelity  that  characterised  him.  He  acted  as  a  good  steward  of  God's  bounty. 
4.  The  brotherly  love  he  displayed.  To  thus  his  brethren  in  the  Church,  and 
l{he  strangers  that  visited  the  place  bore  testimony.  II.  His  spiritxjal  pbos- 
rBEiTT.  1.  Pre-eminent  soul-prosperity.  This  is  by  no  means  a  common  condition 
among  the  people  of  God — to  be  more  prosperous  in  spiritual  interests  than  in 
other  interests.  2.  The  living  embodiment  of  truth.  The  indweUing  truth  came 
forth  in  embodied  action.  If  we  are  rooted  and  grounded  in  doctrinal  truth  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  we  shall  give  a  living  manifestation  of  that  in  our  practical  godliness. 
3.  Devotional  solitude  combined  with  energetic  action.  The  prosperous  Christian 
lives  much  alone  with  God.  But  he  has  also  much  to  do  with  society.  His  field 
of  labour  is  the  world.  4.  Largeness  of  heart.  With  many  self  is  first  and  last, 
all  and  in  all.  Spiritual  prosperity  to  such  is  a  thing  unknown.  5.  Deep  humility 
of  soul.  It  has  been  well  said  that  a  haughty,  self-sufficient  professor  is  a  doubtfvd 
character ;  and  that  high  minds  are  like  high  hills,  blasted  and  barren.  We  may 
say,  then,  that  lowly  minds  are  like  well-watered,  fruitful  valleys.  IH.  The 
BEARING  OF  THIS  SUBJECT  OK  ouB  ciEcm^TANCES.  1.  The  great  Want  of  the  Church 
of  Christ  is  soul-prosperity.  2.  Individual  solicitude  is  requisite  in  order  to  meet 
that  want.  3.  The  vital  spring  of  spiritual  prosperity  is  found  in  the  presence  and 
mighty  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Isa.  xliv.  3,  4  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27 ;  xxxvii.  14). 
(P.  Morrison.)  Prosperity  and  piety  : — We  have  recorded  here  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  prayers  of  which  we  have  any  information  ;  for  the  word  translated  "  I 
wish,"  not  only  expresses  the  fact  that  the  thing  is  desired,  and  that  the  person 
thus  desiring  would  have  pleasure  in  securing  it,  but  it  carries  the  additional  idea 
of  so  desiring  it  as  to  make  it  a  matter  of  earnest  and  formal  petition.  In  con- 
sidering the  prayer — I.  The  person  who  offers  this  prater — it  is  the  Apostle  John. 
We  know  from  all  his  writings  that  he  was  eminently  affectionate.  Whilst  his 
heart  abounded  in  affection,  he  was  still  most  discriminating  in  his  views.  Probably 
there  is  no  portion  of  the  New  Testament  which  contains  severer  tests  of  Christian 
character  than  are  to  be  found  in  the  three  short  Epistles  of  John.  They  are  very 
spiritual,  and  they  enter  very  largely  into  the  inward  workings  of  the  grace  of  God 
upon  the  heart.  He  manifested  throughout  his  long  and  eventful  life  the  greatest 
BoUcitude  for  those  who  were  converted  under  his  ministry.  H.  The  person  fob 
WHOM  THE  PRATER  WAS  OFFERED:  it  is  for  the  well-bclovcd  Grains.  1.  First,  his 
character.  It  is  very  excellent,  and  caused  him  to  be  much  loved  by  aU  lovers  of 
good  men.  Two  ingredients,  hpwever,  are  particularly  named  as  forming  his 
character.  These  are  his  piety  and  his  benevolence.  With  this  union  of  piety 
towards  God  and  good-wUl  towards  men  his  soul  prospered.  A  plant  is  said  to 
thrive  and  prosper  when  it  brings  forth  fruit,  a  field  when  it  abounds  with  precious 
grain,  a  human  body  when  it  is  healthy  and  vigorous  and  active.  So  a  soul  prospers 
when  it  abounds  in  the  love  of  the  truth,  in  the  love  of  those  who  hold  the  truth, 
and  yields  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  richly,  in  large  measure,  and  in  a 
corresponding  practice.  2.  But  notice  his  condition.  From  the  language  of  the 
text  it  is  gathered  that  he  was  a  man  of  feeble  health.  The  particular  Greek  word 
used  encourages  this  idea.  Whether  it  was  a  permanent  weakness  of  constitution 
or  an  occasional  fit  of  illness,  we  cannot  tell,  though  it  is  obvious  from  the  prayer 
of  the  apostle,  that  he  might  be  in  health,  but  that  he  was  at  that  time  an  invalid. 
From  the  prayer  that  he  might  prosper,  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  Gains  had 
Buffered  in  his  worldly  property,  was  somewhat  reduced  in  circumstances.  Some 
are  of  opinion  that  he  suffered  from  persecution,  and  that  by  the  violence  of  wicked 
men  his  property  was  wrenched  away  from  him.  There  is  much  plausibility  in  thia 
supposition.  Others,  however,  think,  that  by  reason  of  his  great  liberality  to  the 
saints  he  had  actually  impoverished  himself.  This  opinion  is  strengthened  by  the 
account  we  have  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  of  the  Hberality  of  the  early  Christians. 
At  any  rate  the  situation  of  this  Gaius  was  such  as  to  call  for  the  prayer  of  the 
Apostle  John  that  he  might  again  be  prospered.  HI.  The  prater  offered  m 
BEHALF  of  Gaius.  It  is  Very  short,  but  it  is  very  comprehensive.  It  is  that  in  all 
things  he  may  be  prospered,  and  be  in  health.  Thus  we  see  that  it  is  proper  to  pray 
for  temporal  blessings.  Beside  this,  a  special  promise  is  made  to  the  diligent.  Yet 
of  aU  mere  temporal  blessings,  health  stands  as  that  most  valuable ;  for  without  it, 
we  can  neither  labour  for  God,  nor  enjoy  the  good  with  which  He  favours  us.    Bat 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

this  prayer,  whilst  it  is  concerned  about  temporal  prosperity,  contains  one  peculiarity; 
it  is — that  this  prosperity  and  this  health  may  be  in  proportion  to  the  prosperity  of 
the  soul.  Oh !  what  an  exaltation  this  gives  to  spiritual  things  above  all  temporal 
affairs !  Here  is  the  revelation  of  wisdom — that  the  spiritual  state  of  the  soul  is 
the  proper  rule  of  prayer,  and  that  it  is  the  just  standard  of  desire  for  health  and 
prosperity.  This  is  a  rule  most  sifting  in  its  operation,  a  rule  that  tries  to  the  very 
uttermost  the  spirit  of  prayer  as  well  as  the  confidence  of  our  hearts  in  God.  1.  Now, 
in  reviewing  this  subject,  we  learn  in  the  first  place,  how  careful  men  would  be  if 
this  rule  of  praying  was  their  constant,  honest  practice — if  every  one  in  the  retire- 
ment of  the  closet  should  put  up  this  prayer — "  0  Lord  God,  grant  me  this  day 
health  of  body  equal  to  the  health  of  my  soul.  0  Lord  God,  grant  that  I  may 
prosper  in  my  business,  exactly  as  my  soul  prospers."  2.  Secondly,  how  fearful  a 
thing  it  is  by  the  loss  of  piety  to  convert  property  from  being  a  means  of  grace  to 
become  a  source  of  danger  and  ruin !  If  all  Christians  would  live  in  the  spirit  of 
this  prayer,  how  every  interest  of  religion  would  prosper !  Again,  true  piety  will 
seek  the  prosperity  of  the  soul  above  all  things.  3.  And  now,  finally,  we  learn  that 
the  injury  of  riches  is  in  the  motive  for  which  we  desire  them.  If  for  their  own 
sake  we  desire  them,  for  the  purpose  of  accumulation,  then  this  is  mammon 
worship.  Again,  if  we  desire  them  for  the  power,  or  for  the  gratification  which 
they  afford  us,  then  this  is  mere  selfishness.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  do  good, 
this  induces  benevolence.     (W.  Patten,  D.D.)         Spiritual  health  : — I.  It  is  a  law 

OF  LIFE  THAT  HEALTH  IS  ESSENTIAL  TO  PERFECT  ENJOYMENT.  II.  PERFECT  SOUL 
HEALTH   IS    THE    BEST    SAFEGUARD   AGAINST  THE  FORCE  OF  TEMPTATION.       It  is  bcCOmiug 

more  and  more  acknowledged  that  bodily  disease  is  due  not  so  much  to  outward 
causes  as  to  predisposing  causes.  It  arises  not  so  much  from  the  presence  of  disease 
germs  without,  but  susceptibility  of  tissue  that  provides  soil  for  their  ready  growth. 
When  the  seeds  of  disease  are  already  in  the  body,  outward  causes  may  soon  provoke 
their  development.  Is  it  not  so  with  the  soul's  life  ?  When  the  pulse  of  the  soul 
is  feeble  and  the  moral  tone  low,  a  man  soon  succumbs  to  moral  taint.  III.  Perfect 
SOUL  HEALTH  IS  ESSENTIAL  TO  TRUE  SPIRITUAL  GROWTH.  "  Dwai'fs  are  much  more 
common  in  the  spiritual  than  in  the  physical  sphere,"  Many  Christians  remain  at 
the  earliest  stage  of   the  Christian  life.     They  are  ever  in  religious   childhood. 

IV.    The  MEANS  to  be  employed    for  the    MAINTENANCE  OF    SPIRITUAL    HEALTH.       It  IS 

a  sine  qua  non  that  a  healthy  Christian  breathes  pure  air.  When  a  diver  goes 
down  into  the  sea  he  takes  full  care  to  be  supplied  with  a  sufficient  amount  of  pure 
air  from  above.  Our  daily  duties  may  bring  us  into  surroundings  very  uncongenial 
to  the  religious  life.  We  have  no  right,  however,  to  involve  ourselves  in  any 
situation  or  engage  in  any  pursuit  where  the  atmosphere  of  prayer  cannot  reach  us. 
No  one  expects  to  nourish  and  build  up  a  robust  physical  frame  on  mere  condiments 
and  confectionery.  The  result  would  soon  become  apparent  in  impoverished  blood 
and  feeble  pulse.  Aye,  and  men  cannot  nourish  their  souls  on  daily  newspapers 
and  exciting  novels.  An  old  writer  says :  "  Thou  canst  not  read  the  Scriptures  too 
much,  and  what  thou  readest  thou  canst  not  read  too  well,  and  what  thou  readest 
weU  thou  canst  not  too  well  understand,  and  what  thou  understandest  well  thou 
canst  not  too  well  teach,  and  what  thou  teachest  well  thou  canst  not  too  well  live." 
Food  may  be  received  into  the  system,  but  the  body  is  not  nourished  and  strength- 
ened unless  its  various  faculties  are  brought  into  suitable  exercise.  Half  the 
worries  and  vexations  which  afidict  many  Christians  would  disappear  if  they  were 
more  active  for  their  master,  "  working  with  both  hands  earnestly  "  for  His  cause. 
{J.  G.  Greaves.)  Spiritual  and  temporal  prosperity  : — I.  A  supposition  made, 
that  the  soul  of  him  in  regard  to  whom  the  wish  is  expressed  is  prospering.  1.  He 
knew  the  truth,  and  knew  it  well.  Every  one  who  desires  to  be  blessed  with  soul 
prosperity  must  be  intimately  acquainted  with  it  likewise.  "  The  truth  "  is  the 
great  revelation  of  the  gospel  concerning  the  way  of  salvation  by  Christ  crucified 
for  sinners.  This  is  the  great  ocean,  to  which  all  other  truths  are  but  tributary 
streams,  and  from  whose  bosom  all  the  showers  of  blessings  that  fall  on  the  moral 
wilderness  of  human  life  and  refresh  it,  derive  their  origin.  Were  this  truth 
unknown,  what  mysteries  would  encompass  us  !  What  unanswerable  questions 
would  start  up  before  us !  In  what  uncertainty  would  we  live,  in  what  fear 
would  we  die !  2.  Gains  believed  the  truth,  and  every  one  who  desires  soul 
prosperity  must  believe  it  too.  Those  who  content  themselves  with  a  mere 
speculative  acquaintance  with  Divine  truth,  resemble  those  who  would  sit  down 
to  a  feast,  but  leave  the  food  untasted  before  them.  And  what  a  vain  thing 
it  is  to  speak  about  the  truth,  to  profess  it,  to  argue  for  it,  to  recommend  it,  if  all 


III.  JOHN.  11 

the  while  we  never  recollect  that  it  is  our  duty  to  believe  it  I  3.  Gaius  walked  in 
the  truth, — that  is,  he  lived  in  a  manner  that  was  consistent  with  the  principles  of 
the  gospel ;  and  every  one  who  would  attain  soul  prosperity  must  do  so  likewise.  Now, 
if  we  believe  this  truth,  we  cannot  but  walk  in  it,  and  love  God  as  our  best  friend, 
and  we  will  feel  that  He  is  entitled  to  all  the  service  that  we  are  able  to  render ;  for 
we  are  not  our  own,  but  are  bought  with  the  mighty  price  of  the  blood  of  His  Son. 
Again,  the  truth  of  the  gospel  tells  us  that  sin  is  a  most  abominable  and  dangerous 
thing,  and  that  holiness  is  a  most  excellent  and  becoming  thing ;  and  we  must  walk 
in  this  truth  by  showing  that  we  really  believe  it,  in  our  avoidance  of  sin,  and  our 
practice  of  "  whatsoever  things  are  just,  and  honest,  and  true,  and  lovely,  and  of 
good  report."  In  the  same  way  we  must  walk  in  the  truth  by  showing  our  faith  in 
every  department  of  revelation,  by  bringing  it  into  our  practice.  4.  Gaius  loved 
the  truth ;  and  without  love  to  the  truth  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  prosperity  of 
Boul.  If  we  believe  the  truth  we  cannot  but  love  it,  because  it  is  so  glorious  in 
itself  and  so  suitable  to  us ;  and  if  we  walk  in  the  truth,  we  must  love  it  more  and 
more,  as  we  discover  by  increasing  experience  new  beauties  and  excellences.  11. 
Notice  the  wish  itself  :  "  I  wish  above  aU  things  that  thou  mayest  prosper,  and 
be  in  health."  1.  The  apostle  here  expresses  a  wish  for  the  worldly  prosperity  of 
Gaius.  Af33iction,  then,  is  not  a  blessing  in  itself  ;  nor  is  worldly  prosperity  in 
itself  an  evil.  What  the  apostle  would  have  called  prosperity,  in  a  worldly  point 
of  view,  would  likely  have  consisted  of  the  two  following  particulars :  first,  such 
an  amount  of  the  good  things  of  this  world  as  will  preserve  us  from  the  oppressive 
cares  of  poverty  on  the  one  hand,  and  those  almost  equally  great,  and  more  dan- 
gerous, though  less  unpleasant  ones,  which  must  always  accompany  inordinate 
wealth.  The  second  element  of  prosperity  which  the  good  man  would  desire  would 
probably  be  a  tranquil,  easy  flow  of  his  affairs,  without  great  difficulties,  great 
successes,  or  great  reverses.  And  such  a  prosperity  as  this  is  what  we  may  wish 
for  ourselves  and  for  our  friends.  2.  The  apostle  expresses  a  wish  for  the  bodily 
health  of  his  friend.  This  is  necessary  to  complete  the  idea  of  worldly  comfort ; 
for  without  this,  all  that  rank  is  able  to  command  or  wealth  to  procure  will  be  little 
enjoyed.  To  care  for  the  health  of  the  body  is  a  duty ;  for  God  has  not  made  so 
fine  a  piece  of  workmanship  to  be  carelessly  destroyed.  Man  is  a  compound  being, 
consisting  of  two  parts — soul  and  body ;  and  if  it  be  a  duty  to  care  for  the  one,  it 
is  as  certainly  a  duty  to  care  for  the  other,  though  certainly  it  is  a  duty  of  far  inferior 
importance,  and  one  of  whose  neglect  there  is  much  less  risk  of  complaining. 
in.  The  limit  appended  :  "I  wish  above  all  things  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and 
be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth."  1.  When  we  wish  for  our  friends' 
prosperity  and  health,  the  limit  "  as  thy  soul  prospereth  "  is  necessary  for  their  own 
good.  If  we  wish  for  worldly  prosperity  to  a  bad  man,  we  wish  in  general  for 
what  will  harden  his  heart,  and  turn  his  mind  more  effectually  away  from  God, 
But  for  one  whose  soul  is  really  prospering,  health  and  prosperity  are  good  things. 
We  may  be  certain  that  whatever  the  wealth  or  influence  of  a  truly  good  man, 
whose  religion  is  prosperous,  will  enable  him  to  do,  he  will  lend  it  all  to  what,  in 
doing  good  to  others,  will  do  good  to  himself.  2.  But  if  soul  prosperity  is  necessary 
to  render  them  safe  to  the  individual  himself,  it  is  equally  necessary  to  render  his 
health  and  prosperity  a  blessing  to  others.  {W.  Dickson.)  Spiritual  prosperity  : 
— There  are  two  worlds  in  which  every  man  lives,  two  distinct  yet  equally  real 
scenes  of  existence  in  which  we  spend  the  days  and  hours  of  life.  To  the  outward 
world,  with  its  material  objects  and  interests,  no  man  altogether  or  exclusively 
belongs.  You  have  but  to  close  the  eye  or  abstract  the  thoughts  from  outer  things, 
and  instantly  you  pass  into  another  region  :  you  become,  as  it  were,  the  dweller  in 
an  inner  world — that  strange  mysterious  region  of  thoughts  and  feeling  and  desires, 
of  memory  and  conscience  and  will — that  microcosm,  that  little  but  most  real 
world  within  every  human  breast.  Corresponding  to  these  two  worlds,  the  external 
and  the  internal,  there  are  two  lives  we  all  may  be  said  to  lead, — the  outer  life  of 
sense,  the  inner  hidden  life  and  history  of  the  soul.  The  visible  material  life  is 
but  the  scaffolding  under  which  the  unseen  and  eternal  life  is  rearing.  With  respect 
to  each  of  us,  there  has  been,  from  the  dawn  of  our  existence,  a  mental  as  well  as 
a  material  history — a  life  of  the  soul,  a  course  of  inward  progress  or  retrogression, 
a  series  of  changes  for  good  or  evil  in  the  character  of  that  mysterious  dweller 
beneath  every  breast,  more  worthy  to  be  chronicled,  fraught,  would  we  but  believe 
it,  with  interest  deeper,  more  momentous  far,  than  the  fortunes  and  vicissitudes  of 
oar  outward  career.  In  the  passage  before  us,  the  apostle,  as  you  will  perceive  at  a 
glance,  makes  reference  to  the  two  courses  of  human  experience  of  which  we  have 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

just  spoken — the  outward  and  the  inward.  The  text  is  simply  an  expression  of 
affectionate  desire  for  the  welfare  of  one  who  seems  to  have  been  very  dear  to  the 
writer.  It  is  the  friendly  greeting  of  a  believer  to  a  brother  in  Christ.  And  you 
perceive  that  the  particular  form  it  takes  is,  not  that  merely  of  a  simple  wish  for 
the  friend's  happiness,  but  of  a  wish  more  specifically  for  his  happiness,  his 
prosperity,  at  once  in  the  inward  and  the  outer  life.     I.  Of  what  in  the  language 

OF  THE  WORIiD  IS  COMMONLY  DESIGNATED  PKOSPEBITY,  PEBHAPS  THE  TWO  MAIN  ELEMENTS 

ABE  WEALTH  AND  POWER.  Now  there  are  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  man  elements 
analogous  to  these,  of  which  his  inward  prosperity  may  be  said  to  consist.  1.  There 
is,  it  will  need  very  little  reflection  to  perceive,  a  wealth  which  may  be  predicated 
of  the  inward  as  well  as  of  the  outward  life.  Money,  property,  worldly  goods,  are 
not  more  real  possessions  than  thought,  knowledge,  wisdom.  Nor  are  the  outward 
comforts  and  luxuries,  the  gratifications  of  sense  and  appetite  that  may  be  procured 
by  the  former,  more  literally  a  man's  own,  what  belongs  to  him,  what  makes  him 
richer,  than  are  warm  affections,  a  fertile  imagination,  a  memory  stored  with 
information,  and,  above  all,  a  heart  full  of  God's  grace.  The  common  phraseology 
of  life  recognises  this  fact,  when  we  speak,  for  instance,  of  "  a  richly-furnished 
mind,"  a  mind  "  rich  in  intellectual  resources,"  "  a  rich  vein  of  thought,"  "  an 
ample  fund  of  information,"  and  the  like.  Nor  let  it  be  said  that  this  is  merely 
the  language  of  metaphor.  Take  two  men,  one  in  comparatively  straitened  circum- 
stances, yet  possessed  of  great  mental  abilities  and  attainments — the  other,  over- 
flowing with  money,  yet  narrow-souled  and  ignorant ;  you  would  not  hesitate  to  say 
which  is  really  the  richer  of  the  two.  And  if  this  be  true  of  mere  intellect,  if  even 
secular  knowledge  constitute  a  wealth  more  valuable  than  any  outward  possession, 
surely  not  less  true  must  the  same  thought  be  when  applied  to  that  wisdom  which 
maketh  wise  unto  salvation.  Surely  that  man  is  indeed  the  richest,  who  bears 
within  his  bosom  the  treasure  of  a  soul  at  peace  with  God,  and  safe  for  all  eternity  ! 
For  money,  property,  every  worldly  possession,  is  out  of  the  man.  It  does  not  come 
into  the  soul.  It  can  be  separated  from  him.  It  is  but  an  accident,  not  an  essential 
property  of  his  being.  But  knowledge,  faith,  spiritual-mindedness,  love  to  Christ, 
these  are  a  sort  of  wealth  that  go  into  and  become  transfused  through  the  very 
essence  of  the  man.  Yours,  too,  is  the  only  unvarying  wealth.  A  soul,  on  which 
the  image  of  Christ  is  impressed,  is  a  thing  precious  everywhere,  and  for  ever  ;  it  has 
not,  like  man's  wealth,  a  different  value  in  different  countries  and  at  different  times; 
it  will  pass  current  eveiy  where — it  is  free  of  the  universe.  Yours,  finally,  is  the  only 
lasting  wealth.  The  time  will  come  when  the  richest  must  abandon  his  wealth  for 
ever.  The  only  thing  you  shall  be  able  to  keep,  is  that  which  you  have  stored  up 
in  the  soul  itself.  That  alone  will  go  out  with  the  soul  into  eternity.  2.  The  other 
element,  commonly  included  in  the  idea  of  "  prosperity,"  is  power.  He  is  univer- 
sally esteemed  a  prosperous  man  in  his  outward  circumstances  who  is  advancing 
or  has  risen  from  comparative  lowliness  and  obscurity  to  a  position  of  eminence 
and  influence  in  society.  Now,  to  this  also  there  is  a  parallel  in  the  inward  life. 
We  may  be  inwardly  as  well  as  outwardly  powerful.  In  the  little  world  within  the 
breast  there  are  stations  of  rank,  dominion,  authority,  to  which  we  may  aspire,  or 
from  which  we  may  fall.  There  is  a  real  subjection,  degradation,  slavery  of  spirit, 
to  which  we  may  be  reduced ;  there  is  a  real  power,  freedom,  emancipation,  to 
which  we  may  attain.  It  is  not  a  mere  metaphor,  for  instance,  when,  in  common 
language,  we  say  that  the  profligate  man  is  "  the  slave  of  his  appetites."    11.  The 

SEASONS    FOR   WHICH   THIS   SOUL-PROSPEKITY   SHOULD   BE   REGARDED    IN    OUR   DESIRES  AS 

THE  STANDARD  OR  MEASURE  OF  OUTWARD  PROSPERITY.  1.  Can  it  be  doubtful  to  any 
one  that  wealth,  power,  prosperity,  are  no  blessings  where  God's  grace  has  not 
come  before  them  ? — that  it  is  not  good  to  be  happy  if  first  we  are  not  holy  ?  The 
rich,  gay,  happy,  outward  life,  and  the  dark  moral  antithesis  within  !  It  is  good 
to  be  gay,  where  the  gaiety  is  real.  But  it  is  not  good,  it  is  not  seemly,  it  is,  sooth 
to  say,  the  sorrowfullest  thing  under  heaven,  to  be  gay  where  there  is  every  reason 
to  be  sad.  Right  pleasant,  too,  it  is  to  behold  the  ruddy  hue  on  the  cheek,  and  the 
bright  sparkle  in  the  eye  of  health.  But  have  you  never  felt  that  no  sight  is  so 
truly  melancholy  as  the  unnatural  brightness  in  the  eye,  or  the  glow  that  often 
gathers  on  consumption's  cheek,  the  more  beautiful  as  the  end  draweth  near?  And 
yet,  sad  though  these  contrasts  are,  there  is  something  more  truly  pitiful,  there  is  a 
more  awful,  because  a  moral  sadness,  in  the  sight  which  the  minions  of  outward 
prosperity,  of  worldly  comfort  and  happiness,  not  seldom  present  to  a  thoughtful 
observer's  eye.  Looking  on  an  irreligious  man's  life,  mindful  how  rapidly  the 
stream  of  time  is  bearing  him  onward  to  the  unseen,  does  there  not  force  itself  on 


III.  JOHN.  13 


the  mind  a  sense  of  something  horribly  incongruous  in  all  this  gaiety,  as  were  the 
mirth  of  men  in  a  sinking  ship,  or  wild  shouts  of  laughter  from  some  crew  hurrying 
onward  to  the  torrent's  brink  !  2.  Outward  prosperity  is  not  desirable  for  a  man's 
own  sake,  if  unaccompanied  by  inward,  because  of  the  bad  moral  influence  which 
it  has  on  his  own  character.  For  an  irreligious  man,  nothing  is  more  to  be  depre- 
cated than  an  uninterrupted  flow  of  worldly  good.  Only  in  proportion  as  the  dew 
of  God's  hidden  grace  is  descending  on  the  heart,  can  it  be  safe  for  a  man  to  be 
exposed  to  the  hot  sun  of  worldly  prosperity  ;  and  if  that  secret  element  of  strength 
and  fertility  be  not  continually  supplied,  the  scorching  heat  must  speedily  wither 
up,  in  the  spiritual  soil,  every  green  and  beautiful  thing.  3.  It  is  not  only  for  a 
man's  own  good,  but  also  for  the  good  of  others,  that  he  should  prosper  outwardly 
only  in  the  measure  in  which  his  soul  prospereth.  For,  obviously,  wealth,  power, 
influence,  all  outward  advantages,  are  just  so  many  means  of  doing  good  or  evil 
put  into  a  man's  hands  ;  and  whether  such  advantages  shall  be  for  the  benefit  or 
injury  of  mankind,  depends  on  the  inward  character  of  him  to  whom  they  are 
intrusted.  Mankind  are  losers  when  a  selfish  man  prospers  ;  they  are  gainers  by 
the  prosperity  of  the  generous  and  liberal-minded.  The  latter  receive  the  blessings 
of  God's  providence  as  the  sun  receives  light,  to  brighten  and  gladden  the 
world,  or  as  the  healthy  plant  the  influences  of  nature,  to  scatter  them  abroad 
in  fertility  and  fragrance  again.  The  former,  on  the  contrary,  like  an  excres- 
cence on  the  fruit-tree  absorbing  the  moisture  that  might  have  gone  to  produce 
leaves  and  fruit,  receive  any  blessing  at  God's  hand  only  to  retain  or  abuse 
it ;  or,  hke  a  rank  weed,  draw  in  the  genial  influences  of  the  soil  and 
atmosphere  of  life  only  to  poison  all  the  air  around  them.  (J.  Caird,  D.D.) 
The  Christirni's  New  Year's  complitnent : — This  is  the  New  Testament  expression  of 
a  formula  to  which  we  have  been  accustomed  from  our  youth,  and  is  alike  benevo- 
lent, seasonable,  and  beautiful.  Such  an  expression  is  music  to  the  heart  of  him 
who  hears  it ;  and  it  is  the  expression  of  a  noble  and  a  Christian  interest  in  him 
who  gives  it  utterance.  1.  Let  us  look,  then,  at  the  benevolence  of  this  wish. 
Christianity  is  a  system  of  benevolence,  nay,  not  of  benevolence  only,  or  of  good 
wishes,  but  of  good  deeds.  Every  line  that  is  written  in  the  gospel  is  charged  with 
love.  2.  In  the  second  place,  notice  in  this  wish  of  the  aged  John  the  fact  that  his 
benevolent  wish  goes  beyond  the  year  that  passeth  by ;  and  he  wishes  him  not  only 
prosperity  of  body,  but  health  and  prosperity  of  soul.  He  wishes  him  not  simply  a 
happy  new  year,  but  a  happy  eternity.  "I  wish  above  all  things  that  thou  mayest 
prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth."  And  that  wish  that  looks 
on  man  and  regards  hbn  as  the  subject  simply  of  this  world,  is  a  very  imperfect 
one.  It  is  the  least  worthy  of  a  Christian.  3.  Now  notice  in  the  next  place  the 
comprehensiveness  of  this  wish.  4.  But  note  again  the  discriminating  character  of 
this  wish.  "  Beloved,  I  wish  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as 
thy  soul  prospereth."  In  other  words,  if  I  translate  it  into  common  phraseology, 
it  is — Gains,  I  am  anxious  for  your  health ;  I  am  desirous  that  you  should  be  a 
rich  man,  and  a  great  man,  a  healthy  man  and  a  happy  man,  but  I  am  desirous 
stiU  more  that  your  soul  may  be  right  ia  its  relationship  to  God.  Such  is  the  wish 
of  John  as  expressed  to  Gains  ;  and  nothing  can  be  more  reasonable  than  this. 
6.  Thus  we  see  in  this  prayer  of  John,  not  only  benevolence,  but  comprehensiveness 
and  discrimination  ;  we  see  in  it  also  intensity.  It  is  no  bare  expression — a  wish 
with  the  lip,  that  has  no  counterpart  in  the  heart.  In  Scripture  there  is  courtesy, 
but  it  is  the  courtesy  of  Christianity.  But  what  is  this  prosperity  of  soul  that  is 
spoken  of  ?  I  am  sure  you  will  concur  with  me  when  I  say  that  it  must  be  preceded 
by  a  state  of  acceptance  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Not  only  a 
change  of  state,  which  is  justification,  but  a  change  of  nature,  which  is  regeneration. 
Having  noticed,  then,  these  two  as  preliminary  to  the  soul's  health,  let  us  notice 
what  are  ^ome  of  the  signs  and  features  of  real  health  of  soul.  1.  I  would  say,  first 
of  all,  that  a  growing,  deepening  sense  of  unworthiness  in  the  sight  of  God  is  one  of 
the  best  and  most  unequivocal  signs  of  a  state  of  grace  and  healthiness  of  soul. 
2.  Another  sign  is  a  clearer  apprehension  of  the  suitableness  and  suificiency  of 
Christ  as  our  Saviour.     8.  Another  sign  of  this  soul  health  is  greater  teachableness. 

4.  Another  sign  of  this  spiritual  health  will  be  greater  deUght  in  hearing  the  gospel. 

5.  Another  evidence  of  this  soul-prosperity  is  less  bondage  to  the  world.  Just  as  a 
Christian  grows  in  true  spiritual  prosperity  will  he  have  less  care  about  what  men 
say  of  him,  and  more  anxiety  that  God  should  think  well  of  him.  6.  Another  sign 
of  this  true  spiritual  prosperity  and  progress  is  more  entire  acquiescence  in  God's 
wiU.     The  number  and  the  frequency  of  your  waverings  is  evidence  that  you  are 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

far  from  spiritual  truth.  (J.  Cuviming,  D.D.)  Neio  Yearns  wishes  : — Life  may 
become  a  parable,  if  we  will  make  it  so.  Our  New  Year's  wishes  or  our  longinga 
and  cravings  after  some  earthly  good  may  remind  us  of  those  higher  blessings 
without  which  every  living  man  is  poor — those  great  gifts  which  are  more  precious 
than  all  the  treasures  of  this  world,  and  yet  not  beyond  the  reach  of  the  poor  outcast, 
who  wanders  over  it  without  a  home  and  without  a  friend.  I.  Let  me  say,  first,  that 
when  we  talk  of  prosperity,  every  man,  as  its  first  condition,  asks  that  he  may  be 
SAFE  AND  FBEE.  If  I  Cannot  sit  at  ease  in  my  own  home,  if  I  dare  not  sleep  without 
a  guard  at  my  chamber-door,  if  I  crouch  and  watch  in  my  lair,  no  man  in  his 
senses  would  think  of  calling  me  happy  and  prosperous.  A  kingdom  would  be  a 
poor  bribe  for  which  to  accept  a  life  like  that.  Now  we  do  but  say  the  simple  truth 
when  we  declare  that  the  servant  of  God  is  the  only  safe  man  in  the  world. 
Others  may  have  a  bold  step  and  a  proud  look;  they  may  feel  secure  because  they 
walk  with  the  crowd,  and  may  take  the  fool's  course  of  living  in  the  present,  without 
care  for  the  future ;  but  there  is  no  escape  from  the  sweeping  declarations  of 
Scripture  as  to  our  death  in  sin  and  our  life  in  Christ,  no  reversal  of  the  sentence 
which  leaves  every  impenitent,  unsanctified  man  without  hope.  11.  Let  me  speak 
of  another  thing  which  enters  largely  into  the  common  notion  of  prosperity — bodilt 
HEALTH  AND  EASE.  Our  commou  greetings  take  this  direction.  Ailments  are  a 
serious  kind  of  drawback  to  men's  happiness.  Yet  what  a  plague  lieth  on  men's 
souls,  and  few  apprehend  the  half  of  its  malignity  and  danger!  III.  Another 
element  of  prosperity  is  success  ;  advancement,  I  mean,  as  distinct  from  mere 
possession.  IV.  One  more  particular  I  must  mention,  which  most  men  deem  a 
prime  requisite  for  a  prosperous  or  happy  life — friends.  (J.  H.  Gurney,  M.A.) 
The  health  and  prosperity  of  the  soul : — Every  minister  is,  or  ought  to  be,  a  physician 
of  souls.  He  should  know  how  to  feel  the  soul's  pulse  and  to  read  its  spiritual 
symptoms.  He  has  the  experience  of  his  own  inner  life.  He  should  understand 
the  art  of  anatomy.  He  should  know  the  intimate  connection  of  the  spiritual  with 
the  physical.  Is  the  level  of  your  religious  good  health  at  the  level  of  your  bodily 
health  ?  How  comfortable,  how  robust,  how  active,  how  capable  your  body  is !  but 
your  soul — your  real  life  inside  your  body — how  is  it  with  that  ?  What  would  be 
the  result  of  a  careful  examination  this  morning  of  your  soul's  health  ?  I.  Let  us 
examine,  first,  what  may  be  at  this  moment  the  sickness  of  the  soul  to  which  you 
ARE  SUBJECT,  and  from  which  you  may  now  be  suffering.  It  may  be  that  your  soul 
looks  better,  healthier,  than  ever  it  did  in  your  life.  But  inwardly  you  are  getting 
weaker  and  weaker ;  you  do  not  know  it — you  scarcely  feel  it.  You  think  that  all 
is  right ;  that  you  will  be  better  to-morrow :  that's  consumption  !  Or,  you  have  no 
religious  feelings  at  all ;  you  are  neither  happy  nor  unhappy.  Your  vital  power  is 
passing  away,  but  you  do  not  know  that  it  is  decreasing — you  do  not  care  about  it : 
that  is  paralysis,  creeping  paralysis  1  Or,  on  the  contrary,  you  are  very  excited ; 
you  talk  very  much  about  religion,  often  very  foolishly,  very  wildly.  Your  words 
are  extravagant ;  you  cannot  restrain  yourself  ;  it  is  all  high-flown :  that's  fever ! 
Or  you  have  run  down  to  the  opposite  extreme ;  every  feather  is  a  burden, 
every  shadow  distresses  you.  You  are  miserable.  That's  inanition  or  melancholia  ! 
It  is  a  heart  disease.  Or  your  soul  generally  seems  right.  But  there  is  one  very 
sore,  bad  place,  and  you  cannot  get  rid  of  it — it  grows :  that's  ulcer — perhaps 
cancer  I  Or,  worse  still,  some  immorality  is  vitiating  your  soul.  An  allowed  sin 
is  sapping  everything  that  is  good  :  that's  poison — poison  of  the  blood  1  Or  every- 
thing that  is  good  and  true  in  you  is  dying — dying  slowly,  surely.  There  is  no  pain 
now ;  there  is  no  pain :  that's  mortification  :  that's  death  !  H.  But  now  the 
question  is,  What  is  the  bemedt  ?  What  are  the  secrets  of  the  recovery  of  the 
spiritual  life  to  a  diseased  soul  ?  1.  The  first  and  all-important  and  sure  remedy 
is  to  go  at  once  to  the  Good  and  Great  Physician  Himself ;  He  can  and  He  wiD 
cure  all.  2.  Then  go  and  do  exactly  according  to  His  orders.  3.  Next  bathe 
yourself  in  blood.  He  will  show  you  the  fountain,  and  Himself  will  do  the  washing. 
4.  Take  the  medicines  which  He  prescribes.  They  will,  perhaps,  be  bitter,  very 
bitter :  penitence,  tears,  losses,  afflictions,  severe  self-discipline — it  may  be 
amputation  I  But  there  will  be  something  very  sweet  to  take  away  the  bitterness 
and  lull  all  the  pain !  III.  But  now  let  me  suppose,  that  you  are  "  in  health," 
that  "  your  soul  prospers,"  or,  as  the  word  is  in  the  original,  more  literally, 
that  "your  soul  is  in  a  good  way" — what  shall  you  do  to  keep  well?  1.  First, 
keep  very  near  to  the  Good  Physician  to  whom  you  owe  your  recovery,  and  consult 
Him  very  often,  and  wait  for  His  answer.  2.  Then,  use  His  prescription,  for  He  is 
the  Counsellor  to  the  soul,  alwiiys  ready  to  listen  patiently ;  He  knows  the  exact 


III.  JOHN.  15 

treatment  your  constitution  requires,  and  His  remedies  are  infallible.  3.  Then, 
you  must  never  forget  two  things :  one,  the  fact  that  you  have  a  soul,  and  the  other, 
that  your  soul  is  a  very  delicate  thing,  easily  and  immediately  affected  by  all 
outward  things,  and  has  a  great  tendency  to  relapses.  4.  Fourthly,  you  must  be 
very  careful  of  the  atmosphere  in  which  you  live ;  see  that  it  be  a  pure  atmosphere, 
free  from  all  impurities !  5.  Your  soul  must  never  omit  its  daily  exercises :  some 
good  work  which  you  have  in  hand  for  God,  some  labour  of  love.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Soul-health  : — I.  We  will  examine  the  words  of  the  text.  1.  "  I  wish  "  ;  more 
correctly,  "I  pray."    Prayer  is  a  wish  sanctified.     Turn  your  wishes  into  prayers. 

2.  "  That  thou  mayest  prosper."  We  may  ask  for  prosperity  for  our  friends ; 
especially  if,  like   Gains,   they   serve   God  and  His  cause  with  their  substance. 

3.  "  And  be  in  health."  This  is  necessary  to  the  enjoyment  of  prosperity.  What 
would  all  else  be  without  it?  4.  "  Even  as  thy  soul  prospereth."  We  are  startled 
at  this  wish  :  the  spiritual  health  of  Gains  is  made  the  standard  of  his  outward 
prosperity  !  Dare  we  pray  thus  for  many  of  our  friends  ?  Dare  we  pray  thus  for 
ourselves?  What  would  be  the  result  if  such  a  prayer  were  answered?  H.  We 
WILL  MENTION  THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  ILL-HEALTH.  1.  A  low  temperature.  Lukewarmnesa 
is  an  ill  sign.  In  business,  such  a  man  will  make  but  little  way  ;  in  religion,  none 
at  all.  2.  A  contracted  heart.  If  we  do  not  love  the  brethren,  there  is  something 
wrong  with  us.  3.  A  failing  appetite  as  to  spiritual  food.  4.  A  difficulty  in 
breathing.  When  prayer  is  an  irksome  duty,  everything  is  wrong  with  us.  5.  A 
general  lethargy :  unwillingness  for  holy  service,  want  of  heart,  (fee.  6.  An 
ungovernable  craving  for  unhealthy  things.  IIL  We  will  suggest  means  oi" 
BECOVEBY.  1.  Seek  good  food.  Study  the  Word.  2.  Breathe  freely.  Do  not 
restrain  prayer.  3.  Exercise  yourself  unto  godliness.  Labour  for  God.  4.  Return 
to  your  native  air  :  breathe  the  atmosphere  of  Calvary.  5.  Live  by  the  sea.  Dwell 
near  to  God's  all-sufficiency.  6.  If  these  things  fail,  here  is  an  old  prescription : 
"  Carnis  et  Sanguinis  Christi."  This  taken  several  times  a  day,  in  a  draught  of 
the  tears  of  repentance,  is  a  sure  cure.  IV.  We  will  conclude  with  an  exhorta- 
tion. 1.  Brother  Christian,  is  it  a  small  matter  to  be  weak  and  feeble  ?  Thou 
needest  all  thy  vigour.  Go  to  Calvary,  and  recruit  thyself.  2.  Sinner,  thou  art 
dead,  but  life  and  health  are  in  Christ !  {€.  H.  Spurgeon.)  S^oul  prosperity  : — 
Whom  do  you  regard  as  a  prosperous  man  for  this  world  ?  There  are  several 
elements  that  enter  into  that  condition.  The  first,  we  may  say,  is  health.  Another 
is  riches.  A  good  name  is  another.  A  cultivated  taste,  weU-stored  and  regulated 
mind,  leisure,  and  fondness  for  reading  and  study,  are  also  indications  of  prosperity. 
Now  in  what  respects  does  soul  prosperity  answer  to  these  elements  of  temporal 
prosperity  ?  It  must  have  them  all  in  order  to  reach  the  highest  prosperity.  First, 
the  soul  must  be  in  health.  A  healthful  soul  is  one  all  of  whose  faculties  are  sound 
and  in  harmonious  exercise:  the  eye  of  the  understanding  translucent,  the 
muscles  of  wiU  strong,  the  nerves  of  conscience  sensitive ;  all  the  faculties  receptive 
and  digestive  of  Divine  sanative  truth.  There  are  riches,  too,  which  the  soul  may 
gather  and  enjoy.  There  are  treasures  attainable  which  are  essential  to  spiritual 
prosperity.  The  same  term  which  describes  gathering  of  gold,  describes  the 
treasures  of  the  Spirit.  '*  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  it  maketh  rich."  It  is  possible 
for  us  to  accumulate  the  "  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace,"  the  "  unsearchable 
riches  of  Christ,"  and  then  "  the  riches  of  His  glory."  Even  "  the  reproach  of 
Christ  is  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt."  If,  then,  you  would  have  a 
prosperous  soul  you  must  have  a  rich  soul.  A  good  repute  is  also  necessary  to 
spiritual  prosperity,  not  always  in  the  sight  of  men,  indeed,  for  the  world  will  speak 
evil  of  you  were  you  as  holy  as  Jesus,  but  in  the  sight  of  God.  And  yet  the  world, 
even  while  it  sneers  and  abuses,  is  won  by  a  pure  life.  He  has  a  prosperous  soul 
who  deserves  the  confidence  and  esteem  of  his  fellow-men  for  his  truthfulness, 
purity  and  benevolence,  whether  the  world  awards  it  to  him  or  not.  Need  I  say 
that  a  refined  taste,  cultivated  by  the  study  of  Divine  truth  and  by  communion 
with  the  purest  hearts  and  fellowship  with  the  most  lovely  lives  in  the  Church  of 
Grod,  is  an  admirable  aid  to  the  promotion  and  preservation  of  soul  health  ?  And, 
in  fine,  progress,  advancement,  success  in  holy  and  useful  religious  industries,  is  a 
mark  and  method  of  soul  prosperity.  If  you  would  not  call  the  drone  and  laggard, 
who  is  ever  falling  backward  and  eating  up  his  capital  and  trading  only  upon  hia 
old  stock,  a  prosperous  man  in  any  worldly  business,  how  can  you  call  one  a 
prosperous  Christian  who  has  no  religious  enterprise,  who  satisfies  himself  with  his 
old  experience,  and  so  without  progress  has  nothing  but  an  old  stock  and  a 
diminished  capital  to  draw  upon  ?    Thrift  utilises  the  past,  and  draws  it  forward 

33 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

into  the  present,  and  pushes  it  onward  into  the  future.  If  we  look  abroad  into  the 
world,  we  shall  find  that  many  have  temporal  prosperity  without  spiritual.  Their 
bodies  are  pampered ;  their  souls  are  starved.  Some  have  spiritual  prosperity 
without  temporal.  Many  of  God's  saints  are  among  the  poor  of  this  world,  with 
few  of  the  comforts  and  none  of  the  luxuries  which  money  can  buy.  Yet  they  may 
be  such  as  the  Lord  loves  and  guides.  Many  have  neither  temporal  nor  spiritual 
prosperity.  Not  aU  the  poor  are  pure  within.  A  few  have  both  temporal  and 
spiritual  prosperity.  There  are  some  rich  men  that  are  godly.  There  are  more 
whose  circumstances  are  comfortable,  who,  above  want,  and  without  dread  of 
poverty,  enjoy  as  much  of  the  pleasures  of  living  as  their  wealthier  neighbours. 
And  with  this  good  measure  of  worldly  prosperity  they  unite  the  higher  enjoyments 
of  peace  with  God,  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  consolations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
pleasant  fellowship  with  the  purest  and  most  refined  society  of  earth.  These  are 
they  who  give  power  and  beauty  to  the  Church,  and  whose  whole  existence  is 
benefit  and  blessing  to  the  world.  This  is  what  St.  John  prayed  for  Gains — earthly 
vigour  and  resources  corresponding  to  the  sincerity  of  his  piety.  If  your  soul 
health  were  brought  into  correlation  with  your  bodily  health,  how  would  it  be  with 
your  soul  ?  The  body,  in  many  cases,  becoming  like  the  soul,  would  be  trans- 
formed from  strength  and  soundness  into  weakness  and  sickliness.  The  subject 
teaches  us  that  there  is  often  a  want  of  harmony  between  an  inward  character  and 
our  outward  circumstances.  The  rich  in  this  world's  goods  are  often  very  poor  in 
godly  wealth.  God's  favour  they  improve  in  all  secular  business,  and  lay  up  for 
themselves  treasures  on  earth.  God's  grace  theyneglect  and  ignore,  and  lay  not  up 
within  themselves  treasures  for  heaven.  There  are  thus  discords  in  human  nature 
which  the  gospel  is  given  to  harmonise.  Oh  !  do  not  consent  to  remain  more  rich 
or  prosperous  in  worldly  than  in  spiritual  treasures.  (J.  L.  Burrows,  D.D.) 
Gains,  and  his  souVs  prosperity : — Can  that  be  said  of  us,  my  brethren,  which  John 
here  says  of  his  well-beloved  friend  Gaius  ?  Let  us  ask  ourselves,  in  God's  sight, 
whether  or  no  our  souls  have  had  any  true  spiritual  prosperity  this  past  year. 
Gaius's  soul  was  prospering.  Gaius  was  in  both  moral  and  spiritual  prosperity. 
And  John,  and  all  good  men,  saw  that  Gaius's  soul  was  in  prosperity,  and  they 
rejoiced  to  see  it.  Gains  prospered  in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  in  the  love 
of  the  truth,  and  in  the  obedience  of  the  truth.  He  prospered  also  in  his  fidelity  to 
whatever  he  undertook,  both  to  John,  and  to  the  brethren,  and  to  strangers.  1.  Has 
your  soul  prospered  under  the  preaching  of  the  truth  ?  Has  this,  or  any  other 
pulpit,  been  of  any  real  assistance  and  service  to  your  spiritual  life  this  past  year  ? 
And,  if  so,  in  what  has  your  soul's  prosperity  manifested  itself  ?  And  if  you  have 
experienced  no  such  prosperity,  why  not  ?  2.  But  in  these  days,  you  are  not  inde- 
pendent of  the  pulpit,  indeed,  but  you  are  not  so  wholly  dependent  on  it,  and 
instructed  by  it,  as  many  men  are.  You  have  money  to  buy  books  and  you  have 
time  to  read  books.  A  man  is  known  by  his  books.  A  man  cannot  always  choose 
his  minister.  But  he  can  always  choose  his  books.  Now,  honestly,  do  the  books 
about  God,  and  about  the  soul  and  God,  make  you  uncomfortable  ?  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  do  you  ever  open,  and  of  your  own  accord  and  liking,  such  a  book  from  one 
year's  end  to  the  other  ?  3.  But  I  may  be  a  great  authority  on  the  best  books ;  I 
may  be  a  great  collector  and  devourer  of  devotional  books  ;  and  yet,  all  the  time,  I 
may  be  an  utterly  unspiritual  and  undevotional  man  myself.  Philo  for  this  twenty 
years  has  been  collecting  and  reading  all  the  spiritual  books  he  can  hear  of.  Philo 
will  ride  you  forty  miles  in  winter  to  have  a  conversation  about  spiritual  books,  or 
to  see  a  collection  larger  than  his  own.  But  Philo  never  thinks  how  wonderful  it 
is  that  a  man  who  knows  regeneration  to  be  the  whole  world  should  yet  content 
himself  with  books  upon  the  new  birth,  instead  of  being  born  again  himself.  For 
all  that  is  changed  in  Philo  is  his  taste  for  books.  He  is  no  more  dead  to  the  world : 
no  more  delivered  from  himself :  as  unwilling  to  enter  into  war  with  himself,  and  to 
deny  his  appetites,  as  he  was  twenty  years  ago.  Yet  all  is  well  with  Philo :  he  has  no 
snspicion  of  himself.  Have  you  been  any  better  of  what  you  have  heard  about  prayer 
this  last  year  ?  I  tell  you  yon  are  cutting  your  own  throat  if  you  come  and  sit  and 
consent  to  sermon  after  sermon  on  secret  and  spiritual  prayer,  and  still  remain  the 
same  prayerless  and  unspiritual  man  you  have  all  your  life  been.  4.  Socrates,  the 
wisest  of  the  Greeks,  was  wont  to  insist  that  a  Ufe  without  constant  cross-examina- 
tion was  no  true  Ufe  at  alL  "  Know  thyself,"  was  the  holiest  and  most  urgent  of 
the  holy  texts  of  his  god  to  Socrates.  But  a  greater  than  Socrates  has  preached  to 
ns,  and  on  still  holier  and  still  more  heart-searching  texts.  How  does  His  dialectic 
prosper  in  yooi  souls  ?    To  pat  it  in  the  most  elementary  and  superficial  way :  Do 


III.  JOHN.  17 

yoa  know  as  much  as  your  one  besetting  sin,  and  what  it  really  is  ?  Do  you  know 
about  yourself  what  all  your  friends  see  in  you  with  such  pain  and  shame  ?  and 
what  all  your  enemies  rejoice  over  and  laugh  at?  Has  Christ's  cross-examination 
taken  you  down  at  all  among  the  motives  that  move  you  in  aU  you  think,  and  say, 
and  do  "?  Is  the  holy  and  spiritual  law  of  God  at  all  within  your  heart  ?  5.  Once 
more  :  Take  from  among  a  thousand  things  that  might  be  set  forth  as  sure  tests  of 
Boul-prosperity — take  the  forgiveness  of  injuries.  This  is  perhaps  the  very  last 
grace  to  which  even  gracious  men,  and  men  prospering  in  grace,  ever  attain  to. 
Caesar  forgot  nothing  but  injuries.  How  do  you  stand  in  this  aU-important  obedi- 
ence ?  6.  Just  one  more  test  of  your  prosperity.  The  "  taming  of  the  tongue,"  as 
our  Lord's  brother  calls  it.  If  you  are  prospering  with  that  great  task,  then  you 
are  well  on  to  being  a  "  perfect  man"  as  James  has  it.  All  the  roads  in  the  old 
world  led  to  Eome.  And  all  the  prosperities  of  the  soul  point  to  prayer.  What  a 
year  !  and  the  beginning  of  what  prosperity !  it  would  be  to  you,  if  you  discovered 
for  yourself,  this  year,  something  of  the  power,  and  the  joy,  and  the  sweetness  of 
secret  prayer.  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)  Health  is  the  foundation  of  all  human  activity. 
A  sickly  man  cannot  even  think  healthily.  Men  would  be  surprised  if  they  were 
able  to  take  a  survey,  to  find  how  many  of  the  things  which  have  filled  the  world 
with  feuds  and  laden  with  errors,  may  be  traced  back  to  a  disordered  stomach. 
Who  would  go  to  sea  in  a  leaky  vessel  ?  (K.  Braune,  D.D.)  Health  the 
chief  thing  : — On  one  occasion  an  eminent  literary  man  and  a  member  of  the 
House  of  Lords  were  talking  with  the  Duke  of  Albany  when  the  conversation 
turned  on  what  gave  the  best  chance  of  happy  life.  The  literary  man  said  that 
persons  in  a  middle  position  who  were  without  ambitions  they  could  not  satisfy 
were  in  the  happiest  state.  The  conversation  went  on,  and  one  of  the  speakers  said 
to  the  Duke  that  his  own  position  must  be  a  happy  one.  "  You  forget,"  he  said, 
"  I  am  worst  off  of  aU.  I  want  the  chief  thing.  It  is  health— health — health." 
The  helpfulness  of  health  : — ^A  mower  with  a  good  scythe  wiU  do  more  in  one  day 
than  another  that  hath  a  bad  one  can  do  in  two ;  every  workman  knoweth  the 
benefit  of  having  his  tools  in  order ;  and  every  traveller  knows  the  difference 
between  a  cheerful  and  a  tired  horse.  And  they  that  have  tried  health  and  sickness 
know  what  a  help  it  is  in  every  work  of  God,  to  have  a  healthful  body  and  cheerful 
spirits,  and  an  alacrity  and  promptitude  to  obey  the  mind.     {R.  Baxter.) 

Yer.  3.  I  rejoiced  greatly,  when  the  brethren  came  and  testified  of  the  truth 
that  is  in  thee. — Beautiful  is  the  picture  presented  in  this  verse.  Here  we  have 
brethren  engaging  in  Christian  intercourse,  ascertaining  each  other's  moral  condi- 
tion, and  taking  a  deep  and  living  interest  in  all  that  pertains  to  the  education  of  the 
soul  in  the  faith  of  Christ.  This  is  a  fine  test  of  moral  manhood.  When  we  find 
men  disposed  to  give  the  fullest  credit  for  the  growth  and  sincerity  of  their  brethren 
in  the  faith,  we  may  accept  such  witness  as  a  proof  that  they  themselves  are  firmly 
rooted  in  great  principles,  and  are  more  and  more  resembling  Him  whose  name 
they  bear,  and  whose  perfections  it  is  the  business  of  their  lives  to  illustrate.  {J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Gains : — We  are  now  to  study  the  character  of  Gaius,  the  sincere 
and  generous  host  of  Demetrius,  the  quiet  but  sturdy  opponent  of  the  intolerance 
and  tyranny  of  Diotrephes,  and  the  study  should  be  very  welcome  to  us  since,  if  ha 
has  not  climbed  so  high  as  the  fervent  and  zealous  Evangelist,  still  less  has  ha 
fallen  so  low  as  the  prating  lover  of  pre-eminence  who  would  not  defer  even  to  the 
apostle  himself.  With  his  first  touch  St.  John  strikes  the  ground-note,  or  the  key- 
note, of  the  whole  music  which  went  to  make  up  the  character  of  the  man.  Gaiua 
was  one  who  "  walked  in  truth,"  and  so  walked  in  it  that  men  "  bore  witness  to  his 
truth."  The  Greek  word  here  rendered  "  truth  "  might,  if  the  change  were  worth 
making,  be  rendered  "  reality."  But  if  I  say  that  Gaius  was  a  true  man,  a  genuine 
man,  a  real  man,  whose  life  was  aU  of  one  piece,  whose  daily  conduct  was  the 
practical  outcome  and  inference  from  the  truths  he  beUeved,  I  may  perhaps  help 
you  to  some  conception  of  the  apostle's  meaning.  Still  he  implies  much  more  than 
he  says,  and  we  must  try  to  recover  his  implications  also.  We  may,  and  must, 
infer  from  his  stress  on  the  word  "truth  "  that  Gaius  cared  more  for  deeds  than  for 
words ;  that  there  was  not  that  unhappy  divorce  between  his  professions  and  hia 
actions,  his  creed  and  his  conduct,  which  we  may  see  in  Diotrophes  and  recognise 
only  too  clearly  in  ourselves.  He  did  not  look  one  way  and  walk  another.  He  did 
not  say  one  thing  and  mean  another.  He  did  not  approve  the  better,  and  follow  the 
worse,  course.  "There  was  no  hypocrisy,  no  insincerity,  in  him.  He,  the  whole 
man,  was  "  in  the  truth."    Come  what  may,  no  danger,  no  allurement,  wiU  draw 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


or  drive  him  from  his  steadfast  and  habitual  round,  or  make  him  unfaithful  to  the 
faith  and  service  of  Christ.    And  we  may  also  infer  that  Gaius  was  not  one  who 
would   bring  the  spirit  and  methods  of  the  world  into  the  Church.     Diotrephes 
might  be  as  selfish,  as  opinionated,  as  ambitious,  as  subtle  and  scheming,  as  he  was 
before  he  had  entered  the  Christian  fellowship.    But  that  was  not  possible  to  a  true 
man,  a  genuine  Christian,  such  as  Gaius,  who  really  believed  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.    Nor,  again,  could  a  true  man,  in  the  apostle's  sense,  yield  to  that  stiU  more 
subtle   and  fatal  temptation  by   which  those    are   overcome   in   whom   religion 
degenerates,  as  it  seems  to  have  done  in  Diotrephes,  into  mere  ecclesiasticism  or 
sectarianism.    A  too  keen  and  exclusive  interest  in  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  the 
platter  is  as  dangerous  in  the  Church  as  it  is  anywhere  else.    And  the  charity  of 
Gaius  was  as  conspicuous  as  his  unworldliness.    Not  only  had  he  received  and 
entertained  strangers,  who  were  also  brethren,  setting  forward  Demetrius  and  other 
travelling  evangelists  on  their  journey ;  he  continued  to  receive  and  serve  them  even 
when  Diotrephes  forbade  him,  and  had  persuaded  the  Church  to  excommunicate 
those  who  ventured  to  receive  them.     He  could  do  no  other,  for  he  walked  in  truth. 
Nor  was  he  to  be  talked  out  of  his  loyalty  to  truth,  or  threatened  out  of  it.     Truth 
in  every  form  was  welcome  to  him,  let  who  would  teach  it,  let  who  would  prate 
against  it.     It  was  his  duty  to  receive  brethren  even  if  they  were  strangers.    A 
certain  genuineness   and  wholeness,  then,   a    certain    staunchness  and  loyalty, 
"ombined  with  great  breadth  and  tolerance,  seems  to  have  been  characteristic  of  the 
hospitable  and  kindly  Gaius.    He  was  in  the  truth.     He  walked  in  truth.     There 
was  a  clear  accord,  a  fruitful  harmony,  between  his  principles  and  his  practice 
which  gave  unity  and  force  to  his  life.     He  could  be  true  to  truth,  come  whence  it 
would.     He  could  be  true  to  men,  even  when  they  were  reviled  and  thrust  out  of  the 
Church.     Now  this  large,  steadfast,  yet  gentle  loyalty  to  truth  is  as  essential  to  a 
genuine,  a  real  and  strong.   Christian  character  now  as  it  was  then :  a  loyalty 
which  can  not  only   stand  against  the  narrow  intolerance  of  a  Diotrephes,  and 
sympathise  with  the  disinterested  zeal  of  a  Demetrius,  but  can  also  bring  the  large 
generous  truths  in  which  we  believe  to  bear  upon  our  daily  life  and  practice,  and 
constrain  us  to  receive  and  set  forward  all  who  are  serving  the  truth  "  that  we  may 
be  fellow-workers  with  the  truth"  they  teach.    Before  we  can  put  ourselves  even  on 
the  modest  level  of  Gaius,  we  must  ask  ourselves,  "  What  risks  have  we  run,  what 
sacrifices  have  we  made,  what  pleasant  fellowships  have  we  put  in  jeopardy,  that 
we  might  stand  up  for  unpopular  truths,  or  back  up  the  men  who  were  enforcing 
and  defending  them  ?     There  are  men,  no  doubt,  who  have  a  terrible  struggle  to 
■wage  in  the  sacred  precincts  of  their  own  soul  before  they  can  make  religion  the 
ruling  inference  and  power  of  their  lives  ;  and  of  these,  perhaps,  we  must  not  expect 
much  public  service  until  the  issue  of  the  inward  conflict  has  been  decided  ;  though 
I  believe  that,  even  in  this  inward  personal  war,  they  would  be  greatly  aided  were 
they  to  make  it  more  impersonal,  and  to  care  and  contend  for  the  salvation  of  other 
men  instead  of  simply  fighting  for  their  own  hand.    And  there  are  other  men  who 
are  so  engrossed  and  exhausted  by  the  labours  and  cares,  the  occupations  and 
irritations,  of  their  daily  business  that  they  have  as  much  as  they  can  do  in  bringing 
the  spirit  of  religion  to  bear  on  their  daily  task,  and  have  neither  leisure  nor  energy 
left  for  works  of  public  usefulness.    Eemember,  we  are  not  told  that  Gaius  talked 
Diotrephes  down,  or  that  he  made  a  masterly  defence  of  St.  John,  or  even  that  he 
took  a  prominent  part  whether  in  managing  the  affairs  or  conducting  the  services  of 
the  Church.    All  we  are  told  of  him  is  that  he  showed  much  sympathy  with  the 
strangers  whom  John  had  commended  to  the  Church,  that  his  sympathy  took  very 
practical  forms,  and  that  he  exercised  it  at  the  risk,  and  perhaps  at  the  cost,  of 
losing  the   sympathy   of  brethren   who  were  not  strangers,  and  with  whom  he 
habitually  worshipped.     (S.   Cox,  D.D.)        The  testimony  of  others  : — I.  Faith  in 
POSSESSION.     1.  The  unconditional  acceptance  of  the  truth.     2.  The  harmony  of 
truth   with  our    moral  nature.     II.  Faith   in    action.     1.  Faith  in  action  is  a 
healthful  and  energising  exercise  of  our  whole  life.     2.  Faith  in  action  is  a  power 
wielded   over  others.     III.  Faith  on  kecord.     The  faithful   witnesses  who  gave 
their  evidence  in  the  presence  of  St.  John  were  samples  of  others  who  gave  their 
evidence  before  the  tribunal  of  the  world.     1.  It  is  a  record  worth  making.     To 
write  down  the  deeds,  the  trials,  and  the  victories  of  faith  is  not  a  waste  of  either 
time  or  materials.     2.  It  is  worth  rehearsing.     3.  It    is   worth  preserving.     Its 
influence  is  marvellous.     The  lamp  of  another  strengthens  the  light  of  our  own,  to 
make  clearer  the  Christian  path.     IV.  The  reflex  influence  of  faith.     Gaius 
was  the  apostle's  son  in  the  faith.    How  the  soul  of  the  aged  minister  was  lighted 


III.  JOHN.  19 

up  as  the  brethren  related  to  him  the  glad  tidings  concerning  the  soul  he  had  been 
instrumental  in  saving.  (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  Fame  is  like  a  ship  that  receives  all 
passengers,  like  a  waggon  that  entertains  all,  good  and  bad.  Bad  things  go 
abroad,  and  good  things  go  abroad,  but  here  is  the  difference.  1.  Bad  things  go 
speedily,  good  slowly  ;  the  one  flies  I'^ke  eagles,  the  other  creeps  like  snails.  2.  The 
one  are  enlarged,  the  other  diminished.  3.  The  one  all  hear  of,  but  a  few  of  the 
others.  4.  Bad  things  go  without  ceasing ;  men  are  like  flies  that  are  ever 
insisting  upon  sores ;  the  report  of  good  things  is  like  a  hue  and  cry  that  quickly 
falls  down  in  the  country.  5.  The  one  we  tell  of  with  delight ;  we  take  little 
pleasure  in  talking  of  the  other,  yet  we  ought  to  testify  of  the  one  rather  than  of 
the  other.  Let  us  witness  of  the  virtues  wherewith  God  hath  adorned  any.  It 
shall  redound  to  his  glory,  and  it  shall  be  a  spur  to  prick  on  others  to  the  like. 
(W.  Jones,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth. — 

The  Christian  walking  in  the  truth  : — This  is  little  more  than  a  repetition  of  a  declara- 
tion made  by  the  apostle  in  the  foregoing  epistle.     He  is  addressing  there  a  pious 
mother,  and  he  congratulates  her  on  the  spiritual  prosperity  of  some  of  her  family. 
Here  he  is  addressing  a  beloved  friend,  and  he  congratulates  him  on  the  prosperity 
of  his  soul  in  nearly  the  same  words.     I.  Truth.     "What  is  truth?  "said  Pilate 
to  our  Lord  with  a  mixture  of  incredulity  and  scorn,  as  though  truth  were  a  thing 
nowhere  to  be  discovered ;  and  the  same  question  has  been  asked  by  the  wise  men 
of  the  earth  with  the  same  feelings  from  Pilate  downwards  to  our  day.     The  real 
Christian  knows  where  it  is  to  be  found,  for  he  has  found  it.     His  God  has  not  only 
made  him  feel  its  importance  and  enkindled  in  him  a  desire  for  it,  he  has  shown 
him  the  thing  itself,  revealed,  communicated  His  truth  to  him :  so  that  the  man  has 
it ;  has  it  in  his  hand  whenever  he  takes  up  his  Bible ;  has  it  in  his  mind  and 
heart,  for  he  has  read  his  Bible,  and  by  God's  help  has  understood  and  believed  it. 
That  is  the  truth  the  apostle  speaks  of  in  this  text.     It  is  the  revelation  which  God 
has  made  to  us  concerning  spiritual  and  eternal  things  in  His  holy  Word,  and  more 
particularly  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  forms  so  main  a  part  of  that 
revelation.  II.  Walking  in  it.  The  term  "  walking  "  in  Scripture,  when  used  as  it  is 
here,  is  always  expressive,  not  of  an  act  or  two,  but  of  a  continued  course  of  acting. 
To  walk  in  the  truth,  then,  means  more  than  for  a  man  once  in  his  life  to  discover 
and  embrace  the  truth ;  it  implies  besides  this  a  daily  familiarity  with  it,  having  it 
constantly  before  his  mind,   and  his  mind    and    his   life   being   as  constantly 
influenced  and  acted  on  by  it.     1.  That  we  hold  fast  Christ's  truth ;  having  had 
our  minds  enlightened  to  discover  and  opened  to  receive  it,  that  we  retain  it  in 
our  mind,   and  this  in  its  pure,   simple,   unadulterated   form.     2.  A  continued 
profession   of   Christ's  truth.     3.  To    live    in  the  habitual  practice   of    it.     III. 
This   apostle's   jot   when   he   hears   of   his  fellow-Christians  thus  walking. 
He  expresses  this,  you  observe,  in  very  strong  terms.     He  does  not  say  that  he  has 
no  joy   equal  to  this,  but  he  does   say  that   he  has   none  above  it :  "I  have 
no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth."     And  this  strong 
language  plainly  shows  us  two  things.     1.  The  loftiness  of   his  own  character. 
This  favoured,  this  honoured  apostle,  with  all  his  remembrances  of  the  past  and  all 
his  glowing  anticipations  of  the  future,  with  heaven  almost  opening  upon  him,  says 
he  gets  as  much  happiness  from  the  holy  walk  of  others  as  he  does  from  any  other 
source.     We  know  where  he  learnt  this.     We  see  the  Master's  spirit  shining  forth 
again  in  the  disciple.     What  was  self  to  the  blessed  Jesus  when  the  good  of  our 
lost  souls  was  at  stake?    2.  The  high  importance  of  this  holy  walking  in  the  truth. 
Such  a  man,  we  are  sure,  would  never  have  rejoiced  in  a  trifle.     (1)  It  is  important, 
first  to  ourselves,     (a)  It  is  the  bpst  test  we  can  have  of  our  belonging  to  Christ,  of 
the  sincerity  and  reality  of  our  faith  in  Him.     (b)  Our  enjoyment  of  the  gospel,  our 
spiritual  comfort  and  happiness,  depends  on  it.     (c)  Our  sanctification  or  holiness 
depends  altogether  on  the  perrnanency  of  the  place  Christ's  truth  has  within  us, 
(2)  Our   continued  walking   in  the  truth  is   important  also   to  our  fellow-men. 
Every  undecided,  wavering  professor  of  Christ's  gospel  among  us  diffuses  a  bad 
influence  around  him — he  does  mischief  in  the  world  though  he  may  not  aim  to  do 
it ;  while  every  consistent  follower  of  the  truth  does  good  in  the  world,  though  he 
may  scarcely  see  it.     (G.  Bradley,  M.A.)        The  Christian  minister's  joy  ;_ — I.  To 
WALK  in   truth    impUcs — 1.  Sincerity  of    principle,    honesty    of    intention,     in 
opposition  to  all  dissimulation  or  guile.     2.  Decided   attachment  to  evangelical 
doctrine.    3.  Habitual    regard    to    personal    hoUness.    4.  Progress  in  Christian 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

excellency.  II.  "Why  this  walking  in  truth  should  occasion  the  Joy  op  Christian 
MINISTERS.  1.  In  your  Christian  walk  we  witness  the  reality  of  your  personal 
religion.  2.  Walking  as  Christians  secures  your  personal  happiness.  3.  When 
you  walk  as  Christians,  we  have  evidence  of  ministerial  fidelity  —  that  the 
truth  is  spoken  to  you ;  that  the  way  of  truth  is  marked  down  and  recom- 
mended. 4.  In  your  walk  as  Christians,  we  observe  the  fruit  of  our  efforts 
for  your  good.  5.  When  you  walk  as  Christians,  we  behold  the  increase  of 
the  Eedeemer's  cause  in  the  world.  6.  Walking  as  Christians,  we  see  in  you  the 
partners  of  the  felicity  we  hope  for  in  a  future  world.  Conclusion — 1.  If  such  as 
"  walk  in  truth  "  are  our  joy,  it  is  evident  who  are  our  grief — All  they  who  walk  not 
in  truth;  who  "walk  in  darkness";  who  "walk  disorderly";  who  "  walk  in  the 
flesh";  who  "walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts."  2.  By  your  walking,  not  in 
truth,  but  in  unrighteousness,  the  cause  of  God  is  dishonoured,  his  enemies  triumph, 
his  friends  are  painfully  aiiected.  3.  Let  us  all  look  well  to  ourselves,  and  take 
heed  to  our  own  spirit  and  conversation.  (T.  Kidd.)  Walk  in  truth  : — I.  The 
SUBJECT  MATTER  OF  THE  APOSTOLIC  MINISTRY — it  was  truth ;  not  Only  truth  in  the 
bare  sense  of  the  term,  but  truth  in  its  highest  sense,  unmistakable  truth,  infallible 
truth,  the  truth  without  which  we  cannot  be  happy  neither  here  nor  hereafter. 
You  may  be  without  much  knowledge  in  reference  to  geology,  or  astronomy,  or 
botany,  you  may  be  without  much  knowledge  of  these  things,  and  not  suffer  much ; 
but  in  reference  to  this,  if  you  have  it  not,  you  are  a  fool  indeed,  and  if  you  have  it, 
you  are  made  wise  unto  salvation.  It  is  necessary  for  us  while  here,  and  for  our 
well-being  hereafter.  11.  The  manner  of  that  ministry.  "  I  have  no  greater  joy 
than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth."  I  say  that  the  apostle's  ministry 
was  characterised  by  great  earnestness  and  aifection.  There  is  no  minister  that 
will  ever  be  useful  without  it.  III.  The  joy  and  satisfaction  of  the  apostle's 
ministry.  The  subject-matter  of  this  joy  of  the  apostle's  was  to  hear  that  his 
children  walk  in  truth.  1.  To  walk  in  the  truth  is  to  maintain  evangelical  truth. 
2.  To  walk  in  truth  is  constantly  to  keep  and  to  enjoy  the  truth.  It  gives  us  solid 
peace,  it  is  "  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding."  3.  Once 
more,  when  spiritual  children  walk  in  truth  they  are  consistent  Christians. 
Walk  is  not  the  position  of  a  lazy  Christian.  {H.  Allen,  M.A.)  The 
parentis  and  pastor's  joy : — I.  First,  then,  one  of  the  parent's  highest  joys  la 
his  children's  walking  in  truth  :  he  has  no  greater  joy.  1.  And  here  we  must  begin 
with  the  remark  that  it  is  a  joy  peculiar  to  Christian  fathers  and  mothers.  No 
parents  can  say  from  their  hearts,  "We  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  our 
children  walk  in  truth,"  unless  they  are  themselves  walking  in  truth.  No  wolf 
prays  for  its  offspring  to  become  a  sheep.  2.  Let  us,  then,  remark  next  that  the  joy 
mentioned  in  the  text  is  special  in  its  object.  "  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  this,  to 
hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth."  There  is  the  point,  their  practical  religion, 
their  actual  exemplification  of  the  power  of  the  gospel  upon  their  lives.  This  proves 
that  the  teaching  was  well  received,  that  the  feeling  was  not  mere  excitement,  that 
the  profession  was  not  a  falsehood  or  a  mistake,  but  was  done  in  truth.  3.  It  is  a 
healthful  joy,  in  which  we  may  indulge  to  the  full  without  the  slightest  fear,  for  it 
is  superior  in  its  character  to  all  earthly  joys.  Now,  when  our  children  walk  in  truth 
and  love  to  God,  it  makes  us  rejoice  that  another  heart  is  consecrated  to  His  service. 
We  may  weU  rejoice  in  the  salvation  and  in  the  sanctification  of  our  sons  and 
daughters,  because  this  is  the  way  in  which  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  be  extended 
in  the  world.  4.  I  will  tell  you  why  this  is  peculiarly  the  great  joy  of  some  Christian 
parents — it  is  because  they  have  made  it  a  subject  of  importunate  prayer.  That 
which  comes  to  us  by  the  gate  of  prayer  comes  into  the  house  with  music  and 
dancing.  5.  This  joy  is  quickening  in  its  effect.  All  who  have  ever  felt  it  know 
what  an  energy  it  puts  into  them.  Have  you  some  of  your  children  converted  while 
others  remain  unsaved?  Then  I  charge  you,  let  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  some 
encourage  you  concerning  the  rest.  6.  Once  more,  this  high  joy  of  which  we  have 
spoken  is  very  solemn  in  its  surroundings,  for  it  involves  this  alternative — "What 
if  my  children  should  not  walk  in  truth  ?  "  Well,  that  means  for  us  during  this  life 
many  sorrows,  nights  of  sleeplessness  and  days  of  anxiety.  H.  You  may  view  the 
text  as  specifying  the  pastor's  greatest  reward.  "  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to 
hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth."  No  minister  ought  to  be  at  rest  unless  he 
sees  that  his  ministry  does  bring  forth  fruit,  and  men  and  women  are  bom  unto 
God  by  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  Those  who  are  the  preacher's  children  are 
often  known  to  him  ;  they  were  to  John,  else  he  could  not  have  spoken  of  them  as 
"my  children,"  and  could  not  have  had  joy  in  them  as  his  children.    From  this  I 


III.  JOHN.  21 

draw  the  inference  that  it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  who  receives  spiritual  benefit, 
and  especially  conversion,  from  any  of  God's  servants,  to  let  them  know  it.  Put 
on  Christ  publicly  in  baptism,  according  to  His  command :  unite  yourself  with  His 
Church,  and  commune  with  the  people  among  whom  you  have  been  born  unto  God. 
It  seems  from  our  text  that  John  was  in  the  habit  of  hearing  about  his  spiritual 
children:  "I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear" — mark  that — "than  to  hear 
that  my  children  walk  in  the  truth."  That  implies  that,  if  you  make  a  profession 
of  your  faith,  people  will  talk  about  you.  John  could  not  have  heard  if  others  had 
not  spoken.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  viinister^s  chief  joy  : — I.  What  is  the  geeat 
OBJECT  OF  A  minister's  desike  ON  BEHALF  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  1.  He  loHgs  to  behold  in 
them  a  holy  consistency,  a  high  state  of  heavenly  affections,  and  a  careful  attention 
to  the  duties  of  morality.  2.  In  them  he  expects  to  find  a  steadiness  that  bids 
defiance  to  temptation,  and  cannot  be  diverted  from  its  purpose,  either  by  the 
aUurements  of  sense  or  the  terrors  of  persecution.  3.  As  a  parent  wishes  to  see  in  his 
children  a  gradual  advancement  towards  maturity  both  in  their  bodily  and  in- 
tellectual faculties,  so  does  a  minister  long  for  his  people's  progress  towards 
perfection.  II.  Whence  it  is  that  the  attainment  of  that  object  fills  him 
WITH  SUCH  exalted  JOT.  1.  Bccausc  it  is  by  this  only  that  the  ends  of  their 
ministry  are  answered.  2.  Because  by  this  only  can  God  be  glorified.  3.  Because 
without  this  they  can  have  no  hope  of  ever  meeting  their  people  in  the  realms  of 
bliss.  (Sketches  of  Sermons.)  The  minister's  greater  joy  : — I.  The  highest 
bpibitual  relationship — "my  children."  1.  Solicitude.  2.  Endearment.  II. 
The  greatest  possible  rejoicing.  1.  It  is  the  greater  joy  arising  out  of  the 
greater  subject.  Man's  salvation  is  God's  greater  work.  2.  It  is  the  greater  joy 
on  account  of  the  greater  influence.  The  converts  were  exposed  to  sharp  tempta- 
tions, and  subjected  to  fiery  persecutions.  3.  It  is  the  greater  joy  on  account  of  the 
greater  prospect.     (T.  Davies,  M.A.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Thou  doeat  faithfully  whatsoever  thou  doest  to  the  brethren,  and  to 
strangers. — Allegiance  to  the  faith: — In  these  few  words  the  sum  and  substance  of 
the  Christian  life  are  placed  before  us.  They  convey  to  us  that  he  who  was  addressed 
was  simply  loyal  to  truth  and  loyal  to  duty,  whilst  this,  the  loyalty  of  his  being, 
flowed  forth  in  act  from  a  fountain  of  the  purest  love.  These,  in  the  Christian, 
cannot  be  disjoined.  The  mere  philosopher  may  present  us  with  a  state  of  loyalty 
to  truth,  as  truth  is  found  in  the  regions  of  science.  If  he  descends  into  the  bowels 
of  the  earth,  and  tries  to  read  the  marvellous  structure  of  men's  temporal  habitation, 
he  is  supposed  to  be  loyal  to  fact  or  to  truth  as  he  finds  it.  Or,  if  his  business  lies 
on  the  surface  of  the  world,  and  he  questions  the  trees  of  the  forests,  the  flowers  of 
the  field,  or  the  grass  of  the  earth,  he  ever  holds  his  intellect  in  allegiance,  and 
utters  the  thing  as  it  is.  Or,  if  rising  from  the  earth,  and  traversing  the  starry 
firmament,  he  tries  to  measure,  and  weigh,  and  count  the  number  of  the  stars,  he 
stands  the  minister  of  truth,  the  interpreter  of  the  works  and  ways  of  the  Omnipotent 
Creator.  All  this,  so  far  as  it  is  an  attitude  of  human  reason,  is  right  and  well. 
But  all  this,  however  effective  in  giving  strength  and  enlargement  to  man's  intellect, 
does  not  achieve  the  full  loyalty  to  truth  commended  in  the  sacred  writings.  The 
truth  therein  revealed  contains  the  knowledge  of  Jesus,  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
It  displays  to  the  human  understanding  the  only  pathway  leading  out  of  sin  into 

f)iety,  out  of  misery  into  happiness,  out  of  death  into  life.  But  whilst,  with  child- 
ike  simplicity,  the  message  of  the  Divine  love  is  to  be  received  into  the  understanding, 
with  the  same  simplicity  the  law  of  the  Divine  love  is  to  be  received  into  the  heart. 
The  conscience  of  the  genuine  Christian  is  to  be  ruled  by  the  commandments  of 
Jesus.  Our  Lord  is  King  in  Zion.  Alone  He  legislates,  and  alone  demands  the 
indefeasible  allegiance  of  the  conscience  of  man.  It  is  not  pretended  that  men  do 
not  know  in  any  thing  right  from  wrong  till  they  have  opened  the  Bible.  Men  in 
all  ages,  in  all  lands,  have  gone  into  the  market  of  the  world  attempting  to  maintain 
a  standard  of  truth.  To  this  lawgiver,  legislating  for  the  conscience  and  the  heart, 
the  disciple  of  Jesus  becomes  iminediately  and  uninterruptedly  Uege.  Loyalty  to  Him 
who  spake  as  never  man  spake  arises  out  of  confidence  in  Him  who  died  as  never 
man  died.  Fidelity  to  Jesus  as  our  rightful  Lord  is  essentially  interwoven  with 
fidelity  to  Jesus  as  the  Lord  our  righteousness.  And  this  was  the  state  of  Gains :  a 
Christian  doing  whatever  he  did  to  the  brethren,  and  to  strangers,  in  the  faith  that 
■0  God  had  taught  him,  and  under  the  conviction  of  his  conscience  that  so  his  Lord 
had  commanded.  But  this  is  not  all ;  there  is  another  element  still,  the  ever-living, 
ever-moving  impulse  that  urges  onward  the  whole.    It  is  love — the  end  of  the 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

commandment — out  of  a  pure  heart,  a  good  conscience,  and  faith  unfeigned.  Over 
and  above  the  marvellous  signature  of  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour 
written  in  the  blood  of  the  Cross,  the  Spirit  of  love  proceeding  from  the  Father  and 
the  Son  comes  to  enkindle  this  Divine  flame  in  every  follower  of  Jesus.  In  every 
Christian  He  is  the  Spirit  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind.  No 
religion  found  among  men,  and  invented  by  men,  ever  pretends  to  the  in- 
dwelling of  this  infinite  agent — the  moral  renovator  of  the  soul.  His  presence 
in  man  is  the  presence  of  holy  love.  In  this  we  behold  the  living  power 
that  moves  the  heart  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  the  life  that  reanimates  every  soul 
loyal  to  the  Messiah,  and  binds  for  ever,  beneath  the  perfect  bond,  the  subjects  of 
the  eternal  King.  Such,  then,  are  the  three  essential  elements  which  form  the 
Christian  life  and  the  Christian  character — the  spirit  of  allegiance  to  whatever  the 
Word  of  God  reveals ;  the  spirit  of  allegiance  to  whatever  the  Word  of  God  commands ; 
and  lastly,  the  spirit  of  love  animating  and  urging  onward  the  whole.  What  Divine 
simplicity.      {J.  Paterson,  D.D.)  Bring  forward  on  their  journey  after  a  godly 

sort. — Noble  deeds  : — I.  The  standaed  of  noble  deeds,  "  worthily  of  God."  1.  Gains 
was  animated  by  the  purest  motive.  To  be  charitable  is  praiseworthy,  but  to  serve 
God  is  better.  He  received  not  the  glory  of  men.  2.  He  did  the  best  he  could.  The 
question  was  not  whether  the  deed  was  worthy  of  Gains,  but  whether  it  would  be 
acceptable  of  God.  3.  He  had  the  best  end  in  view.  It  was  the  glory  of  God.  He 
treated  well  the  servants  for  the  Master's  sake.  II.  The  inspieation  of  noble  deeds, 
"  Who  bare  witness  to  thy  love  before  the  Church."  1.  Deeds  worthy  to  be  rehearsed. 
Christians  need  not  indulge  in  useless  conversation  while  so  much  valuable  history 
waits  to  be  told.  2.  Deeds  worthy  of  imitation.  The  life  of  Gains  may  fail  ua  in 
some  particulars  ;  if  so,  look  at  the  life  of  Jesus.     (T/te  Weekly  Pulpit.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  For  His  name's  sake  they  went  forth. — Christian  missions : — I,  The 
motive,  conduct,  and  disinterestedness  of  missionabies.  1.  Their  motive  :  "  for 
His  name's  sake  " — for  Christ's  service.  2.  Their  conduct :  "  they  went  forth." 
With  the  gospel  in  his  hand  and  the  Saviour  in  his  heart  he  makes  his  way  through 
burning  deserts  and  the  howling  wilderness,  braving  the  rage  of  climates.  3.  Their 
disinterestedness :  "  taking  nothing  "  of  those  to  whom  they  are  sent.  When  an 
artisan  or  commercial  man  quits  his  native  country  for  foreign  lands  it  is  in  the 
hope  of  making  a  fortune  ;  or  when  a  navigator  undertakes  an  arduous  voyage  of 
discovery,  it  is  with  the  hope  of  immortalising  his  name.  Not  so  the  Christian 
missionary.  H.  The  powerful  and  encouraging  motives  which  we  have  to  "  be 
fellow-helpers  to  the  truth  "  by  contributing  towards  the  great  work  of  propagating 
the  gospel.  1.  It  is  the  command  of  our  Divine  Eedeemer  :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world,"  &c.  2.  Every  intelligent  and  responsible  being  needs  the  gospel,  which 
alone  can  supply  all  his  moral  and  spiritual  wants.     III.  What  is  our  duty  xjndeb 

THESE   AFFECTING    CALLS    UPON    OUR    SYMPATHIES    AND    BENEVOLENCE?         1.    There     iS     E 

widely-kindling  zeal  for  the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  on  the  one  hand,  and  an 
evident  eagerness  to  receive  instruction  on  the  other.  2.  The  facilities  for  propa- 
gating the   gospel  are  now  greater  than  ever.     IV.  The  blessed  effects  which 

HAVE  ACTUALLY  RESULTED  TO  MANKIND  THROUGH  THE  DiVINE  BLESSING  ON  MIS- 
SIONARY  EFFORTS.       V.    The    distinguished     RELIGIOUS     PRIVILEGES     WITH     WHICH     WE 

ARE  PRE-EMINENTLY  FAVOURED.  {T.  H.  Horne,  B.D.)  Primitive  missionaries  : — 
I.  The  example  of  the  primitive  missionaries.  1.  They  were  well  principled. 
This  appears  from  their  going  forth,  not  only  at  the  command  of  Jesus  Christ,  but 
"  for  His  name's  sake."  2.  They  were  active  amidst  scenes  of  hardship.  "  They 
went  forth."  II.  The  case  of  private  Christians,  that  is,  what  duty  requires 
them  to  do  on  behalf  of  missionaries.  1.  We  are  "fellow-helpers"  to  the  truth 
when  we  suggest  what  is  calculated  to  animate  Christian  ministers  in  their  sacred 
career.  2.  We  are  "  fellow-helpers  to  the  truth "  when  we  contribute  to  the 
pecuniary  support  of  Christian  ministers.  3.  We  are  "  fellow-helpers  to  the  truth" 
when  we  intercede  earnestly  on  behalf  of  ministers,  and  of  all  whom  they  endeavour 
to  bring  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  (0.  A.  Jeary.)  Blisdonary  enterprise  : — 
I.  The  motive.  To  feel  a  strong  compassion  for  perishing  souls  is  a  good  incen- 
tive, but  to  work  for  the  glory  of  God  is  better.  1.  The  glorious  name.  Its  lustre 
is  on  every  page  of  history.  2.  The  gracious  name.  "And  His  name  shall  be 
called  Jesus."  3.  The  enduring  name.  As  long  as  the  sun  will  shine  in  the 
heavens.  II.  The  enteupuise.  They  went  forth  to  proclaim  this  name.  1.  An 
enterprise  of  self-sacrifice.  Every  earthly  prospect  was  abandoned.  2.  An  enter- 
prise of  peril.     Not  only  danger  arising  from  natural  causes,  but  from  persecution. 


III.  JOHN.  23 

It  meant  possibly  death.  3.  Consequently  an  enterprise  of  faith.  III.  Th*  dis- 
CBETiON.  They  accepted  no  hospitality  from  those  who  might  have  misunderstood 
their  motive.  They  were  careful  that  nothing  should  hinder  the  work.  Prosperity 
as  well  as  work  was  their  aim.  (The  Weekly  Pulpit.)  For  the  name's  sake  : — In 
aU  the  older  manuscripts  the  phrase  is,  "  For  the  name's  sake."  The  meaning  is 
the  same,  but  the  expression  of  it  is  more  striking  in  the  general  form.    I.  "  For 

THE   name's   sake  "   IS   THE  AVAILING  PLEA   IN  ACCEPTABLE  PRAYER.      God  haS  revealed 

Himself  in  Christ.  The  name  is  the  character ;  the  name  of  God  is  the  character 
of  God  as  manifested  among  men.  He  has  got  Himself  a  glorious  name,  and  our 
knowledge  of  that  name  has  been  completed,  rounded,  fulfilled,  alone  in  Christ.  To 
pray  in  His  name,  therefore,  is  to  recognise  God  in  Him,  in  His  whole  personality, 
in  His  whole  history,  in  what  He  has  done  and  suffered  on  our  behalf.    H.  "Fob 

THE   name's    sake  "    is   in    a   pre-eminent    DEGREE    THE    SPRING   AND  MOTIVE   POWER  OF 

HOLT  OBEDIENCE.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  text  in  its  own  connection.  These 
men  went  forth  in  a  spirit  of  self-consecration  that  asked  no  questions,  that  fixed 
no  limits ;  they  went  forth  to  tell  the  world  the  news.  And  they  lived  upon  the 
news  they  told.  When  they  had  plenty  of  outward  comfort  it  was  haUowed  by  the 
"  name."  When  they  had  no  comfort  the  gospel  was  compensation.  The  gospel 
would  be  benefited  by  their  self-denial — that  settled  the  question  in  a  moment.  Nor 
was  this  a  transient  impulse  pertaining  exclusively  to  the  very  earliest  days.  It 
multiplied  itself  in  great  numbers  of  instances,  it  continued  from  age  to  age.  The 
whole  secret  of  such  loyalty,  of  such  endurance,  of  life  so  unselfish,  so  divine,  lay  in 
this — "  For  the  name's  sake."  Nor  let  any  one  say  that  in  this  matter  we  live  upon 
the  past,  and  that  we  are  always  speaking  of  a  glory  that  has  faded  from  among 
men.  Answer  ye  graves  of  missionaries  on  Indian  plains  I  and  ye  martyrs  for 
Christ  lately  slain.  Ye  glorious  company  of  consecrated  souls  1  You  and  your 
labours  are  more  to  the  city,  and  more  precious  to  the  State,  than  bridges  and 
viaducts,  and  queenly  procession  and  regal  pomp.  What  essentially  is  this  Chris- 
tian service  ?  It  means  the  consecration  of  the  redeemed  self  In  wholeness  to  the 
glory  of  Christ  and  to  the  service  of  our  fellow-men  under  Him.  The  love  of  Christ 
has  this  perfectly  unique  peculiarity,  that  it  is  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  man 
in  one;  and  when,  "for  the  name's  sake,"  we  give  ourselves  to  God  and  live  to 
God,  then  we  are  swayed  by  this  all-comprehending  love.  And  just  as  surely  as  we 
are  so,  "  we  are  more  than  conquerors."  For  love  is  invincible.  Of  what  import- 
ance, then,  must  it  be  to  a  Christian  to  be  full  of  love,  full  of  the  love  of  Christ  to 
him,  fuU  of  quick  answering  love  to  Christ,  fuU  of  the  power  of  "  the  name."  (A. 
Raleigh,  D.D.)         Fellow-helpers  to  the  troth.— Truth   helpers  : — I.    We    are 

"  FELLOW-HELPERS   TO    THE    TRUTH  "    WHEN    WE    YIELD    OURSELVES     TO     THE    INFLUENCE 

OF  TRUTH.     The  most  powerful  agencies  only  effect  their  work  through  co-operation. 

U.   We   are   "  FELLOW-HELPERS    TO    THE    TRUTH "   AS    WE    SHOW    ITS    POWER    IN    OUB 

LIVES.  If  you  want  to  judge  of  the  electric  light  you  go  and  see  it  in  operation,  and 
as  you  see  mansions,  halls,  and  streets  illuminated,  you  are  impressed  with  the 
greatness  and  utility  of  the  discovery  more  than  you  would  be  by  aU  the  writers 
and  lecturers  who  attempt  to  describe  its  merits.  So,  when  you  see  a  man  tem- 
perate, upright,  and  benevolent,  happy  amidst  surrounding  iUs,  patient  in  suffering, 
gentle  under  opposition,  firm  in  upholding  what  is  right,  you  see  what  education 
cannot  do,  what  human  effort  cannot  accomplish — what  can  only  be  realised  and 
exhibited  by  those  who  know  and  receive  the  truth.  You  are  impressed,  convinced, 
led  to  admire  and  desire  the  same  experience  yourselves.     HI.  By  prater  we  mat 

BE  "  FELLOW-HELPERS  TO  THE  TRUTH  "  (2  Cor.  1.  11).  IV.  We  MAY  BE,  AND  OUGHT 
TO  BE,  "  FELLOW-HELPERS  TO  THE  TRUTH "  BY  PERSONAL  AND  PECUNIABT  CONTRIBU- 
TIONS. We  should  be,  Uke  Gains,  hospitable  and  generous.  Men  are  honoured 
who  fight  the  battles  of  their  -jountry,  who  make  discoveries  in  science,  who 
improve  the  arts  of  civihsed  life ;  but  I  tell  you  to  have  lived  the  truth,  to  have 
contributed  to  the  advancement  of  the  truth,  wiU  count  for  more  in  the  eternity  of 
the  future  than  aU  the  wreaths  of  honour  that  victors  ever  won  or  all  the  wealth 
that  the  millionaire  has  ever  amassed.  (R.  Sewell.)  Fellow-helpers  to  the  truth  : 
— What  distinguishing  honour  has  God  put  upon  His  chosen  that  He  not  only 
makes  them  partakers  of  His  grace,  but  instruments  for  communicating  that  grace 
to  others  ?  Not  the  intellectual  and  the  learned  alone,  not  the  bishop  and  the  priest 
alone,  but  the  weak  and  the  despised.  I.  The  precious  treasure  confided  to  thb 
DisciPLBS  of  Christ.  "  The  Truth."  It  is  the  Truth  of  God.  Not  merely  as  all 
truth  may  be  said  to  be  of  God.  It  is  not  truth  as  gathered  up  from  the  works  of 
God,  it  is  not  truth  as  wrought  out  by  the  efforts  of  human  reason,  it  is  not  truth 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

as  discovered  by  investigating  the  mysterious  page  of  providence,  of  which  the 
apostle  speaks,  but  it  is  the  Truth  revealed  by  God  Himself.     The  Truth  of  God. 
Because  "  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God."    The  Truth  of  God:  which 
He  has  authenticated  by  incontestable  miracles,  to  which  He  has  given  the  stamp 
and  character  of  His  own  glory.     The  Truth  of   God:    because,   as   God   hath 
recorded  it,  so  God  conveys  it  to  the  believing  mind  and  heart.     It  is  written,  "  All 
thy  children  shall  be  tau,r;ht  of  God."    It  is  the  Truth  of  God  that  is  entrusted  to 
us,  and  it  is  the  truth  touching  eternity.     Take  away  this  simple  word  and  you  take 
from  the  world  all  its  moral,  spiritual,  eternal  light.     It  is,  too,  the  truth  unto 
salvation.     It  does  not  merely  reveal  our  origin,  our  duty,  our  destiny  ;  it  does  not 
merely  unfold  to  us  the  law  that  we  have  transgressed ;  it  does  not  merely  thus 
reveal  to  man  what  will  deepen  his  guilt  and  darken  his  doom ;  bui  it  does  all  this 
to  prepare  the  way  for  the  disclosures  of  that  unspeakable  work — the  redemption  of 
lost  mankind  through  the  incarnation,  death,  and  blood  of  God's  own  Son.    II. 
What  is  the  duty  of  those  to  whom  God  has  confided  so  untold  a  treasure  ? 
what  is  their  duty  towards  that  truth  ?     "  We  therefore  ought  to  receive  such,  that 
•we  might  be  fellow-helpers  to  the  truth."    And  first  of  all,  it  is  clear,  our  duty  is  to 
•'  receive  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it "  for  our  own  souls.     What  mean  we  to  aid  in 
building  the  ark  if  we  ourselves  do  not  enter  it?    But  if  we  "  receive  the  truth  in 
the  love  of  it,"  it  is  clear  from  the  whole  tendency  of  the  gospel  that  we  shall  look 
upon  that  truth  as  a  treasure  confided  to  us  as  stewards,  and  "it  is  required  in 
stewards  that  a  man  be  found  faithful."    The  truth  is  evidently  not  designed  for 
the  few,  but  for  the  many ;  not  for  some  one  chosen  nation,  but  for  the  whole 
world.     There  is  no  exclusiveness  in  the  gospel.  Then  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  " 
cannot  communicate  itself.     God  has  made  no  provision  for  the  truth  to  be  sell- 
propagated.     He  hath  not  ordained  that  it  should  be  so  much  spread  abroad  by  the 
written  book  as  that  it  should  be  proclaimed  principally  by  the  living  voice.    It  is 
clear,  therefore,  that  the  truth  is  confided  to  the  Church,  that  the  Church  may  be 
"  fellow-helper  to  the  truth,"  aiding  it  in  its  glorious  career  ;  giving  it  its  chariot  in 
which  it  may  ride  on  "conquering  and  to  conquer";  supplying,  if  we  may  so 
speak,  the  gale  that  is  to  spread  the  sails  of  the  vessel,  freighted  with  the  "  pearl  of 
great  price,"  that  it  may  bear  it  round  the  world.     HI.  How  can  we  discharob 
OURSELVES  OF  THIS  HIGH  RESPONSIBILITY?  and  how  Can  the  lowliest  amongst  us 
discharge  his  duty  in  this  high  matter?     {H.  Stowell,  M.A.)      Fellow-helpers  to  the 
truth : — I.  By  speaking  friendly  to  the  preachers  of  the  truth.    Hezekiah  spake 
comfortably  to  the  Levites,  which  was  a  cheering  of  their  hearts,  as  the  word 
importeth.     2.  By   a  private  instructing  of   others,  as  Priscilla  and   Aquila  did 
ApoUos.    Householders  that  catechise  their  families  are  great  fellow-helpers  to  the 
truth.    3.  As  they  that  made  apologies  for  them.    4.  By  pulling  them  out  of  dangers. 
So  they  that  let  down  Paul  in  a  basket  through  the  wall  of  Damascus  were  fellow- 
helpers  to  the  truth  that  Paul  preached.    5.  By  helping  them  to  their  maintenance. 
So  did  Hezekiah  by  commanding  the  people  to  pay  their  tithes  and  offerings  to  the 
priests  and  Levites,  whereby  they  were  encouraged  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  (2  Ghron. 
xxxi.  4).     6.  By  ministering  temporal  things  to  them,  by  receiving  the  preachers  of 
the  truth  into  our  houses,  by  relieving  of  their  necessities,  by  affording  them  all  the 
eomfort  we  can,  by  sending  to  them  if  they  be  in  distress.     {W.  Jones,  D.D.)       All 
ought  to  he  fellow-helpers  : — In  the  old  coaching   days,  before  railways  were  as 
common  as  they  are  now,  I  observed  a  notice  about  the  amount  of  first,  second,  and 
third-class  fares  upon  one  of  these  coaches.    As  the  seats  all  appeared  alike,  I  took 
a  third-class  ticket,  expecting  to  be  as  well  off  as  those  with  second  or  first-class 
tickets,  and  beside  that,  I  should  have  the  satisfaction  of  having  saved  my  money. 
However,  at  the  foot  of  a  steep  hill  the  driver  stopped,  and  shouted  in  stentorian 
tones,  "  First-class  passengers  keep  your  seats ;  second-class   passengers   get  out 
and  walk ;    third-class  passengers    push    behind."      Let    us    all   be    third-class 
passengers,  not  sitting  at  ease  looking  on  while  others  do  the  work,  nor  walking  off 
from  it,  but  pushing  behind  with  all  our  might,  and  so  helping  and  encouraging  the 
often  overworked  and  overstrained  leaders  who  are  bearing  the  burden  and  heat 
of  the  day.     (F.  Clarkson.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Biotrephes,  who  lOTetb  to  have  the  pre-eminence. — Diotrephet  ;— 
Besides  the  light  which  this  brief  Epistle  casts  on  the  state  of  the  Christian  Church 
toward  the  close  of  the  first  century,  it  presents  us  with  "  the  portraits  in  little  "  of 
three  remarkable  men — Demetrius,  Diotrephes,  and  Gains.  We  are  to  study  a  man 
ol  a  very  inferior  stamp— the  vain,  irritable,  and  loquacious  Diotrephes,  whose 


in.  JOHN.  25 

religion  seems  to  have  been  quite  compatible  with  a  slippery  morality.  What 
exactly  it  was  at  which  Diotrephes  took  offence,  whether  in  the  letter  of  St.  John  or 
in  the  conduct  of  Demetrius,  we  are  not  told ;  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  offend  a  man 
who  has  an  undue  sense  of  his  own  importance,  and  whose  self-love  may  be  set  on 
fire  by  any  match,  however  innocently  it  may  be  struck.  St.  John  clearly  implies 
that  it  was  some  wound  to  his  love  of  pre-eminence,  his  determination  to  stand  first 
and  to  exact  a  homage  he  did  not  deserve.  But  whatever  the  prick  which  his  vanity 
had  received,  the  character  of  the  man  comes  out  in  his  wholly  disproportionate  and 
extravagant  resentment  of  the  offence.  In  his  resentment  he  sets  himself  against 
men  far  wiser  and  better  than  himself  ;  he  imperils  the  peace  of  the  Church  ;  he 
diminishes  its  numbers  and  strength.  Nothing  less  than  the  excommunication  of 
all  who  had  dared  to  differ  from  him,  all  who  had  ventured  to  receive  the  Evange- 
lists whom  he  would  not  receive,  and  whom  he  had  forbidden  them  to  receive,  would 
satisfy  him.  But  the  democratic  constitution  of  the  primitive  Church  would  not 
permit  one  man,  however  eminent,  to  excommunicate  those  who  had  offended  him, 
simply  because  they  had  offended  him.  Before  that  extreme  sentence  was  passed 
upon  them,  he  must  have  won  over  a  majority  of  his  and  their  fellow-members  to 
his  side.  He  must  have  taken  a  bypath  to  his  end.  And,  indeed,  a  man  of  inferior 
gifts  and  of  a  spirit  less  informed  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  who  will  stand  first,  will 
put  himself  forward  and  attempt  to  rule  a  free  Christian  congregation,  must  take 
this  course.  He  must  play  on  the  ignorance,  and  even  on  the  piety,  of  those  who 
follow  him,  must  affect  a  superior  wisdom,  or  a  superior  orthodoxy.  He  wiU  not 
let  facts  speak  for  themselves,  but  sets  himself  with  his  glib  tongue  to  lick  them 
out  of  their  natural  shape.  He  cannot  suffer  learning,  wisdom,  godliness,  experience, 
to  exert  their  natural  and  beneficent  influence,  but  must  at  all  risks  counterwork 
that  influence  and  suggest  plausible  reasons  for  not  yielding  to  it.  How  else  can  he 
win  and  maintain  a  pre-eminence  he  does  not  deserve  ?  There  is  nothing  in  the 
Epistle  to  suggest  that  Diotrephes  held  unsound  doctrinal  views,  or  that  he  fell  into 
what  are  called  gross  and  open  sins.  Had  he  been  unorthodox,  indeed,  or  flagrantly 
immoral,  he  would  never  have  gained  that  eminence  in  the  Church  which  he  insisted 
on  converting  into  pre-eminence.  All  that  he  is  blamed  for  is  the  conceit  and  self- 
assurance  which  rendered  him  impatient  of  rivalry  or  resistance,  and  set  him  on 
seeking  power  rather  than  usefulness.  Any  man  who  wiU  have  his  own  way  is 
only  too  likely  to  come  to  a  bad  end.  Any  man  who  insists  on  the  Church  taking 
his  way  is  only  too  certain  to  prove  a  blind  guide,  who  will  lead  those  who  follow 
him  into  a  ditch,  and  perhaps  leave  them  in  the  ditch  when  he  himself  scrambles 
out  of  it.  But  you  may  be  asking,  "  How  did  Diotrephes  induce  his  fellow-members 
to  foUow  his  lead,  since  they  must,  most  of  them  at  least,  have  been  good  men 
who  were  not  likely  to  excommunicate  their  fellows  either  for  an  excess  of  charity 
or  for  wounding  his  self-conceit?  And  the  answer  to  that  question  is  suggested  by 
St.  John's  words :  "  He  receiveth  not  us  " ;  "  prating  against  us  with  wicked  (or 
malicious)  words."  Yet  Diotrephes  could  hardly  have  openly  denied  the  authority 
of  an  apostle  so  revered  and  beloved  as  St.  John.  No  ;  but  he  may  have  questioned 
it  indirectly.  He  may  have  dilated  on  the  independence  of  the  Church,  of  every 
separate  community  of  believers,  on  its  competence  and  right  to  manage  its  own 
affairs,  to  appoint  its  own  agents,  to  decide  on  its  own  course  of  action,  and  have 
asked  whether  they  would  suffer,  whether  it  would  be  right  to  suffer,  any  outsider, 
however  honoured  and  beloved  he  might  be,  to  govern  and  control  them.  He  may 
even  have  persuaded  himself,  as  well  as  others,  that  John  had  taken  a  new  departure 
and  was  giving  a  new  tone  to  Christian  thought  and  life,  and  that  the  Church  was 
in  no  small  danger  of  being  led  away  from  its  old  standards,  and  thinking  too  much 
of  the  mercy  and  too  little  of  the  severity  of  God.  If  he  could  not  say  bluntly, 
••  I  mean  to  stand  first  in  this  Ch?irch,  let  who  will  oppose  me,"  or,  "  I  hate  Gains 
and  his  pretensions  to  advise  and  rule,"  or,  '•  I  dislike  Demetrius,  and  resent  his 
lack  of  deference  for  me,"  he  could  at  least  appeal  to  the  memory  and  teaching  of 
their  venerated  founder,  and  avow  his  preference  of  St.  Paul's  gospel  over  that  of 
St.  John.  For  we  must  now  remember  that  we  are  told  two  things  about  Diotrephes. 
We  are  told  not  only  that  he  loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence,  but  also  that  he  was 
cursed  with  a  voluble  tongue,  that  he  would  "  still  be  speaking  "  ;  for  how  often 
does  a  fluent  tongue  lead  a  man  whither,  in  his  reasonable  moods,  he  would  not 
go,  and  betray  him  into  positions  which  he  would  not  willingly  have  assumed  ?  Mr. 
Talkative,  as  Bunyan  calls  him,  may  do,  and  often  does  do,  quite  as  much  harm  as 
Mr.  niwill.  It  is  his  own  way  he  wants,  not  the  best  way,  not  the  way  which  wiU 
be  most  beneficial  to  others ;  and  if  he  cannot  get  it  by  fair  means,  he  will  often 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

Btoop  to  foul  or  dubious  means,  stirring  up  division  and  discontent,  prating  with 
malicious  words  against  those  who  oppose  him  when  fair  words  will  no  longer  serve 
his  turn.     And  if  the  itch  of  speaking  is  apt  to  lead  on  to  the  prating  of  idle,  and 
even  of  malicious,  words,  the  lust  of  power  commonly  leads  to  an  abuse  of  power. 
"  John,  or  Demetrius,  has  slighted  me.     Gaius  does  not  defer  to  me  or  my  wishes. 
He  has  received  strange  brethren  without  consulting  me,  or  when  he  knew  that  I  had 
forbidden  their  reception.    Nothing,  then,  shall  induce  me  to  receive  them.     I  will 
move  heaven  and  earth  against  them,  and  against  all  who  abet  them,  be  they  who 
they  will  " — when  a  man  has  once  reached  that  point,  and  Diotrephes  seems  to  have 
reached  it,  he  is  not  far  from  any  evil  word  or  any  evil  work.     No  punishment  is 
more  unwelcome  to  such  an  one  than  that  with  which  John  threatens  Diotrephes  : 
"  I  will  put  him  in  mind  of  his  words  and  his  works,"  bring  him  to  book  for  them 
in  his  own  presence  and  in  that  of  the  Church.     They  dislike  nothing  so  much  as 
being  compelled  to  face  their  own  whispers,  and  to  see  how  they  sound  in  honest 
and  impartial  ears,  or  even  in  their  own  ears  now  that  their  excitement  and  irrita- 
tion have  subsided.     Diotrephes,  then,  was  a  man  who  was  not  necessarily,  or 
wholly  bad  ;  a  man  who  may  have  had  many  good  qualities  and  have  done  some 
service  to  the  Church ;  but  his  good  qualities  were  blended  with,  and  their  good 
effects  vitiated  by,  an  exorbitant  self-conceit  and  loquacity.   "  Beloved,"  exclaims  St. 
John,  when  he  had  completed  his  miniature  of  Diotrephes,  "  imitate  not  that  which 
is  evil,  but  that  which  is  good.   He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God  ;  he  that  doeth  evil  hath 
not  seen  God."    And  by  this  exhortation  I  do  not  understand  him  to  imply  that 
Diotrephes  was  an  utterly  bad  man  who  had  never  seen  God,  never  taken  the  fii  st  step 
toward  a  participation  of  the  Divine  nature,  any  more  than  he  means  that  Demetrius, 
whom  he  forthwith  begins  to  describe,  was  a  man  wholly  good  in  whom  no  fault 
could  be  found.     But  I  do  understand  him  to  mean  that  a  vain  man,  too  fond  of 
hearing  himself  talk,  too  bent  on  taking  the  foremost  place,  is  closing  his  eyes 
against  the  heavenly  vision,  and  may  do  as  much  harm  as  if  his  intents  were  bad. 
The  apostle  may  imply  that,  as  Demetrius  was  undoubtedly  doing  a  good  work,  he 
was  a  good  man ;  and  that  Diotrephes,  in  so  far  as  he  opposed  and  crippled  that 
work,  was  doing  an  evil  work  and  took  his  place  among  evil  men.     [S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
Diotrephes  : — I.  I  will  show  you  who  is  not  Diotrephes.     1.  He  whose  godly  walk 
and  conversation  secures  for  him  the  entire  confidence  of  the  brethren,  and  thua 
gives  him  great  influence.     2.  He  whose  talents  and  education  necessarily  make 
him  a  man  of  influence.    3.  Nor  he,  whose  well-known  and  oft-proved  wisdom  and 
prudence  make  him  much  sought  unto  in  counsel.     4.  These  men  generally  do  not 
seek  influence.     It  is  unavoidable.     It  follows  them  as  their  shadow.     II.  I  proceed 
to  show  WHO  Diotrephes  is.     1.  Sometimes  he  is  a  man  who  never  had  his  will 
broken.    As  a  Church  member,  he  expects  the  household  of  Christ  to  give  way  to 
him.     He  is  wilful  and  headstrong,  often  as  unreasonable  as  a  mere  animal.     2. 
Sometimes  he  is  a  man  of  wealth.    His  riches  give  him  authority  in  the  world  ;  and 
he  takes  it  for  granted  they  ought  to  do  so  in  the  Church.     3.  Sometimes  he  is  a 
man  of  some  learning  and  much  volubility,  who  fancies  that  his  capacity  ought  to 
give  his  opinion  authority.     IH.  I  proceed  to  set  forth  Diotrephes  in  action.    If 
the  minister  does  not  take  him  for  counsellor  he  is  his  enemy.   With  every  movement 
does  he  find  fault  unless  he  originated  it.     IV.  In  the  next  place,  I  remark  upon 
Diotrephes'  character.    1.  He  is  very  unlike  Christ,  who  was  meek  and  lowly.     2. 
He  is  very  disobedient  to  the  word,  "  Let  each  esteem  other  better  than  himself." 
3.  He  is  against  that  equality  which  Christ  has  established  in  His  Church.   Practical 
observations :  1.  Diotrephes  is  most  of  the  time  in  trouble.  Always  looking  for  deference, 
he  is  always  liable  to  think  it  wanting.     2.  The  Church  can  take  no  surer  road  to 
trouble  than  to  give  way  to  Diotrephes.     3.  Diotrephes  will  scarce  be  the  friend  of 
the  minister.     The  natural  influence  of  the  religious  teacher  disturbs  him.     4.  It  is 
best  to  look  for  Diotrephes  in  his  own  pew.     Perhaps  we  may  find  him  in  our  own 
seat.   5.  Diotrephes  is  sometimes  married,  and  his  partner  may  be  a  true  yoke-fellow. 
{Christian  Treasury.)        Love  of  pre-eminence : — It  is  not  Diotrephes  alone  whose 
character  my  text  describes — it  is  human  nature  generally ;  it  is  every  man  whose 
heart  is  unrenewed  by  grace.     1.  A  haughty  heart,  a  lofty  look,  a  proud  temper, 
ambition,  spirit,  vanity — these  are,  more  or  less,  the  characteristic  marks  of  the 
natural  man.    No  such  man  is  content  with  the  station  in  which  it  has  pleased 
Providence  to  place  him.    AH  are  for  being  greater  than  they  are.    Each  must  have 
his  6wn  will  executed — his  own  humour  gratified.     Things  must  be  done  exactly  to 
his  taste,  and  every  other  person's  will  and  pleasure  must  give  way  to  his.     2. 
Whenoe  arises  this  "  love  of  the  pre-eminence  "  ?  to  what  is  it  to  be  ascribed?    To 


III.  JOHN.  27 

an  awful  ignorance  of  ourselves.  We  all  entertain  naturally  a  very  high  opinion 
of  our  own  characters — a  vast  notion  of  our  own  merits.  We  cannot  really  think 
that  we  are  miserable  sinners  whilst  we  are  striving  which  shall  be  the  greatest.  3. 
Is  this  love  of  the  pre-eminence  consistent  with  a  state  of  grace  ?  Search  the 
Scriptures  for  the  answer.  The  Bible  indeed  is  not  a  levelling  book.  It  does  not 
sweep  away  distinctions.  But  as  for  men  of  such  a  spirit  as  Diotrephes — of  a  vain, 
proud,  self-exalting  spirit — the  Bible  passes  upon  them  its  sentence  of  condemna- 
tion, and  gives  us  everywhere  to  understand  that  heaven  is  shut  against  them 
(Matt,  xviii.  3 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  5).  4.  But  why  is  a  love  of  the  pre-eminence  so  utterly 
condemned  in  the  Word  of  God  ?  Wherein  does  the  great  guilt  of  it  consist  ?  (1)  First, 
it  is  utterly  unsuitable  to  our  condition  as  fallen  guilty  creatures.  (2)  There  is 
another  reason  why  it  is  so  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  character  of  a  Christian  to 
love  the  pre-eminence.  That  post  of  honour  is  preoccupied.  It  belongs,  not  to  the 
Christian,  but  to  the  Christian's  Lord — not  to  the  saved  sinner,  but  to  that  sinner's 
Saviour.  {A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  true  method  of  eminence  : — Men  are  not  so 
much  mistaken  in  desiring  to  advance,  as  in  judging  what  will  be  an  advance, 
and  what  the  right  method  of  it.  A  man  proves  himself  fit  to  go  higher  who  shows 
that  he  is  faithful  where  he  is.  When  workmen  are  building  the  foundation  of  vast 
structures  they  must  needs  labour  far  below  the  surface,  and  in  disagreeable  f>on- 
ditions.  But  every  course  of  stone  which  they  lay  raises  them  higher,  and,  at 
length,  when  they  reach  the  surface,  they  have  laid  such  solid  work  under  them  that 
they  need  not  fear  now  to  carry  up  their  walls,  through  towering  storeys,  till  they 
overlook  the  whole  neighbourhood.  A  man  that  will  not  do  well  in  his  present  place 
because  he  longs  to  be  higher  is  already  too  high,  and  should  be  put  lower. 
Ambition: — Unless  they  can  be  top-sawyers  they  will  not  touch  a  saw.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  I  will  remember  his  deeds  which  he  doeth,  prating  against  us. — 
Diotrephes  rebuked  : — Here  St.  John  sets  up  a  flag  of  defiance  against  Diotrephes. . 
We  must  all  pluck  up  the  like  courage  against  the  adversaries  of  the  truth.  To 
give  wild  horses  the  rein  too  much  is  to  spoil  them  and  their  riders  too  ;  to  loose 
the  cords  of  the  ship  is  to  drown  the  ship ;  to  be  too  remiss  in  the  Church  is  to  over- 
throw the  Church.  Lenitives  will  serve  for  little  sores,  but  great  sores  must  have 
drawing  plasters,  otherwise  we  do  not  cure  but  kill.  We  must  bear  our  own  enemies, 
but  our  backs  must  not  be  so  broad  as  to  bear  God's  enemies.  Then  he  makes  an 
enumeration  of  his  deeds ;  they  be  in  number  four,  hke  four  stairs  in  a  ladder,  one 
higher  than  another ;  the  lowest  stair  of  all  is  his  prating,  the  next  to  that  is  his  not 
receiving  of  the  brethren  ;  the  third  is  his  forbidding  of  others  to  do  it ;  the  last  and 
greatest  of  all  is  his  casting  of  them  out  of  the  Church.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.) 
Censorious  men  commonly  take  up  magnifying  glasses  to  look  at  other  persons' 
imperfections,  and  diminishing  glasses  to  look  at  their  own  enormities.  Not  con- 
tent therewith. — Covetousness  in  sinning: — There  is  a  kind  of  covetousness  in 
sinning  :  a  covetous  man  is  not  content  with  that  which  he  hath,  though  he  have 
the  riches  of  Croesus,  yet  still  he  would  have  more.  So  he  that  hath  begun  to  drink 
of  the  water  of  sin,  must  needs  drink  more  and  more.  A  man  that  sinneth  is  like 
one  that  is  tumbled  down  from  a  steep  hUl,  he  cannot  stay  till  he  come  to  the  bottom 
unless  there  be  an  extraordinary  stop  by  the  way ;  there  is  no  stay  in  sinning  unless 
God  stay  us  by  the  hand  of  His  Spirit.  Not  content  therewith,  neither  doth  he 
himself  receive  the  brethren,  which  notwithstanding  he  ought  to  do,  for  in 
receiving  of  them  he  receives  Christ  (Matt.  xxv.  35).  Yet  not  content  with  that,  he 
forbids  them  that  would,  like  the  dog  in  the  manger  that  would  neither  eat  provender 
himself  nor  suffer  the  horse  to  eat  it ;  like  the  Pharisees  that  shut  up  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  before  men,  neither  go  in  themselves  nor  suffer  others  to  enter  in ;  these  be 
vile  wretches,  neither  give  to  good  uses  themselves  nor  suffer  others,  dissuade  others ; 
these  are  guilty  of  their  own  damnation,  and  of  the  damnation  of  others.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  11.  Beloved,  follow  not  that  which  ifl  evU,  but  that  which  is  good. — 

Evil  not  to  be  imitated  : — Evil  is  soon  imitated,  especially  in  great  persons ;  they  are 
a  countenance  to  it ;  their  actions  seem  to  be  laws.  Such  a  great  man  swears  pro- 
fanely. Why  may  not  I  swear  too  ?  No  ;  foUow  not  that  which  is  evU  in  any — 
no,  not  in  good  men.  1.  Evil  is  agreeable  to  our  nature;  it  is  soon  followed ;  a 
little  persuading  will  serve  the  turn ;  therefore  we  had  need  to  beware  of  it. 
2.  There  be  many  instigators  to  that  which  is  evil,  the  devil  and  his  instruments  to 
thrust  us  forward.  3.  Evil  is  common,  a  weed  that  grows  everywhere ;  goodness 
is  a  flower  that  grows  in  few  gardens  (Matt.  vii.  13,  14).  4.  EvU,  since  the  fall,  is 
of  greatest  antiquity.    There  was  a  Gain  before  an  Abel ;  therefore  we  had  need  to 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

watch  over  ourselves,  else  we  shall  follow  evil  ere  we  be  aware.  5.  Whither  doth  evil 
lead  us?  Even  to  hell,  follow  her  not ;  let  her  go  alone  for  all  us;  yet  she  hath 
too  many  followers,  even  in  the  light  of  the  gospel.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  He  that 
doeth  good  is  of  God :  but  he  that  death  evil  hath  not  seen  God. — Godliness : — 
Follow  the  faith  of  Abraham,  the  zeal  of  Phinehas,  the  sincerity  of  Nathaniel,  the 
liberaUty  of  Zaccheus  and  Cornelius ;  listen  to  the  admonition  of  St.  Paul  (Phil, 
iv.  8).  But  let  us  come  to  St.  John's  reason.  1.  For  goodness.  "  He  that  doeth 
good  is  of  God,"  not  by  propagation,  but  by  imitation  ;  he  is  full  of  goodness ;  be 
you  so,  too,  in  some  measure.  2.  He  doeth  that  which  is  acceptable  to  God ;  he  is 
of  His  family;  he  serves  and  obeys  Him,  therefore  God  will  reward  him  for  it.  On 
the  other  side,  "  he  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God."  Why  ?  Then  none  hath 
seen  Him,  for  all  do  evil.  The  meaning  is,  that  doth  accustom  himself  to  do  evil. 
The  godly  man  doeth  evil,  but  it  is  upon  weakness  ;  the  wicked  do  it  upon  wilful- 
ness ;  the  one  accidentally,  the  other  properly  and  naturally.  He  that  walketh  in 
the  dark  cannot  see ;  wicked  men  walk  in  the  darkness  of  sin  and  ignorance, 
therefore  they  cannot  see  God.  Therefore  let  us  abhor  that  which  is  evil ;  it  will 
blind  our  eyes,  and  keep  us  from  seeing  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Sin  injurious  to  spiritual 
sight : — 1.  He  that  doeth  evil — willingly  doeth  it — cannot  have  seen  God  in  the 
sense  of  having  seen  and  felt  the  claims  and  the  force  of  His  commandments. 
Diotrephes  could  not  have  seen  God  in  the  commandments,  or  he  would  not  have 
forced  his  way  to  the  "  pre-eminence,"  withheld  kindly  hospitalities,  or  spoken 
untrustful  things  of  the  apostle.  2.  He  that  doeth  evU — willingly  doeth  evil— 
cannot  have  "  seen  God  "  in  the  example  of  His  Son.  3.  He  that  doeth  evil — 
willingly  doeth  evil — cannot  have  "  seen  God  "  in  the  illuminations  of  the  Divine 
will  through  the  Holy  Ghost.  All  evil  resists  His  in-workings.  Or,  to  use  the 
figure  of  our  text,  aU  evil  blinds  us  to  His  presence,  and  leaves  us  to  grope  our  way 
in  the  darkness  of  our  self-seeking.     {The  Weekly  Pulpit.) 

Ver.  12.  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  all  men. — The  Christian  character  will 
stand  every  test : — 1.  The  test  of  public  opinion.  All  men  had  a  good  word  for 
Demetrius.  But  there  are  antipathies  in  the  worldly  mind ;  how,  then,  can  we 
expect  an  unbiassed  judgment?  We  answer  that  truth  must  vanquish  error  as  the 
light  does  the  darkness.  Dishonesty  can  only  obtain  a  temporary  triumph  over 
integrity  (1  Pet.  ii.  12).  2.  The  test  of  the  Word  of  God.  The  standard  of 
character  is  the  law  of  the  Lord.  We  use  the  Bible  for  comparison  as  well  as  for 
instruction.  It  is  a  mirror  in  which  to  see  our  true  condition.  3.  The  test  of 
Church  fellowship.  Christians  know  each  other  intimately,  and  as  such  they  know 
each  other's  failings  ;  yea,  and  they  know  the  difficulties  which  beset  a  holy  life. 
To  have  a  good  word  from  those  who  thus  know  us  testifies  to  the  genuineness  of 
our  character.  4.  The  test  of  the  final  judgment.  (Ibid.)  Demetrius : — 
An  evangelist,  possibly  a  prophet,  animated  by  a  most  self-sacrificing  and  dis- 
interested spirit,  which  sprang  from  an  ardent  love  for  Christ  the  Saviour  of  men, 
Demetrius  won  for  himself  a  threefold  testimony.  1.  He  won  "  the  witness  of  all," 
says  St.  John,  i.e.,  the  witness  of  all  good  men,  of  all  who  were  capable  of 
appreciating  goodness.  Even  those  who  rejected  his  message  had  nothing  to 
allege  against  the  man,  save  the  sublime  folly  of  a  perilous  and  unprofitable 
enthusiasm ;  while  those  who  accepted  it  from  him,  or  had  already  accepted  it 
from  other  lips,  could  not  but  admire  the  fineness  of  his  spirit  and  the  fire  of  hia 
zeal.  2.  More,  and  better  still,  he  won  "  the  testimony  of  the  truth  itself."  For 
he  who  daily  sets  his  life  upon  the  die  that  he  may  be  true  to  his  convictions,  he 
who,  moved  by  the  grace  and  love  of  Christ,  seeks  not  his  own  things,  but  the 
things  of  others ;  he  who  devotes  himself  with  burning  zeal  and  all-enduring 
courage  to  the  service  of  truth  and  the  salvation  of  men — to  him  the. truth  itself, 
which  has  made  him  what  he  is,  bears  witness.  Men  do  not  despise  ease  and  a 
sure  provision  for  their  daily  wants  ;  they  do  not  daily  affront  every  form  of  danger 
and  loss,  for  truths,  or  beliefs,  which  have  no  real,  no  vital,  hold  upon  them. 
**  They  who  do  such  things  as  these  declare  plainly  "  ;  they  "  make  it  manifest  " 
that  they  are  the  servants  of  a  truth,  which  they  love  more  than  they  love  them- 
selves. It  is  the  truth  itself  which  speaks  through  them,  and  bears  witness  to 
them.  3.  Last  of  all,  St.  John  adds  his  own  testimony  to  that  of  the  previous 
witnesses  :  "  We  also  bear  witness."  And  any  man  who  has  devoted  himself  to 
the  service  and  spread  of  a  truth  which  has  not  met  with  wide  or  general  recognition 
will  understand  the  special  charm  which  this  testimony  would  exert  on  Demetrius. 
A  very  noble  character,  on  which,  simply  by  describing  it,  St.  John  has  pronounced 


III.  JOHN.  29 

a  very  noble  eulogium.  Let  me  also  remind  you  that  great  as  Demetrius  looks  to 
us — great  in  his  disinterestedness,  his  devotion,  his  zeal — he  was  not  a  man  of  any 
great  mark  in  the  primitive  Church.  It  is  not  some  hero  of  distinction,  some 
honoured  and  beloved  man  of  spiritual  genius,  whom  I  have  tried  to  place  before 
you  ;  bnt  a  man  of  whom  we  should  never  have  heard  but  for  the  prating  insub- 
ordination of  Diotrephes.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  A  good  name  : — There  be  two  things 
which  we  ought  all  to  procure — a  good  conscience  in  respect  of  God,  and  a  good 
name  in  regard  of  men.  1.  A  good  name  is  sweet  and  comfortable  ;  it  is  preferred 
before  the  most  precious  things  that  men  have  in  greatest  estimation  (Prov.  xxii.  3). 
2.  It  is  profitable.  A  good  name  maketh  the  bones  fat.  A  good  name  maketh  a 
man  fat;  he  eats,  he  drinks,  he  sleeps  the  better  for  it.  3.  It  secures  a  man  whUe  he 
is  alive  ;  they  that  have  a  bad  report  for  their  injurious  dealing  are  maHgned;  they 
go,  in  some  sort,  in  danger  of  their  lives ;  they  that  have  a  good  report  walk  cheer- 
fully and  safely.  4.  It  is  a  consolation  to  a  man,  even  on  his  deathbed  ;  he  hath 
the  less,  then,  to  vex  and  trouble  his  mind.  5.  It  leaves  a  sweet  savour  after  us  ; 
when  we  be  dead  it  is  an  odoriferous  ointment ;  the  house  will  smell  of  it  a  good  while 
after.  Therefore  let  us  so  live,  that  we  may  be  well  reported  of,  so  far  as  it  is 
possible  of  all  men.  I  say,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  ;  for  in  truth  it  is  impossible ;  the 
best  of  us  all  must  make  account  to  pass  through  good  report  and  ill  report  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.     (W.  Jones,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  I  trust  I  shall  shortly  see  thee. — The  siveetness  of  Christian 
fellowship : — 1.  Its  foundation — peace.  This  is  the  bond  of  the  Christian  com- 
munity. It  cannot  exist  without  concord.  Divisions  drive  away  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  open  the  door  for  envy  and  malice.  2.  Its  sacredness — not  with  ink  and  pen. 
It  is  a  hidden  desire  which  can  only  be  expressed  in  a  manner  suitable  to  its  own 
nature.  It  may  take  many  forms  to  show  itself,  but  it  cannot  be  fuUy  realised 
without  personal  contact.  3.  Its  well-wishers — the  friends  greet  thee.  A  sincere 
desire  for  the  welfare  of  each  other  is  a  strong  feature  in  Christian  morals.  4.  Its 
individual  regard — greet  the  brethren  by  name.  Each  person  received  attention 
irrespective  of  wealth  or  position.  {The  Weekly  Pulpit.)  Greet  the  friends  by 
name. — The  friends : — The  word  "friend"  does  not  often  occur  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, being  swallowed  up  in  the  more  endearing  one  of  "  brother."  {J.  Wesley.) 
Greet  the  friends  hy  name  : — The  good  pastor  imitates  that  Good  Shepherd  who 
"  caUeth  His  sheep  by  name."  (C.  Wordsworth.)  True  friends  scarce  : — The 
friendship  of  most  men  in  these  days  is  Uke  some  plants  in  the  water,  which  have 
broad  leaves  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  but  scarce  any  root  at  aU ;  like  drums  and 
trumpets  and  ensigns  in  a  battle,  which  make  a  noise  and  a  show,  but  act  nothing  ; 
mere  friendships  in  pretence  and  compliment,  that  can  bow  handsomely,  and 
promise  emphatically,  and  speak  plausibly,  and  forget  all.    {J,  Spencer.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR. 

JUDE. 


S4 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations ; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,   on    the   Verses  of   The    Bible 


/ 


Rev.    JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,    M.A. 


]UDE 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.    Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO   THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JUDE. 

The  Wbiteb  of  the  Epistle. — ^In  ver.  1  he  describes  himself  as  the  brother  of 
James.  If  James,  then,  was  the  first  of  the  four  persons  mentioned  as  the  brethren 
of  the  Lord  in  Matt.  xiii.  55,  this  Judas  was  the  last  of  these  four,  and  the  Son  of 
a  Mary  (not  the  Virgin)  who  stood  by  the  Cross.  In  this  case  he  would  not  have 
been  one  of  the  original  apostles,  but  was  (along  with  James)  converted  by  the 
Resurrection  of  the  Lord.  Some,  however,  suppose  that  he  was  the  son  of  Alphseus 
by  a  sister  of  the  Virgin,  but  in  that  case  the  fact  of  the  Nazarenes  associating  him 
with  themselves,  rather  than  with  the  Lord,  would  have  to  be  accounted  for.  The 
Epistle  is  quoted  as  an  inspired  and  canonical  work  in  some  of  the  early  fathers. 
Some  words  in  it  seem  to  be  cited  in  a  fragment  of  Irenseus,  published  by  Pfaff  in 
the  last  century — "  the  most  holy  faith  delivered  unto  us."  Tertullian  quotes  it 
by  name  in  his  tract  on  "Female  Dress,"  chap.  iii. :  "To  these  considerations  is 
added  the  fact  that  Enoch  possesses  a  testimony  in  the  Apostle  Jude,"  &c.  Clement 
of  Alexandria  also  quotes  it  by  name  ("  Miscellanies,"  b.  iii.,  chap,  ii) :  "  Concern- 
ing these  and  the  like  heresies,  I  think  that  Jude  has  spoken  prophetically  in  hig 
Epistle,  '  Likewise  those  dreamers,'  "  &c.  Also  in  Misc.,  vi.  8:  "And  some  pluck 
from  the  fire,"  &c.  Also  in  the  "  Psedagogus,"  iii.  8:  "  'For  I  would  have  you 
know,'  says  Jude,  '  that  God,  having  once  saved,'  "  Ac.  The  Muratorian  fragment 
also  includes  it  in  the  Canon.     (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.) 

The  Epistle  of  St.  Jude. — I.  The  example  of    St.  Jude  in  this  Epistle  may 
suggest  to  us  that  "  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ "  is  justifiable  in  usinq  the 

PLAINEST    LANGUAGE    OF    WABNING    AND    EEPBOOF,    WHEN    CIBCUMSTANCES     DEMAND     IT 

nay,  that  he  is  bound  to  do  so.  Instruction  and  consolation  are  not  the  only  duties 
of  the  pulpit.  There  is  still  such  a  province  in  religious  discourse,  as  the  province 
of  warning  and  rebuke  ;  and  ministerial  fidelity,  undoubtedly,  consists  in  not  over- 
looking this.  To  be  plain,  it  is  not  necessary  that  our  language  should  be  coarse. 
To  be  bold  in  declaring  the  truth,  we  may  stand  at  the  widest  distance  from 
arrogance  and  presumption.  We  may  be  fully  earnest  and  vehement,  without 
using  invective.  II.  Besides,  we  may  infer  the  necessity  of  what  is  now  stated 
from  observing.  That  St.  Jude  has  hebe  pbessed  the  lanquaqe  of  bepboof  and 

WABNING  UPON  THE  MINDS   EVEN    OF   THOSE  WHO  WEBE  GREATLY  ADVANCED  IN  GhBISTIAN 

peefection.  They  were  those,  he  says,  who  were  "  sanctified  by  God  the  Father." 
Even  these,  though  far  advanced,  stood  in  need  of  a  faithful  rehearsal,  both  of 
their  danger  and  of  the  motives  to  perseverance.  High  as  their  acquirements  were, 
they  were  not  beyond  the  reach  of  that  sinful  infection,  which  would  shade,  or 
tarnish,  or  destroy  their  purity.  He  who  perseveres  to  the  end  is  not  the  man  who 
imagines  he  is  secure  of  never  falling  away.  III.  While  everything  that  relates  to 
the  human  condition  and  character  requires  the  faithfijlness  which  I  now  speak 
of,  I  am  led  to  infer  the  justification  of  it,  from  observing,  That  St.  Jude  has 

V 


6  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JUDE. 

UNITED  HIS  LANGUAGE   OF  WARNING  AND   REPROOF   WITH   THE   WISH   FOR   "  MBRCT,   AMD 

PEACE,  AND  LOVE,"  SO  that,  instead  of  its  being  indicative  of  the  morose  and  bitter 
dispositions,  it  is  coincident  with  kindness,  and  is  the  very  sign  of  benevolence. 
We  never  apprehend  that  our  fellow-traveller  will  be  enraged  at  us,  because  we 
shake  him  out  of  the  lethargy  which  we  perceive  is  stealing  upon  him,  amid  the 
cold  and  snows  of  his  journey,  and  is  about  to  seal  his  eyes  in  death.  Why  is  it, 
therefore,  that  the  attempt  to  save  from  evils  of  a  moral  kind  is  not  met  with 
grateful  acknowledgments,  but  because  these  evils  are  not  seen  to  exist,  or  because 
they  are  deemed  trifling  in  their  origin  and  eq-aally  immaterial  in  their  effects. 
{W.  Muir,  D.D.) 

Belation  between  n.  Peter  and  Jude. — The  second  chapter  of  the  Second 
Epistle  of  Peter  constitutes  a  remarkable  peculiarity  in  that  Epistle.  Were  it  not 
for  the  indisputable  evidence  in  favour  of  the  integrity  of  the  Epistle,  we  might 
regard  this  chapter  as  a  later  insertion,  as  it  could  be  omitted  without  any  injury 
being  done  to  the  train  of  thought.  It  differs  in  style  from  the  other  portions,  and 
it  is  here  that  the  chief  linguistic  differences  between  the  First  and  Second  Epistles 
of  Peter  are  found.  But  what  especially  strikes  one  as  remarkable  is  the  close 
resemblance  between  this  chapter  and  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  a  resemblance  which  is 
not  confined  to  a  mere  similarity  of  thought,  but  extends  to  a  sameness  of  words 
and  phrases,  to  the  illustrations  and  references  employed,  and  to  the  sequence  of 
ideas ;  so  that  it  is  now  almost  universally  conceded  that  there  must  be  an  intimate 
connection  between  these  writings,  amounting  either  to  a  dependence  of  the  one 
upon  the  other,  or  to  both  being  derived  from  the  same  source.  And  yet,  on  the 
other  hand,  this  dependence  is  by  no  means  slavish,  each  contracts  or  expands  the 
ideas  of  the  other,  and  in  both  there  is  a  freshness  of  expression  and  a  vigour  of 
thought.  The  passages  in  the  Epistles  related  to  each  other  are  2  Peter  ii.  1,  ill.  3 ; 
and  Jude  4-18.  The  subject  treated  of  in  these  passages  is  the  same — the  character 
of  the  false  teachers  who  at  that  period  infested  the  Christian  Church.  And 
although  there  is  some  difference,  as  Peter  dwells  chiefly  on  the  heretical  teachers 
themselves,  and  Jude  describes  the  licentiousness  of  their  followers;  yet  it  is 
evident  that  the  same  class  of  men  is  alluded  to.  Their  character,  their  maxims, 
their  vices,  their  destiny  are  the  same ;  they  are  painted  with  the  same  colours  and 
described  by  the  same  qualities.  I.  Some  suppose  that  Peter  and  Jude  wrote 
independently.  Both,  it  is  asserted,  wrote  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  were  guided  in  their  thoughts.  They  wrote  on  the  same  subject,  were 
well  versed  in  the  Old  Testament,  were  directed  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  hence  the 
reason  of  the  remarkable  resemljlance  in  their  writings.  Such  a  hypothesis  is 
nnsatisfactory.  The  sacred  Scriptures,  though  inspired,  were  yet  written  by  men, 
each  writer  using  his  own  style  and  language  ;  and  these  human  elements  are  to 
be  judged  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  criticism.  The  words  and  phrases  in  2  Peter  ii. 
and  Jude  are  so  similar  that  it  must  follow  either  that  the  one  borrowed  from  the 
other,  or  that  both  derived  their  materials  from  a  common  source.  U.  A  more 
plausible  supposition  is  that  both  Peter  and  Jude  borrowed  from  the  same  docu- 
ment ;  that  both  were  translations  from  or  adaptations  of  some  Aramaic  writing. 
The  supposition  was  first  stated  by  Bishop  Sherlock,  with  singular  ingenuity.  He 
supposes  the  original  document  to  have  been  some  ancient  Jewish  writing,  in 
which  the  prophecies  of  Enoch  and  Noah,  relating  to  the  flood,  were  recorded,  so 
that  it  is  easy  to  account  for  the  reference  to  Noah  by  Peter  and  to  Enoch  by  Jude. 
StUl,  however,  the  Bishop  feels  that  this  hypothesis  is  not  sufficient  to  account  for 
all  the  points  of  similarity,  as,  for  example,  the  prediction  of  these  mockers  by  the 
Apostles,  and  therefore  he  further  supposes  that  Jude  had  along  with  this  Jewish 
book  the  Epistle  of  Peter.  Now,  such  a  supposition  does,  to  a  certain  extent, 
account  for  the  resemblances  and  differences  in  the  writings  of  Peter  and  Jude ;  it 
also  accounts  for  the  difference  in  style  between  the  second  chapter  and  other 
portions  of  this  Second  Epistle  of  Peter,  and  obviates,  in  a  great  measure,  the 
objection  drawn  from  the  difference  in  style  between  Peter's  First  and  Second 
Epistles.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  appears  to  be  derogatory  to  the  sacred  writers, 
and  contrary  to  our  idea  of  inspiration,  to  suppose  that  both  should  copy  from  a 
writing  which  must  be  considered  as  apocryphal,  and  very  improbable  that  both 
should  fix  on  the  same  document.  HI.  A  third  supposition  is  that  Jude  borrowed 
from  Peter.  1.  Eeasons  assigned  for  the  priority  of  the  Epistle  of  Peter.  (1^  In 
the  Epistle  of  Peter  the  false  teachers  and  scoffers  are  the  subjects  of  prediction  ; 
they  had  not  as  yet  arisen  in  the  Church  ;  whereas  in  the  Epistle  of  Jude  they  had 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JUDE.  7 

already  arisen.  (2)  There  is  la  the  Epistle  of  Jude  a  reference  to  predictions  con- 
cerning the  coming  of  scoffers  (vers.  17, 18).  Now  it  is  affirmed  that  this  prediction 
of  the  Apostles  is  found  most  fuUy  and  most  plainly  ia  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter. 
Paul,  indeed,  frequently  foretold  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  would  come, 
that  many  would  depart  from  the  faith,  and  that  even  among  Christians,  false 
teachers  would  arise,  seeking  to  draw  away  disciples  after  them.  But  the  very 
words  employed  by  Jude  are  used  in  Peter's  prediction.  (3)  In  Jude's  Epistle 
corruption  appears  in  a  more  advanced  state.  Jude  is  far  more  vehement  in  his 
expressions  and  denunciations  than  Peter;  if  Jude  wrote  first,  Peter  has  toned 
down  and  moderated  his  expressions.  (4)  It  is  asserted  that  Jude  has  in  many 
instances  expanded  the  expressions  of  Peter ;  added  to  them  and  adapted  them  to 
the  purpose  of  his  writing.  Certainly  such  instances  of  expansion  may  be  adduced ; 
but  little  can  be  made  of  this  argument,  as  it  is  counterbalanced  by  similar  instances 
in  the  Epistle  of  Peter.  It  is  supposed  that  Jude,  about  to  write  the  Epistle 
concerning  the  common  salvation,  was  diverted  from  his  purpose  by  seeing  the 
extreme  wickedness  which  was  corrupting  the  Christian  Church ;  and,  therefore, 
he  felt  that  it  was  needful  for  him  to  write  at  once,  and  to  exhort  Christians  to 
contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  And  finding  a  remark- 
able resemblance  between  the  licentiousness  of  wicked  Christians  and  the  description 
of  the  scoffers  who  were  to  arise  in  the  Christian  Church  given  in  the  Epistle  of 
Peter,  he  felt  that  he  could  best  accomplish  his  design  by  borrowing  from  that 
Epistle,  and  freely  using  the  sentiments  it  contained  ;  and  this  he  does  in  an 
Epistle  fuU  of  vigour.  2.  Objections  against  this  hypothesis.  (1)  Dean  Plumptre 
remarks,  "It  was  more  likely  that  Peter  should  incorporate  the  contents  of  a  short 
Epistle  like  that  of  Jude  in  the  longer  one  which  he  was  writing,  than  that  Jude, 
with  the  whole  of  Peter's  Second  Epistle  before  him,  should  have  confined  himself 
to  one  section  of  it  only."  To  this,  however,  it  is  answered  that  the  section  to 
which  Jude  confined  himself  was  the  one  appropriate  for  his  purpose.  It  must, 
however,  be  admitted  that  the  comparative  brevity  of  Jude's  Epistle,  and  the  terse 
and  sententious  expression  of  its  thoughts,  are  in  favour  of  its  originality.  (2)  It 
is  affirmed  that  some  portions  of  the  Epistle  of  Peter  can  only  be  understood  by  a 
reference  to  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  Thus  the  language  of  Peter  concerning  the  for- 
bearance of  the  angels,  taken  by  itself,  is  unintelligible.  As  Hug  puts  it:  "  With 
Jude  this  is  the  case ;  he  states  the  matter  distinctly,  and  expressly  names  the 
dispute  of  Michael  with  the  devU  respecting  the  body  of  Moses.  But  Peter  rests 
BO  much  in  generals,  and  explains  himself  respecting  it  so  indefinitely,  that  we 
could  not  at  all  have  guessed  what  he  had  in  view  in  this  passage,  if  we  were  not 
in  possession  of  Jude."  IV.  The  only  other  possible  supposition  is  that  Peter 
borrowed  from  Jude.  1.  This  is  the  opinion  in  the  present  day  most  generally 
favoured.  (1)  The  phraseology  of  Jude  is  simpler  than  that  of  Peter,  which  is 
more  artificial,  rhetorical,  and  paraphrastic.  (2)  Some  of  the  expressions  in 
Jude's  Epistle  are  distorted,  and  altered  in  a  singular  manner.  (3)  Passages  in 
Peter's  Epistle  are  obscure  and  can  only  be  explained  from  the  parallel  expressions 
in  Jude's  Epistle.  (4)  The  course  of  thought  in  Jude  is  firm  and  distinct,  whilst 
in  Peter  it  is  unsteady  like  that  of  an  imitator  (Jude  4  compared  with  2  Pet.  ii.  1 
and  i.  19-21 ;  Jude  5-^  compared  with  2  Peter  ii.  4^11,  where  the  interruption  in 
7-9  and  the  change  of  case  in  ver.  10  are  to  be  noticed).  (5)  The  opponents 
described  and  denounced  in  Jude  are  distinctly  portrayed,  whereas  in  Second  Peter 
the  position  is  quite  indefinite.  2.  Those  who  adopt  the  opinion  that  Peter 
borrowed  from  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  suppose  that  when  Peter  wrote  his  Second 
Epistle,  the  Epistle  of  Jude  came  under  his  notice,  and  he  was  deeply  impressed 
with  its  vigour,  earnestness,  inspiration  ;  he  felt  that  it  contained  the  words  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  that  it  was  most  applicable  to  the  state  of  the  Churches  to  which 
he  was  writing.  He  therefore  uses  it  in  enforcing  his  own  injunctions  ;  he  incor- 
porates its  sentiments  in  his  Epistle ;  but  he  does  so  in  no  slavish  manner ;  he 
makes  the  thoughts  and  words  of  Jude  his  own.  Hence  he  omits  and  adds  as 
occasion  serves.  The  readers  of  the  two  Epistles  were  in  some  respects  different. 
Both  write  to  Christians,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles ;  but  Jude's  Epistle  is  chiefly 
addressed  to  Jewish  Christians,  and  Peter's  to  Gentile  Christians.  Hence  several 
references  employed  by  Jude  are  omitted  by  Peter,  because  he  adapts  his  writing  to 
Gentile  Christians.  3.  This  view  of  the  priority  of  the  Epistle  of  Jude  is  exposed 
to  several  weighty  objections.  Especially  it  is  considered  to  be  opposed  to  the 
authenticity  of  Peter's  Epistle.  It  can  hardly  be  imagined  that  Peter,  one  of  the 
three  pillars  of  the  Church,  so  ready  in  speech  and  action,  would  borrow  from  one 


8  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JVDE. 

who  was  not  an  Apostle,  and  who  was  unknown  in  the  Christian  Church.  '*  Those 
who,  like  ourselves,"  observes  Fronmiiller,  "  are  profoundly  impressed  with  the 
authenticity  of  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter,  deem  it,  a  priori,  highly  improbable 
that  Peter,  the  prince  of  the  Apostles,  that  illumined  and  highly  gifted  man,  who 
proves  his  originality  in  the  First  Epistle,  as  well  as  in  chaps,  i.  and  iii.  of  the 
Second  Epistle,  should  have  borrowed,  in  a  part  of  his  Epistle,  the  language, 
figures,  and  examples  of  a  man  evidently  less  gifted  than  himself.  Especially 
remarkable,  moreover,  would  be  his  silence  concerning  Jude,  seeing  that  he  made 
mention  of  Paul  and  his  Epistles."  Hence  it  is  that  Schott  argues  against  the 
priority  of  Jude  on  the  ground  of  the  authenticity  of  Second  Peter.  4.  Upon  the 
whole,  then,  although  we  consider  that  2  Peter  ii.  1-iii.  1-3  and  Jude  are  so 
dependent  upon  each  other  that  either  Peter  must  have  seen  the  Epistle  of  Jude  or 
Jude  must  have  seen  the  Epistle  of  Peter,  yet  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the 
priority  of  each  are  so  nearly  balanced,  that  it  is  impossible  to  come  to  a  definite 
conclusion.  The  admission  of  the  fact  that  one  sacred  writer  borrowed  from 
another  is  no  argument  against  the  inspiration  or  the  genuineness  of  one  of  the 
writings.  There  are  several  instances  in  Scripture  where  writers  have  copied  from 
one  another,  or  from  a  common  source.  Not  to  mention  in  this  point  of  view 
several  passages  in  the  synoptical  Gospels,  the  repetitions  in  the  Pentateuch,  and 
the  same  historical  accounts  in  the  books  of  Samuel,  the  Kings,  and  Chronicles ; 
the  following  passages  are  coincident  in  words ;  compare  2  Sam.  xxii.  with 
Psa.  xviii. ;  Psa.  xiv.  with  Psa.  liii. ;  Psa.  cxv.  4-11  with  Psa.  cxxxv.  16-21 ; 
2  Kings  xviii.  13-xix.  with  Isa.  xxxvi.-xxxix. ;  2  Kings  xxv.  23,  24  with  Jer.  xl. 
7-9 ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  22,  23  with  Ezra  i.  1-3 ;  Ezra  ii.  with  Neh.  vii. ;  Isa.  ii. 
2-4  with  Micah  iv.  1-3,  <&c.  In  all  these  passages  the  resemblance  is  far  more 
complete  and  exact  than  that  found  between  the  Epistles  of  Second  Peter  and  Jude. 
(P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTKATOE. 

JUDE. 

Vebs.  1,  2.  Jude  ...  to  them  tliat  are  sanctified. — The  apostolic  benediction : — 
I.  The  apostolic  benediction.  St.  Jude  has  given  the  blessing  in  a  fuller  form 
than  any  of  his  brethren,  superadding  the  benefits  of  Christian  "  love  "  to  the  other 
subjects  of  the  holy  wish.  Observe  that  in  this  benediction  the  apostles  follow 
the  same  order  as  in  the  text — I  mean  that  "mercy"  or  "grace"  is  always  first. 
And  we  may  well  perceive  the  absolute  necessity  of  this.  "  Mercy"  must  form  to 
us  the  beginning  of  every  blessing.  "  Mercy  "  therefore  is  the  first  object  of  our 
concern ;  mercy  to  forgive ;  to  rescue  from  perishing ;  to  raise  to  favour ;  and  to 
render  us  at  last,  by  its  purifying  influence,  worthy  of  the  friendship  of  that 
gracious  Being  who  freely  bestows  it.  It  is  here  we  find  the  only  source  of  "  peace," 
which  begins  in  our  being  reconciled  to  God ;  and  the  wisdom  of  its  commencing 
there  appears  from  the  fact  that  the  mind,  with  its  many  fears  and  hopes,  has  no 
ground  whereon  to  rest  but  in  union  with  God.  Peace  under  the  remembrance  of 
sin,  for  sin  is  pardoned  ;  under  the  visitations  of  adversity,  for  the  paternal  favour 
turns  them  all  to  present  improvement  and  endless  good  ;  under  the  solemn  views 
of  the  future  world,  for  the  judgment  is  to  be  an  acquittal  and  eternity  of  blessedness 
to  the  children  of  God.  The  man  who  has  this  Divine  tranquillity  reigning  in  his 
soul  will  be  eager  to  preserve  the  unity  of  kind  affection  with  his  brethren.  He  is 
in  the  best  state  for  cultivating  the  fruits  of  Christian  "  love."  He  cannot  hold 
fellowship  with  "  the  things  above  "  without  drawing  down  "  the  wisdom  "  that  is 
as  "peaceable  and  gentle"  as  it  is  "pure."  II.  The  limitations  within  which 
the  benediction  is  here  pronounced.  The  persons  on  whom  exclusively  it  is  pro- 
nounced are  described  by  decided  traits  of  character.  Every  one  that  hears  the 
gospel  is  "called."  But  it  is  not  upon  every  one  that  the  "call"  produces  its 
effect.  As  giving  an  abridged  view  of  what  is  required  in  the  way  of  evidence  on 
this  subject,  the  next  qualification  mentioned  may  safely  be  taken.  For  to  be 
"  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus  "  denotes  perseverance  in  every  excellence.  It  describes 
at  once  constancy  of  religious  profession  and  devotedness  of  religious  obedience, 
trust  in  the  author  of  our  salvation,  and  endeavour  to  resemble  Him.  Now, 
consider  for  what  use  these  views  of  character  are  here  detailed.  They  are  of  use 
for  determining  on  whom  the  apostolical  benediction  was  pronounced.  Freely  as 
the  blessings  of  the  gospel  are  offered,  never  is  the  offer  of  them  to  conceal  the 
great  distinctions  of  moral  truth  and  duty.  Benedictions  are  to  descend  on  ground 
fitted  to  receive  them ;  otherwise  there  will  spring  up  no  real  good.  Let  no  man, 
therefore,  soothe  himself  with  the  promises  of  "  mercy "  who  is  conscious  that, 
instead  of  being  "  sanctified  "  under  the  influence  of  the  gospel,  he  is  living  in  the 
wilful  practice  of  sin.  (W.Muir,  D.D.)  The  salutation  : — I.  Characteristics  op 
TRUE  believers.  These  are  three,  and  they  include  all  which  pertain  to  godliness. 
1.  A  Divine  act  in  the  soul.  The  idea  of  consecration  is  here  intended.  2.  Divine 
guardianship  over  the  soul.  We  are  preserved  in  the  matter  of  possession — what 
God  has  given  us,  and  in  the  matter  of  condition — what  God  has  made  us.  3. 
Divine  leadership  before  the  soul.  This  is  the  call  to  service,  activity,  and  suffer- 
ing. II.  The  blessings  of  true  believers.  1.  God's  mercy  to  maintain  their 
purity.  The  very  idea  of  weakness  and  imperfection  is  here  implied.  By  the 
constant  supply  of  grace  the  saints  are  kept  from  falling.    2.  God's  peace  to  main- 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

tain  their  preservation.  Commotion,  strife,  perturbation  of  soul,  invariably  lead  to 
loBS  and  disaster,  3.  God's  love  to  inspire  their  life.  (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  A 
servant  of  Christ : — 1.  They  who  undertake  any  public  employment  for  Christ  mast 
receive  a  call  from  Him  to  be  His  servants,  if  with  comfort  to  themselves  or  benefit 
to  others  they  will  go  about  His  work.  2.  Alliance  in  faith,  spiritual  relation  to 
Christ,  is  much  dearer  and  nearer  than  alliance  in  flesh.  3.  There  is  a  peculiar 
excellency  and  worth  in  the  title  of  servant.  (1)  Christ  much  honours  us.  (2)  He 
will  assist  us  in  our  works.  (3)  He  will  preserve  us.  (4)  He  will  provide  for  us. 
(5)  He  wiU  reward  us.  4.  We  owe  to  God  the  duty  and  demeanour  of  servants. 
To  serve  Him— (1)  Solely.  (2)  Obediently.  (3)  Heartily.  (4)  Cheerfully.  (5) 
Perpetually.  5.  They  who  expect  to  persuade  others  to  serve  Christ  must  be 
servants  themselves.  (W.  Jenkyri,  M.A.)  Grace  and  sanctijication  : — 1.  Grace 
whereby  we  are  changed,  much  excels  grace  whereby  we  are  only  curbed.  2.  This 
sanctification  changes  not  the  substance  and  faculties  of  soul  and  body,  but  only 
the  corruption,  disorder,  and  sinfulness  thereof.  3.  The  people  of  God  even  in  this 
life  are  saints.  4.  Holiness  cannot  be  hid.  5.  How  great  the  change  that  is 
wrought  upon  a  person  when  God  comes  with  sanctifying  grace !  6.  The  holiness 
of  a  sanctified  person  is  not  purely  negative.  We  are  not  content  with  half 
happiness,  why  should  we  be  with  half  holiness  ?  7.  Sanctification  admits  no 
coalition  between  the  new  and  the  old  man.  8.  As  a  sanctified  person  allows  no 
mixtures  with  grace,  so  he  puts  no  limits  to  grace.  9.  Outside,  superstitious 
mortification  is  but  a  shadow  of  the  true.  10.  The  Lord  estimates  His  people  by 
the  better  part,  their  bent  and  strain,  not  their  defects.  11.  How  causelessly  the 
world  complains  of  those  who  are  truly  sanctified !  (Ibid.)  Sanctijication  and 
preservation  of  the  saints  : — All  former  blessings  without  tnis  is  to  small  purpose, 
in  that  God  not  only  calleth  us,  but  sanctifieth  us,  and  not  only  so,  but  also 
reserveth  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  maketh  up  the  measure  of  our  joy  tiU  the 
bushel  run  over.  So  Paul  told  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  i.  8).  This  is  the  anchor  of 
our  hope,  that  God  preserveth  us  for  ever.  Our  life  is  like  a  ship  in  the  sea,  beaten 
with  wind,  tossed  with  waves,  and  were  it  not  that  Christ  is  in  this  ship,  we  were 
like  to  sink.     {S.  Otes.) 

Yet.  2'.  Mercy  unto  you,  and  peace,  and  love,  be  multiplied. — Mercy,  peace,  and 
love  multixdied : — I.  Mercy.  1.  Pardoning  mercy.  2.  Sustaining  mercy.  3.  Pre- 
serving mercy.  4.  Restraining  mercy.  5.  Supplying  mercy.  6.  Restoring  and 
sanctifying  mercy.  7.  Glorifying  mercy.  H.  Peace.  1.  Internal  peace — a  holy, 
tranquU  calm.  2.  External  peace.  Christ  is  the  King  of  peace.  Our  lives  must 
be  peace,  our  lips  will  breathe  peace.  HI.  Love.  1.  The  love  of  God  towards  us. 
2.  The  love  of  ourselves  to  God.  Surely  this  needs  to  abound !  How  cold  it  is,  how 
poor  and  deficient !  3.  Love  to  one  another.  This  is  the  evidence  of  our  love  to 
Him.  (Homilist.)  Spiritual  blessings  best : — 1.  Spiritual  blessings  are  the  best 
blessings  we  can  wish  to  ourselves  and  others.  It  is  true,  nature  is  allowed  to 
speak  in  prayer,  but  grace  must  be  heard  first.  2.  Observe  the  aptness  of  the 
requests  to  the  persons  for  whom  he  prayeth.  "  Those  that  are  sanctified  and 
called  "  have  still  need  of  "  mercy,  peace,  and  love."  They  need  mercy,  because 
we  merit  nothing  of  God,  neither  before  grace  received  nor  afterward.  Our  obliga- 
tion to  free  grace  never  ceaseth.  We  need  also  more  peace.  There  are  degrees 
in  assurance  as  well  as  faith.  There  is  a  temperate  confidence,  and  there 
are  ravishing  delights,  so  that  peace  needs  to  be  multiplied  also.  And  then 
love,  that  being  a  grace  in  us,  it  is  always  in  progress.  In  heaven  only  it  is 
complete.  Take  it  for  love  to  God  ;  there  we  cleave  to  Him  without  distraction 
and  weariness  or  satiety.  God  in  communion  is  always  fresh  and  new  to  the 
blessed  spirits.  And  take  it  for  love  to  the  saints ;  it  is  only  perfect  in  heaven, 
where  there  is  no  ignorance,  pride,  partialities,  and  factions.  3.  Observe  the  aptness 
of  these  requests  to  the  times  wherein  He  prayed,  when  religion  was  scandalised  by 
loose  Christians,  and  carnal  doctrines  were  obtruded  upon  the  Church.  In  times 
of  defection  from  God,  and  wrong  to  the  truth,  there  is  great  need  of  mercy,  peace, 
and  love.  Of  mercy,  that  we  may  be  kept  from  the  snares  of  Satan.  And  we 
need  peace  and  inward  consolations,  that  we  may  the  better  digest  the  misery  of 
the  times ;  and  love,  that  we  may  be  of  one  mind,  and  stand  together  in  the 
defence  of  the  truth.  4.  Note  the  aptness  of  the  blessings  to  the  persons  to  whom 
He  prayeth.  Here  are  three  blessings  that  do  more  eminently  suit  with  every 
person  of  the  Trinity ;  and  I  do  the  rather  note  it,  because  I  find  the  apostle  else- 
where distinguishing  these  blessings  by  their  proper  fountains,  as  Rom.  i.  7.     So 


JUDE.  11 

here  is  mercy  from  God  the  Father,  who  is  called  "  the  Father  of  mercies  and  the 
God  of  aU  comfort "  (2  Cor.  i.  3),  and  peace  from  the  Son,  for  "  He  is  our  peace  " 
(Eph.  ii.  14),  and  love  from  the  Spirit  (Kom.  v.  5),  "  The  love  of  God  is  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  given  to  us."  Thus  you  see 
every  person  concurreth  to  our  happiness  with  His  distinct  blessing.  5.  How  aptly 
these  blessings  are  suited  among  themselves :  fii'st  mercy,  then  peace,  and  then 
love.  (T.  Manton.)  Holy  arithmetic : — A  trinity  of  blessings  is  often  to  be  met 
with  in  God's  Word.  It  is  God's  happiness  to  crown  all  His  people  with  goodness. 
May  this  trio  of  blessings  be  given  to  each  one  of  us,  and  be  multiplied.  God's 
gifts  always  come  in  company.  He  is  God,  and  gives  as  a  God.  Man,  indeed,  has 
limited  means,  and  so  must  be  limited  in  his  gifts.  I.  We  have  a  sum  in  addition. 
As  Christians  we  must  never  be  content  with  the  measure  of  our  grace.  Do  not  be 
satisfied  to  remain  dwarf  trees,  but  seek  to  be  growing  higher  and  higher,  and  at 
the  same  time  sending  your  roots  deeper  and  deeper.  1.  The  first  figure  in  this 
sum  is  "  mercy,"  and  it  is  a  very  high  number  indeed.  It  stands  foremost,  for  it 
is  the  chief  of  God's  dealings  with  us,  whereby  He  pities  us  in  our  helplessness. 
We  have  already  received  much,  but  we  are  to  add  to  it :  for  "  He  hath  not  dealt 
with  us  after  our  sins,"  but  favour  has  been  shown  to  the  undeserving,  mercy  to 
those  who  are  full  of  sin.  He  has  shown  not  only  clemency  in  bestowing  pardon, 
but  His  bountiful  mercy  whereby  He  supplies  sufiiciently  our  wants.  So  that 
whatever  we  need  let  us  seek  the  stream  bearing  on  its  tide  blessings  for  our  souls 
to-day.  2.  Then  add  to  mercy  "  peace."  What  a  glorious  numeral  is  this  !  Now 
are  we  reconciled  to  God  through  the  death  of  His  dear  Son.  The  enmity  of  our 
hearts  has  been  slain,  and  it  is  our  delight  to  be  in  His  company.  We  want  to 
have  more  of  this  peace ;  how  shall  we  gain  it  ?  Only  by  seeking  to  hold  more 
communion  with  our  God.  If  this  fair  flower  is  to  grow  within  our  hearts  the  dew 
of  heaven  must  faU  upon  it  during  the  hours  of  cahn  fellowship  with  God.  We 
must  dwell  in  Him  and  He  in  us.  3.  Yet  again,  there  is  another  figure  to  add, 
and  it  is  "  love."  Many  have  got  a  little  of  this  treasure;  would  to  God  aU  had 
more.  Love  lies  smouldering  in  our  hearts.  0  breath  Divine,  blow  these  sparks 
into  burning  fires  I  Grace  changes  aU  within  us,  for  while  we  receive  such  mercy 
and  enjoy  such  peace  from  the  hands  of  our  loving  Lord  we  feel  we  must  love  in 
return.  H.  Now  we  come  to  our  sum  in  multiplication.  If  I  want  to  increase 
rapidly  let  me  have  the  multiplication  table,  and  let  it  be  by  compound  multiplica- 
tion too.  Mercy,  and  peace,  and  love,  multiplied  by  mercy,  and  peace,  and  love, 
which  have  been  multiplied.  Is  this  a  hard  sum  ?  God  can  help  us  to  do  it  if  we 
also  help  ourselves.  1.  The  first  thing  that  affords  aid  is  memory.  Think  of  the 
mercies  of  yesterday,  put  them  down,  then  multiply  them  by  the  mercies  of  to-day, 
and  so  on  and  on,  meditating  upon  the  favours  of  years  past,  and  you  wiU  find  by 
this  mental  exercise  that  the  mercy  you  now  enjoy  wiU  be  multiplied.  And  memory 
will  refresh  you  concerning  peace  too.  KecoUect  the  morning  of  bright  joy  which 
followed  the  nights  of  sadness.  Love,  too,  must  be  remembered  if  it  is  to  be 
multiplied.  Beview  all  the  tokens  received  in  the  past,  aU  the  choice  souvenirs. 
2.  Another  help  we  may  have  is  mutual  intercourse.  As  a  boy  at  school  runs  to 
another  older  and  wiser  than  himself  when  a  sum  is  hard,  and  he  needs  help  in 
doing  it,  so  should  Christians  endeavour  to  find  counsel  and  support  from  inter- 
course with  their  feUow-saints.  3.  But  the  very  best  way  is  to  go  to  the  Master. 
If  the  sum  is  difiicult,  it  may  be  well  to  take  down  the  exercise-book  and  see  the 
examples  already  worked  out.  He  is  plenteous  in  mercy.  Here,  then,  shall  you 
find  a  way  out  of  your  difficulty.  If  you  cannot  multiply,  He  wiU  do  it  for  you ; 
He  is  the  Prince  of  Peace,  submit  yourself  to  His  gentle  reign,  and  peace  shall  be 
yours.  DweU  in  the  atmosphere  of  His  love  and  this  grace  shall  be  more  and 
more  in  you.  HI.  Now,  a  sum  in  practice,  and  a  very  short  one  too.  Unto 
you  who  have  been  called,  sanctified,  and  preserved,  are  these  words  of 
exhortation  sent.  Be  merciful,  for  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall 
obtain  mercy."  Be  peaceful,  for  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall 
be  called  the  children  of  God,"  Be  loving,  for  "  love  is  of  God,  and  every 
one  that  loveth  is  bom  of  God,  and  knoweth  God."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Mercy  :— 1.  Mercy  can  be  attributed  to  God.  (1)  As  it  signifies  a  promptitude  of  the 
wiU  to  succour  the  miserable.  (2)  As  it  signifies  God's  actual  helping  and  relieving 
us  in  our  distresses.  2.  God  is  merciful — (1)  With  a  preventing  mercy.  (2)  With 
a  forgiving  mercy.  (3)  With  accepting  mercy,  taking  in  good  part  the  desires  of 
the  soul  when  it  finds  not  to  perform.  (4)  With  re-accepting  mercy ;  looking  upon 
a  returning  prodigal  as  a  son;  pitying  as  a  father,  not  punishing  as   a   judge. 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

(5)  With  providing  mercy  (Psa.  xxiii.).  (6)  With  directing  mercy  in  our  doubts 
(Psa.  Ixxiii.  24).  (7)  With  sustaining  mercy  (Psa.  xciv.  18).  (8)  With  quickening, 
enhvening  mercy  to  any  holy  duty  (Phil.  iv.  13).  (9)  With  restoring  mercy;  and 
that  not  only  from  sin  and  miseries,  but  even  by  them.  (10)  With  crowning  mercy 
when  He  brings  us  to  heaven.  3.  The  properties  of  God's  mercy.  (1)  Full. 
(2)  Free.  Lessons :  1.  How  unbeseeming  a  sin  is  pride  in  any  that  live  upon  mercy ! 
2.  The  duty  of  contentment  in  our  greatest  wants  or  smallest  receipts.  3.  The 
impiety  and  folly  of  those  that  abuse  mercy.  4.  Great  is  the  heinousness  of  sin, 
that  can  provoke  a  God  of  much  mercy,  to  express  much  severity.  5.  It  should  be 
our  care  to  obtain  the  best  and  choicest  of  mercies.  6.  How  little  should  any  that 
have  this  God  of  mercy  for  theirs,  be  dismayed  with  any  misery  !  7.  It  is  our  duty 
and  dignity  to  imitate  God  in  showing  mercy.     (W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  Beloved. — Ministerial  courtesy  and  love  : — 1.  Piety  is  no  enemy  to 
courtesy.  2.  The  work  and  labour  of  a  minister  should  proceed  from  love  to  his 
people.  3.  People  should  study  to  be  fit  for  the  love  of  their  pastor.  4.  The  love  of 
a  minister  must  not  be  slack  and  remiss,  but  vehement  and  ardent.  5.  Loving  a 
minister's  person  has  a  great  influence  upon  loving  his  doctrine.  6.  The  aim  of  a 
minister  in  being  beloved  of  his  people  should  be  to  benefit  their  souls.  7.  The  love 
of  a  minister  to  his  people  should  procure  love  again  from  his  people.  (Ibid.)  I 
gave  all  diligence. — Diligence  : — 1.  Greatest  diligence  is  always  to  be  used  about  the 
best  things,  about  matters  of  greatest  concernment.  It  is  madness  to  make  as  great 
a  fire  for  the  roasting  of  an  egg  as  for  the  roasting  of  an  ox ;  to  follow  the  world  with 
as  much  fervency  as  we  do  holiness :  and  about  trifles  to  be  employed  with  vast 
endeavours.  It  is  impossible  to  be  too  diligent  for  heaven,  and  difficult  not  to  be 
over- diligent  for  the  earth.  2.  All  that  ministers,  even  the  best  of  them,  can  do,  is 
but  to  be  diligent,  to  take  pains  and  endeavour  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).  One  thing  to  preach, 
another  to  persuade.  3.  Diligence  in  duty  is  the  commendation  of  ministers.  The 
light  of  knowledge  without  the  heat  of  love,  speaks  him  not  excellent.  He  is 
not  made  for  sight,  but  for  service.  4.  People  who  partake  of  the  minister's 
diligence,   must    take    heed    of    negligence.      (Ibid.)  To  write  unto  you. — 

Writing : — Writing  is  a  great  help  to  promote  the  common  salvation.  By  this 
means  we  speak  to  the  absent  and  to  posterity  ;  and  by  this  means  are  the  oracles 
of  God  preserved  in  public  records,  which  otherwise  were  in  danger  of  being 
corrupted,  if  left  to  the  uncertainty  of  verbal  tradition.  Apostolical  doctrine  being 
committed  to  writing,  remaineth  as  a  constant  rule  of  faith  and  manners.  Finally, 
by  writing,  the  streams  of  salvation  are  conveyed  into  every  family,  that  in  the 
defect  of  public  preaching  good  supply  may  be  had  in  this  kind  (Judg.  v.  14). 
Again,  in  controversials  there  is  great  use  of  writing,  controversies  not  being  so 
easily  determined  by  the  judgment  of  the  ear  as  the  eye.  In  the  clamour  of 
disputations  and  violent  discourse,  usually  there  is  such  a  dust  raised,  that  we 
cannot  so  soon  discern  the  truth  as  upon  a  calm  debate,  and  mature  consideration  of 
what  is  delivered  in  writing.  (T.  Manton.)  Of  the  common  salvation. — The 
common  salvation  : — I.  Invite  attention  to  the  theme.  "The  common  salvation." 
1.  Salvation  is  adapted  to  all.  It  meets  the  case  of  man,  as  it  provides — (1)  An 
atonement  for  sin.  (2)  A  justifying  righteousness.  (3)  The  Holy  spirit,  to  renew 
and  sanctify.  2.  The  salvation  of  the  gospel  is  suificient  for  all.  As  well  exhaust 
the  Godhead  as  exhaust  it.  If  you  were  bid  betake  yourself  to  that  mighty  ocean, 
would  you  say  there  was  not  water  enough  for  me  to  bathe  in  ?  3.  The  salvation 
of  the  gospel  offers  itself  freely  to  all.  II.  Exhort  the  ubgenct  of  personal 
APPROPRIATION  OF  THE  COMMON  SALVATION.  It  suggcsts  moumful  Considerations. 
Is  what  lies  within  the  reach  of  all,  what  comes  as  a  boon  to  be  forfeited.  Ah, 
what  a  dismal  consummation  from  such  preliminaries  !  It  is  no  dubious  problem, 
that,  in  order  to  any  benefit,  the  salvation  must  be  appropriated ;  otherwise  it  is 
worse  than  of  no  avail.  For  that  dishonoured  salvation  must  throw  a  dismal 
complexion  on  your  eternity.  It  must  add  intensity  to  all  its  retributions.  (Adam 
Forman.)         The   common   salvation  :  —  I.    The   essential   truths   it   embraces. 

I.  The  full  admission  of  man's  entire  depravity  and  ruin.  2.  The  necessity  of  an 
entire  and  sole  dependence  on  the  finished  work  of  Christ.  3.  The  necessity  of  the 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the  regeneration  and  sanctification  of  the  soul. 

II.  The  wondrous  scenes  it  discloses.  1.  Look  back  to  the  counsels  of  eternal 
love.  2.  Observe  the  scenes  of  the  Redeemer's  advent.  3.  Look  to  the  scenes  of 
purity  and  bliss  above.  III.  The  distinouishino  blessings  it  confers.  1.  Pardon 
and  peace.     2.  Adoption  and  dignity.     3.  Comfort  and  preservation.     4.  Present 


JUDE.  13 

pleasure  and  joyful  anticipation.  IV.  The  peksonal  attention  it  demands. 
(TF.  Spencer.)  The  common  salvation  (with  Titus  i.  4): — Jude  was  probably  one  of 
Christ's  brothers,  and  a  man  of  position  and  influence  in  the  Church.  He  is 
writing  to  the  whole  early  Christian  community,  numbering  men  widely  separated 
from  each  other  by  nationality,  race,  culture,  and  general  outlook  on  life ;  and 
he  beautifully  and  humbly  unites  himself  with  them  all  as  recipients  of  a 
"  common  salvation."  Paul  is  writing  to  Titus,  the  veteran  leader  to  a  raw  recruit ; 
and  yet  Paul  beautifully  and  humbly  associates  himself  with  his  pupil,  as  exercising 
a  "  common  faith."  But  you  will  notice  that  they  take  up  the  same  thought  at 
two  different  stages,  as  it  were.  The  one  declares  that  there  is  but  one  remedy  for 
all  the  world's  woes ;  the  other  declares  that  there  is  but  one  way  by  which  that 
remedy  can  be  applied.  All  who  possess  "  the  common  salvation  "  are  so  blessed 
because  they  exercise  "the  common  faith."  I.  The  underlying  conception  of  a. 
tTNivEESAij  deepest  NEED.  "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint." 
The  tap  root  of  all  human  miseries  lies  in  the  solemn  fact  of  human  transgression. 
That  is  a  universal  fact.  Wide  differences  part  us,  but  there  is  one  thing  that  we 
have  all  in  common  ;  a  conscience  and  a  will  that  lifts  itself  against  disliked  good. 
Beneath  all  surface  differences  of  garb  there  lies  the  same  fact,  the  common  sickness 
of  sin.  Now,  do  not  let  us  lose  ourselves  in  generalities.  Whatever  you  may  want, 
be  sure  of  this:  that  your  deepest  needs  will  not  be  met  until  the  fact  of  your 
individual  sinfulness  and  the  consequences  of  that  fact  are  somehow  or  other  dealt 
with,  staunched,  and  swept  away.  II.  The  common  bemedy.  "  The  common 
salvation."  There  is  one  remedy  for  the  sickness.  There  is  one  safety  against 
the  danger.  There  is  only  one,  because  it  is  the  remedy  for  all  men,  and  it  is  the 
remedy  for  all  men  because  it  is  the  remedy  for  each.  Jesus  Christ  deals,  as  no 
one  else  has  ever  pretended  to  deal,  with  this  outstanding  fact  of  my  transgression 
and  yours.  He,  by  His  death,  as  I  believe,  has  saved  the  world  from  the  danger 
because  He  has  set  right  the  world's  relations  to  God.  On  the  Cross,  Jesus  Christ 
the  Son  of  God  bore  the  weight  of  the  world's  sin,  yours  and  mine  and  every  man's. 
Further,  Jesus  Christ  imparts  a  life  that  cures  the  sickness  of  sin.  Christ  deals 
with  men  in  the  depths  of  their  being.  He  will  give  you,  if  you  will,  a  new  life  and 
new  tastes,  directions,  incUnations,  impulses,  perceptions,  hopes,  and  capacities, 
and  the  evil  will  pass  away,  and  you  will  be  whole.  Jesus  Christ  heals  society  by 
healing  the  individual.  There  is  no  other  way  of  doing  it.  If  the  units  are 
corrupt  the  community  cannot  be  pure.  HI.  The  common  means  of  possessing  the 
COMMON  HEALING.  My  secoud  text  tells  us  what  that  is — "  The  common  faith."  If 
it  is  true  that  salvation  is  a  gift  from  God,  then  it  is  quite  plain  that  the  only  thing 
that  we  require  is  an  outstretched  hand.  It  is  no  arbitrary  appointment.  The  only 
possible  way  of  possessing  "  the  common  salvation "  is  by  the  exercise  of  "  the 
common  faith."     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)         The  common  salvation  : — I.  It  is  common 

BECAUSE  IT  comes  TO  ALL  MEN  FKOM  A  COMMON  SOURCE.       II.    BECAUSE  IT  CONCERNS   ALL 

CLASSES.    III.  Because  it  satisfies  a  common  need.    IV.  Because  it  is  adapted  to 

MEN  OF  ALL  RACES  AND  EVERY  CLIME.       V.    BECAUSE  IT  IS  THE  THEME  OF  ALL  THE  WRITERS 

OF  Scripture.  Learn — 1.  To  accept  this  salvation.  2.  To  pubUsh  it.  3.  To 
defend  it.  (James  Hoyle.)  The  common  salvation : — I.  It  lies  open  to  all. 
n.  Christ  is  offered  freely  to  all,  in  order  to  be  received  altogether  as  He  is 
EXHIBITED  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  In  His  complcx  character  as  God-man.  2.  In  all 
His  offices  as  Mediator,  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  {F.  Frew.)  The  general 
character  of  the  gospel  scheme  : — I.  The  gospel,  which  is  characterised  by  its  spiritual 
or  experimental  effect,  is  here  called  "  the  salvation."  It  is  the  instrumental 
medium  through  which  this  comprehensive  blessing  is  conveyed  to  the  soul. 
"Faith  Cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God.  H.  The  gospel  is 
not  only  called  "  the  salvation,"  but  "  the  common  salvation."  This  may  be 
intended  to  intimate — 1.  That  the  salvation  which  the  gospel  reveals  flows  to 
behevers  from  one  common  source — Christ.  2.  That  it  is  the  same  salvation  that  is 
enjoyed  by  all  the  children  of  God.  3.  That  the  salvation  of  the  gospel  is  common 
to  every  age,  and  class,  and  clime.  4.  That  all  true  believers  have  a  common 
interest  in  this  salvation — that  they  are  all  alike  bound  to  maintain  its  doctrines,  to 
vindicate  its  principles,  and  to  promote  its  practical  designs.  HI.  The  gospel  is 
also  here  described  as  "  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the   saints."      IV.  The 

MANNER  AND  SPIRIT  IN  WHICH  WE  ARE  TO  "  CONTEND  FOR  THE  FAITH."      V.    ThE  REASONS 

•which  BENDER  THIS  CONTENDING  FOR  THE  FAITH  NECESSARY.  1.  Becausc  men  are  by 
nature  hostile  to  the  truth,  and  therefore  disposed  to  pervert  it.  2.  Because  the 
glory  of  God  is  peculiarly  connected  with  the  preservation  of  His  truth.    3.  Because 


14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

the  uncorrupted  truth  is  essential  to  the  salvation  of  man.     4.  Because  we  are 
bound   in   this  matter  to  follow  the   example    of   our  Lord  and  His    apostles. 
(W.  McGilvray,  D.D.)        The  common  salvation : — 1.  God  is  most  free  of  His  best 
blessings.     He  affords  salvation  in  common  to  all  His  people.      2.  Christ  and 
heaven  are  full  and  satisfactory ;   they  are  enough  for  all.     3.  None  should  be 
willing  to  be  saved  alone.    Heaven  was  made  for  a  common  good.     4.  They  who 
teach  others  the  way  to  salvation,  should  be  in  a  state  of  salvation  themselves.     He 
who  has  sailed  into  foreign  coasts,  discourses  more  thoroughly  and  satisfactorily 
than  he  who  has  only  map  knowledge.     5.  The  commonness  of  salvation  to  all 
believers   should  be  a  great  inducement  to  every  one  to  labour  particularly  for 
salvation,  and  that  they  may  not  miss  of  it  themselves.     6.  There  is  but  one  way  to 
heaven.     There  are  miany  nations,  more  men,  only  one  faith.     7.  The  partakers 
of  this  "  common  salvation,"  who  here  agree  in  one  way  to  heaven,   and    who 
expect  to  be  hereafter  in  one  heaven,  should  be  of  one  heart.     {W.  Jenkyn,  3I.A.) 
The  common  salvation : — Ajid  note  that  he  calleth  it  common  salvation,  not  proper 
to  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  David,  Peter,  &c.,  but  common  to  aU.    First,  he  caUeth 
it  common  salvation.    First,  to  admonish  aU  men  to  lay  hold  of  it.     So  saith  Paul 
to  Timothy, "  Lay  hold  of  eternal  life."    And  also  to  admonish  ministers  to  neglect  no 
sheep  of  God,  not  the  very  least.     Secondly,  he  caUeth  it  common  salvation  because 
it  is  not  prepared  for  some  few,  as  the  Ark  was  for  the  deluge.     Salvation  is  of  the 
Jews,  but  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  offered  unto  aU.      Thirdly,  he  calleth  it 
common  salvation  because  we  are  aU  saved  by  one  common  means,  that  is,  by 
Christ.      In  this  sense,  as  salvation  is  called  common,  so  the  Church  is  called 
common  or  cathoUc  in  three  respects.    First,  it  is  not  tied  to  any  time,  as  the  time 
of  the  law,  but  it  endureth  for  ever.     Secondly,  it  is  not  tied  to  any  place,  but  to  the 
whole  world.     Thirdly,  it  is  not  tied  to  any  persons,  as  to  the  seed  of  Abraham,  but 
to  all  that  believe.    In  these  respects  salvation  is  called  cathoUc,  or  common,  and 
so  is  the  Church.     (S.  Otes.)        The  common  salvation  : — I.  Because  it  pbovides 
THAT  WHICH  MANKIND  EVEKYWHEEE  EEQUiKE.     It  may  be  rightfully  Said,  I  think,  that 
mankind  are  addicted  to  religion  ;  by  which  I  mean  that  the  propensity  to  engage  in 
worship,  and  to  seek  for  help  and  succour  from  powers  which  are  external  to  our- 
gelves — that  that  propensity  is  characteristic  to  man  as  man.     Man  is  reUgioua 
because  he  cannot  help  it ;  he  is  religious  from  necessity ;  he  wants  that  which 
naturally  he  does  not  possess,  and  without  which  he  believes  it  cannot  be  weU  with 
him,  either  now  or  hereafter.    Why  else  wiU  you  find  men  going  upon  pilgrimages, 
offering  sacrifices,  and  enduring  the  heaviest  self-der.lal?    Well,  look  here,  in  the 
glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  you  have  just  the  common  benefaction  which 
humanity  require.    This,  and  not  something  else  ;  not  this  or  something  else,  but 
this  exclusively,  and  this  alone.    II.  Because  you  can  communicate  it  to  mankind 
EVEBTWHERE.    I  havc  spokcu  of  various  forms  of  religious  service,  and  various  modes 
of  religious  action  ;  now  of  many  of  them  it  may  be  said  that  they  arose  out  of  the 
necessities  of  some  given  district,  and  that  they  relate  exclusively  to  the  peculiarities 
of  that  district.     But  you  cannot  tell  me  of  any  region  of  earth  where  Christianity 
cannot  be  instituted  ;  the  man  does  not  Uve  to  whom  it  may  not  be  preached,  and 
by  whom  it  may  not  be  forthwith  enjoyed.     The  nation  cannot  be  found  under 
heaven  to  which  it  may  not  be  sent.     The  government  does  not  exist  under  which 
it  will  not  survive.    PecuUarities,  geographical,  local  or  national,  cannot  be  found 
•whereby  it  would  be  set  at  nought.    III.  Because  it  is  adapted  to  mankind  every- 
where.   It  is  not  only  required  by  them  in  the  general,  but  it  is  adapted  to  them 
severally,  wherever  they  may  be  found.     There  are  great  peculiarities — personal 
pecuharities  amongst  the  human  family.     1.  What  peculiarities  there  are,  for 
example,  in  respect  to  constitutional  temperament !     One  man  is  cheerful,  so  much 
so  that  some  would  say  of  him,  that  he  is  volatile  and  gay.    Another  man,  on  the 
contrary,  is  taciturn.    It  would  be  said  of  him  that  he  is  gloomy  or  morose.     Others 
partake  of  each  of  these  peculiarities  in  a  manner  which,  perhaps,  may  be  said  to 
constitute  the  temperament  we  most  admire.    The  gospel  when  brought  to  bear  on 
these  peculiarities,  ministers  impulse  where  it  is  required — it  ministers  equanimity 
where  that   is  required,  and   strength  where  strength  is  required.    It  preserves 
cheerfulness  from  degenerating  into  levity,  and  seriousness  from  degenerating  into 
gloom.    2.  Again,  what  peculiarities  there  exist  with  respect  to  age  1    The  young 
man  needs  to  be  reminded  that  the  world  is  a  great  delusion,  and  to  be  kept  under 
a  constant,  powerful,  yet  cheerful  check,  lest  he  put  darkness  for  Ught,  and  hght 
for  darkness.     The  man  of  business  needs  to  be  reminded  that  this  is  not  his  rest. 
The  man  of  threescore  years  and  ten  needs  to  be  succoured,  comforted,  and  cheered 


JUDE.  15 

by  the  consolations  of  the  gospel.  It  takes  the  young  man  and  the  maiden,  and 
administers  counsel  and  instruction  to  them.  It  takes  the  man  of  business,  and  is 
like  a  monitor  at  his  very  elbow  on  the  exchange,  bidding  him  not  to  forget  the 
things  which  are  unseen  and  eternal.  It  goes  to  the  old  man's  chamber,  and 
makes  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness.  3.  Yet  again,  there  are  peculiarities  with 
respect  to  intellectual  power.  There  are  some  men  who  are  profoundly  intellectual, 
and  there  are  other  men  who  are  not  profoundly  intellectual.  There  is  a  very  great 
variety  of  gradation  between  those  two  extremes  ;  but  mark  !  The  proverbs,  the 
parables,  the  doctrines,  the  invitations  in  this  Book  were  made  as  much  for  the  sage 
as  they  were  for  the  rustic  ;  and,  engaged  as  men  of  the  most  opposite  intellectual 
power  may  be  upon  the  examination  of  it,  I  would  defy  anybody  to  teU  whether 
the  philosopher  or  the  peasant  were  most  at  home.  4.  Then  there  is  another 
peculiarity  with  regard  to  the  degree  of  each  person's  criminality.  It  is  adapted  to 
the  profligate,  the  blasphemer,  the  dishonourable — to  adopt  the  language  of  the 
Apostle  Paul,  it  is  adapted  to  the  disobedient,  the  lawless,  the  ungodly.  IV. 
Because  it  mat  be  proffered  to  all  mankind,  everywhere.  So  explicit  are  its 
declarations,  so  unrestricted  are  its  invitations.  "  Believe  thou  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  ! "  The  light  of  heaven  is  unrestricted,  and  the 
light  of  the  gospel  is  equally  so.  (W.  Brock.)  Earnestly  contend  for  the  faith 
once  delivered.  Contending  for  tlie  faith : — The  revelation  of  God  in  Christ — 
whose  contents  are  the  object  of  Christian  faith  and  are  therefore  described  as  the 
faith  which  was  once  for  all  delivered  to  the  saints — does  not  consist  merely  in 
additional  knowledge  concerning  God.  Christ  is  the  Saviour  as  well  as  the  teacher 
of  men.  A  large  part,  perhaps  the  larger  part,  of  the  revelation  of  God  which  has 
come  to  the  race  through  Christ  consists  in  the  actual  redemption  of  men  from  sin 
and  eternal  death.  Those  who  receive  the  Christian  gospel  are  not  only  brought 
under  the  power  of  great  and  pathetic  and  animating  truths  concerning  God — they 
enter  into  the  actual  possession  of  a  redemption  which  God  has  achieved  for  the 
race.  To  them  the  faith  was  once  for  all  delivered.  That  is,  the  revelation  of  God 
in  Christ,  the  Christian  gospel,  which  is  the  object  of  the  faith  of  all  Christians, 
and  which  is  here  described  as  "  the  faith,"  is  committed  to  the  trust  of  all  who 
have  been  actually  redeemed  and  restored  to  God  by  Christ.  They  are  responsible 
for  its  purity  and  integrity.  There  are  other  provisions  for  perpetuating  it,  and 
for  renewing  it,  when  it  has  been  corrupted  or  wholly  lost.  The  wi'itten  story  of 
the  earthly  Ufe  and  ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  authoritative  teach- 
ing of  the  apostles.  But  even  those  sacred  books  were  written  by  elect  saints  in 
discharge  of  the  same  trust  which  has  been  inherited  by  ourselves.  They  stand 
apart.  They  have  an  exceptional  authority.  But  they  illustrate  the  fidelity  which 
is  required  of  the  saints  of  all  succeeding  generations ;  and  in  our  age,  as  in  all 
past  ages,  the  effective  defence  of  the  faith  lies,  under  God,  with  living  men 
and  women  who  through  Christ  have  received  the  remission  of  sins,  and 
the  supernatural  life,  and  the  grace  and  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  To  the  saints 
was  the  faith  delivered  once  for  all.  The  saints  of  every  age  are  responsible  for 
defending  it  in  times  of  peril  and  asserting  its  power.  For  they,  and  they  alone, 
have  an  independent,  personal,  and  immediate  knowledge  of  the  Divine  objects  of 
faith.  Some  kinship  with  a  poet's  genius  is  necessary  for  a  true  understanding  of 
his  verse ;  and  spiritual  kinship  with  the  writers  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New 
is  necessary  to  catch  their  real  thought.  Who  can  tell  what  is  meant  by  being  "  in 
Christ  "  except  the  man  who  is  conscious  that  he  himself  is  "  in  Christ  "  ?  Who 
can  have  any  clear  perception  of  the  great  truth — the  paradox  of  the  Christian 
gospel — that  we  are  justified,  not  by  our  own  righteousness,  but  in  Christ,  except 
the  man  who,  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  own  happy  experience,  can  join  in  the 
exulting  triumph  of  saints  and  say,  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with 
God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  <fec.  The  theologian,  therefore,  must  first  of 
all  be  a  saint.  It  is  not  enough  that  he  has  mastered  the  theories  of  conflicting 
theologies  concerning  the  Christian  atonement,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  justification, 
the  new  life  which  is  given  to  the  race  in  Christ,  judgment  to  come.  He  must 
know  for  himself  the  greatness  of  the  Christian  redemption.  He  must  be  vividly 
conscious  that  in  the  power  of  a  new  life  he  has  passed  into  a  new  world,  it  he  is  to 
be  able  to  give  any  true  account  of  that  Divine  regenerative  act  in  which  the  new  life  is 
given.  His  science  is  the  science  of  God.  He  must  have  a  large  and  varied  know- 
ledge of  God — not  merely  of  the  speculations  of  other  men  about  God.  His  faith 
in  Christ  as  the  Eternal  Word  who  has  become  flesh  must  rest,  not  on  proof  texts, 
but  on  a  direct  vision  of  Christ's  glory,  and  his  faith  in  the  Holy  Spirit  on  his  own 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

consciousness  that  that  august  and  gracious  Presence  dwells  in  him  as  in  a  temple. 
For  his  thought  to  move  with  any  certainty  in  the  great  mysteries  which  surround 
the  being  of  the  Eternal,  he  must  be  able  to  say  with  other  saintly  souls,  "  Through 
Christ  we  have  access  in  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father."    To  aU  Christian  men  the 
great  objects  of  faith  are  revealed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.    No  man  can  really  say 
that  Jesus  is  the  Lord  but  in  the  Holy  Spirit.    The  theologian  who  is  called  of  God 
to  be  the  teacher  of  the  Church  must  receive  in  larger  measure  than  his  brethren 
"  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  "  in  the  knowledge  of  God.    It  is  not  given 
indeed  to  man  to  know  in  this  direct  way  all  the  wonders  of  the  Divine  kingdom ; 
and  the  theologian,  like  the  discoverers  in  other  sciences,  must  sometimes  rely  on 
the  observations  and    experience  of    other  men.     The  great  things  he  should 
know    for    himself.      Where    his    own     vision     is    defective,    and     his    own 
experience   at    fault,  he    will    try    to    learn   what   other    men    have    seen  and 
what    other    men    have    experienced.      He    will    distinguish    between    their 
speculations  and  the  facts  which  they  have  verified  and  which  have  been  verified 
by  ordinary  Christian  men  in  different  ages  and  under  different  conditions.    He 
will  remember  that  to  the  meek   God  teaches  His  way.     He  has  to  give  an 
intellectual  account  of  the  faith  once  for  aU  delivered  to  the  saints.    He  will  there- 
fore attribute  supreme  value  to  that  central  substance  of  Christian  truth  which  has 
been  the  life  and  strength  of  Christian  men  in  all  generations.    The  spirit  of 
intellectual  adventure  will  not  be  uncontrolled.    He  wUI  not  imagine  that  after 
nineteen  centuries  of  Christian  history  the  saints  have  yet  to  learn  what  are  "the 
first  principles  of  Christ."    Believing  that  the  light  of  God  has  come  to  himself  he 
will  also  believe  that  it  came  to  devout  men  of  past  generations.    We  claim  for  the 
intellect  the  largest  freedom.    It  can  render  no  worthy  service  to  the  Church  or  to 
truth  if  it  be  fettered.    We  claim  for  it  in  religion  a  freedom  as  large  as  is  conceded 
to  it  in  science.    In  science  it  cannot  change  the  facts  ;  its  function  is  to  ascertain 
and  to  interpret  them.    In  faith  it  cannot  change  the  facts ;  its  function  is  to 
ascertain  and  to  interpret  them.    In  both  departments  the  facts  are  supreme. 
Wherever    facts    are  known    the  speculative  intellect  is  under  limitations  and 
restraints ;  it  is  absolutely  free  only  where  it  is  absolutely  ignorant.    The  methods 
of  the  intellect  in  the  investigation  of  religious  truth  differ  from   its  methods 
in  the  investigation  of  scientific  truth,  as  the  methods  of  the  historian  differ 
from  the  methods  of  the  chemist.      But  the  claim  for  intellectual  freedom  in 
theology  needs  no  other  qualification  than  that  which  is  imposed  upon  it  in  every 
other  province  of  intellectual  activity — facts,  through  whatever  channel  the  certain 
knowledge  of  them  may  come,  and  by  whatever  methods  they  are  discovered  or 
verified— facts  are  its  only  limitation.    It  is  our  duty  to  keep  an  open  mind  to  the 
discoveries  of  theologians  and  scholars ;  but  this  does  not  mean  that  we  should 
consent  to  regard  all  the  articles  of  the  Christian  faith  as  open  questions.    On  the 
great  subjects  our  mind  is  made  up.    The  facts  we  know,  and  under  God  we  have 
to  transmit  the  knowledge  of  them  to  coming  generations.    We  are  willing,  if 
necessary,  to  revise  definitions,  but  can  accept  no  definition  which  obscures  the 
Divine  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  God,  Son  of  Man,  Creator,  Brother, 
Lord,  Redeemer  of  the  human  race.    We  are  prepared  to  discuss  theories  of  the 
Atonement,  but  can  accept  no  theory  which  would  dislodge  our  hearts  from  their 
sure  confidence  in  Christ,  in  whom  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  even 
the  remission  of  sins  according  to  the  riches  of  God's  grace.    We  confess  that  the 
mystery  of  the  eternal  life  of  God  transcends  our  science ;  that  the  terms  of  the 
creeds  must  be  inexact ;  that  they  point  towards  august  truths,  but  do  not  reach 
them  ;  and  yet,  with  reverence  and  awe  we  worship  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit — 
one  God,  blessed  for  evermore ;  and  in  the  knowledge  of  God  we  have  eternal  life. 
The  substance  of  the  faith  delivered  once  for  all  to  the  saints  of  the  first  age  has 
been  verified  in  the  experience  of  the  saints  of  every  succeeding  generation,  and 
has,  in  these  last  days,  been  verified  in  our  own.    Theologians  have  not  to  create 
new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  but  to  give  a  more  exact  account  of  that  spiritual 
universe  whose  mysteries  and  glories  have  environed  the  saints  from  the  beginning. 
{R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  Contend  for  the  faith  :—I.  The  gkeat  cause  for  the  main- 

tenance of  which  the  apostle  exhorts  Christians  to  contend.  1.  For  the  purity  of 
the  faith.  2.  For  the  influence  of  the  faith.  3.  For  the  propagation  of  the  faith. 
II.  The  grounds  which  justified  the  apostle  in  making  this  duty  so  imperative.  1. 
The  importance  of  the  faith  in  itself.  2.  The  proneness  of  men  to  deteriorate  or 
pervert  the  faith.  3.  The  violent  opposition  of  avowed  enemies,  and  the  seduction 
of   secret   foes.     4.  The   Divine   origin   of  the   revelation.     III.  The   spirit  and 


JUDE.  17 

TEMPEB  in  which,  as  Christians,  we  should  discharge  the  duty.  1.  Our  methods 
must  be  spiritual,  not  carnal.     2.  Our  efforts  should  be  enlightened  and  scriptural. 

3.  We  should  contend  for  the  faith  with  great  earnestness.  4.  We  should  combine 
with  firmness  a  charitable  spirit.  5.  While  active  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel 
among  our  fellow  men,  there  should  be  a  consistent  exemplification  of  religion  in 
our  own  lives.  6.  We  should  give  ourselves  to  prayer,  accompanying  all  our 
exertions  with  ardent  supplications  for  the  outpourings  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (C. 
Barry.)  The  defence  of  the  faith  : — I.  The  cause  to  be  defended.  "  The 
faith."  1.  Christians  are  not  called  upon  to  contend  for — (1)  Mere  forms  and 
ceremonies.  (2)  Mere  speculative  opinions,  though  those  opinions  may  refer  to 
some  points  of  Christian  doctrine.  2.  We  are  to  contend  for — (1)  The  great  facts 
of  the  gospel.  The  incarnation,  miracles,  sufferings,  death,  resurrection, 
&c.,  of  Christ.  (2)  The  essential  doctrines  of  the  faith.  The  faU  of 
man.  Divinity  and  atonement  of  Christ.  Influence  of  Holy  Spirit.  Salva- 
tion by  faith.  (3)  The  experimental  power  and  influence  of  the  faith. 
Practical  holiness.  II.  The  natdbe  of  this  duty.  "  Earnestly  contend."  1.  Not 
with  bigoted  zeal.     2.  Not  with  secular,  carnal  weapons.     3.  In  a  Christian  spirit. 

4.  Judiciously.  5.  Practically.  By  example,  as  well  as  precept  or  rebuke.  III. 
The  necessity  of  dischabginq  this  duty.  1.  It  is  enjoined  by  Divine  authority.  2. 
By  contending  for  the  faith  you  will  yourself  become  more  established  in  it.  (Josiah 
HiU.)  The  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  : — I.  What  is  it  ?  1.  The  word 
faith  here  must  be  understood  as  meaning  the  objects  of  faith — all  the  great 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  which  we  must  cordially  beUeve,  and  all  its  holy  precepts 
which  we  must  diligently  practise.  2.  This  faith  was  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 
It  was  communicated  first  to  the  evangeUsts  and  apostles  by  the  teaching  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  was  by  them  spread  abroad 
in  the  world.  II.  How  are  yte  to  contend  for  it  ?  1.  We  must  strenuously  con- 
tend for  this  faith,  as  a  prize  of  inestimable  value.  2.  We  must  also  contend  for 
this  faith  with  great  diligence.  It  should  be  our  daily  study  and  prayer  that  this 
faith  may  be  firmly  rooted  in  our  own  hearts,  and  in  the  hearts  of  all  who  are 
placed  under  our  care  or  under  our  influence.  3.  We  must  contend  for  the  faith 
once  delivered  to  the  saints,  with  much  anxiety.  We  must  be  "  sober  and  vigilant," 
as  knowing  that  we  are  exposed  to  many  enemies,  who  would  rob  us  of  our  faith. 
4.  We  must  further  contend  for  this  faith  with  constant  perseverance.  Surely  you 
would  not  wish  merely  to  fight  some  battles  well  in  contending  for  your  Christian 
faith,  and  then  give  up  all  for  lost.  Conclusion :  1.  If  any  additional  motives  are 
necessary  to  persuade  you  thus  to  "  contend  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints,"  consider — (1)  How  much  your  present  peace  and  eternal  welfare  depend 
upon  this  contest.  (2)  Consider  how  strongly  you  are  urged  by  a  principle  of 
gratitude  to  hand  down  to  others  the  pure  faitii  of  the  gospel  which  you  have 
received  from  your  fathers.  (3)  There  is  another  motive  which  should  strongly 
urge  you  in  this  arduous  contest :  This  is  the  love  of  Christ  and  of  your  brethren. 
{John  Bull,  M.A.)  Contending  for  the  faith  : — I.  We  are  called  to  contend 
EARNESTLY.  But  to  coutend  earnestly  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  contend 
bitterly,  fiercely,  unkindly.  It  merely  means,  that  we  view  the  question 
as  we  ought  to  view  it ;  that  we  are  serious  where  we  should  be 
serious ;  firm  where  we  should  be  firm ;  and  that,  as  we  know  the  valae 
of  truth,  we  should  be  as  decided  in  maintaining  it  as  we  have  been  diligent 
in  seeking  it.  U.  The  object  for  which  we  are  directed  to  contend.  We  are  to 
contend  earnestly ;  but  it  is  "  for  the  faith  once  deUvered  to  the  saints."  In  other 
words,  we  are  to  contend,  not  for  any  notions  of  our  own,  not  for  any  private 
views,  personal  feelings,  imaginary  distinctions,  but  for  that  which  God  has  revealed. 
It  is  not  easy  to  say  how  much  the  character  of  contention  is  affected  by  that, 
which  is  regarded  as  its  object.  If  the  object  is  personal,  the  contention  becomes 
personal.  Self-love,  in  that  case,  mixes  itself  with  the  feelings  of  the  moment; 
and  pride  and  vanity,  and  a  hundred  other  evil  tempers,  are  enlisted  in  the  cause, 
and  add  bitterness  and  warmth  to  the  dispute.  On  the  other  hand,  he  who  wishes 
to  defend  nothing  but  "  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,"  can  contend,  and 
earnestly  too,  without  allowing  his  earnestness  to  exceed  its  proper  limits, 
or  become  violent  and  intemperate.  The  cause  in  which  he  is  engaged 
sanctifies  the  spirit  with  which  it  is  advocated.  The  consciousness 
that  he  has  truth  on  his  side  makes  him  calm.  The  assurance  of 
God's  word  gives  certainty  and  steadiness  to  his  reasoning.  {H.  Raikes,  M.A.) 
The  permanence  of  the  Christian  faith : — What  are  our  primary,  positive  reasons — 

35 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

sach  as  spring  from  the  broad  facts  which  meet  us  on  the  fcnefront  of  history  and 
human  nature — for  believing  in  the  permanence  of  our  Christian  creed  ?     1.  First, 
surely  we  may  gather  reassurance  from  the  past  history  of  Christianity.      Human 
nature  is  one  and  the  same  beneath  all  distinctions  of  race  and  class.     Christianity 
has  already  in  the  past  shown  a  marvellous  power  so  to  get  down  to  the  permanent 
roots  of  human  liJEe  and  to   pass  in  substance  unchanged  through  the  greatest 
possible  crisis  and  most  radical  epochs  of  change  in  human  history.     2.  Should  we 
not  find  reassurance  in  the  fact  that  the  panics  with  which  the  faith  of  our  own 
generation  has  been  assailed  are  storms  which  the  ship  of  Christian  faith  is  already 
showing  signs  that  she  can  weather  ?     For  example,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the 
horror  with  which,  not  wisely  perhaps,  but  certainly  not    unnaturally,  new  con- 
ceptions of  evolution  in  nature  were  at  first  regarded  by  theologians  and  Christian 
teachers  is  passing  away,  and  they  at  least  are  declaring  on  all  sides  and  in  all  good 
faith  that  they  do  not  find  their  frankest  acceptance  at  all  inconsistent  with  a 
Christian  belief.    3.  Again,  if  we  are  tempted  to  take  an  over-ideal  view  of  develop- 
ment as  the  law  of  the  world,  and  to  fear  that  Christianity  by  the  very  fact  that  it 
claims  finality  proves  its  falsity,  is  there  anything  more  reassuring  than  to  consider 
carefully  the  broad  fact  that  Christian  morality  has  as  a  matter  of  history  vindicated 
its  claim  in  this  respect.    A  morality — an  ideal  of  human  life,  individual  and  social 
— promulgated  in  Syria  1800  years  ago,  proclaimed  in  its  completeness  by  a  few 
mostly  uneducated  men  of  Jewish  birth  and  training,  within  the  limit  of  a  few  years 
— this  ideal  has  remained  through  the  ages,  and  almost  nobody  seriously  claims  to 
find  it  deficient.    At  any  rate  those  who  do,  appeal  very  little  to  our  consciences 
and  better  reason.    But,   then,  what  a  vast  admission   is  here  !    It  means  that 
morality  has,  under  circumstances  when  such  a  fact  was  not  at  all  to  be  expected, 
vindicated  its  finality  ;  each  successive  generation  has  but  to  go  back  and  drink  its 
fill  afresh  from  that  inexhaustible  source  of  a  moral  ideal  which  is  Catholic.   4.  And 
if  we  are  convinced  of  this,  if  we  are  convinced  that  in  this  moral  and  spiritual  sphere 
of  human  life  an  ideal  promulgated  1800  years  ago  in  an  Eastern  country  has  shown 
every  sign  of  being  universal  and  final,  if  we  are  convinced  that  the  law  of  evolution 
has  here  something  which  in  actual  experience  Umits  its  application,  then  it  seems 
no  great  step  to  ask  a  person  to  admit  that  this  finahty  shall  be  attributed  not  to  the 
life  merely  in  ideal  and  effect,  but  to  what  St.  Paul  calls  the  "  mould  "  of  Christian 
teaching  which  fashions  the  life.     For  just  as  surely  as  in  the  lapse  of  years  we 
identify  the  Mahommedan  character  with  the  Mahommedan  creed,  and  in  the 
creed  recognise  the  condition  of  the  character,  just  so  surely  we  must  recognise  the 
whole  organism  of  the  historic  Christian  system  as  the  condition  of  the  Christian 
morality.     Is  there  any  consideration  in  the  world  which  can  call  itself  scientific 
which  would  justify  us  in  supposing  that  a  life  consciously  and  confessedly  moulded 
by  a  body  of  truths  can  go  on  existing  without  those  truths  ?   Is  it  not  contradicting 
all  principles  of  science  to  imagine  that  a  changed  environment  of  truth  will  not 
produce  a  changed  product  ?    The  prayerful  temper  must  excite  our  admiration,  but 
is  it  not  inconceivable  that  the  prayerful  temper  can  be  developed  except  on  the 
basis  of  a  belief  in  a  personal  God  to  whom  we  can  have  personal  and  open  access  ? 
The  temper  of  penitence  we  know  to  be  one  of  the  most  absolute  essentials  of  spiritual 
progress.    But  the  temper  of  penitence  is  the  simple  product  of  a  belief  at  once  in 
the  personal  holiness  and  personal  love  of  God,  a  belief  which  can  become  conviction 
only  in  the  revelation  of  Christ.     (Canon  Gore.)        Contending  for  the  faith  given 
to  the  saints  .-—Here  note  three  things :    1.  That  faith  is  a  gift.     2.  That  it  is  once 
given.     3.  That  it  is  given  unto  the  saints.      I.  And  first,  that  faith  is  a  gift,  it 
is   evident  by  the   apostle's  own  words  where  he  calleth  Christ  the  Author  and 
Finisher  of  our  faith,  as  the  Athenians  were   called  the  inventors  and  perfecters  of 
all   good    learning.     But   the   Church   hath  all  her   learning,  religion,  and  faith 
from    God ;     He    gave    it    at    the     first,    and    He    confirmed     it    at    the    last. 
This  doctrine    serveth    to    humble    us ;    to   let   us  see  that    it    is    not    in    our 
power,  that  faith   is  not  hereditary :   God  beginneth  it,  and  increaseth   it,  and 
finisheth  it.     II.  But  to  proceed  to  the  next  point :  this  faith  was  once  given,  once 
for  aU,  once  for  ever ;  which  commendeth  unto  us  the  constancy  of  God,  with  whom 
is  no  variableness  nor  shadow  of  change ;  He  speaketh,  and  it  is  done.   There  is  such 
mutability  in  men,  that  they  change  like  the  moon,  they  alter  like  the  cameleon; 
but  God  alters  not,  but  giveth  His  gifts  to  His  Church  once  for  ever.   The  gifts  and 
calling  of  God  are  without  repentance.   Note  this  word  "  once  "  so  often  repeated — 
once  God  gave  the  law,  once  He  gave  the  gospel.    HI.  Thirdly,  this  faith  is  given 
TO  the  saints.     By  saints  he  meaneth  the  children  of  God.       First,  in  respect  o£ 


JUDE.  19 

eeparation,  for  they  are  elected  and  gathered  out  of  this  world.  Secondly,  in  respect 
of  vocation,  they  were  saints  by  calling.  Thirdly,  in  respect  of  regeneration.  And 
lastly,  in  respect  of  justification  or  imputation,  because  the  holiness  and  sanctity  of 
Christ  is  imputed  unto  them.  In  that  this  faith  is  given  unto  the  saints  we  learn 
that  holy  things  are  not  to  be  given  to  dogs.  The  songs  of  nightingales  are  not 
for  the  ears  of  asses.  (S.  Otes.)  The  faith  once  for  all : — Among  the  testimonies 
which  the  sons  of  genius,  in  their  deep  disappointment  and  bitter  want,  have  given 
to  the  solitary  superiority  of  the  Christian  faith,  I  know  none  more  impressive  than 
that  of  Sir  Humphrey  Davy.  His  brilliant  genius,  his  practical  inventiveness,  his 
great  talents,  his  discovery  of  four  metals,  his  fortunate  surroundings  and  his  pre- 
eminent distinction  conspire  to  make  the  entry  in  his  later  diary  very  mournful — ■ 
namely,  the  two  words  "  very  miserable,"  and  to  give  profound  emphasis  to  hia 
estimate  of  the  Christian  faith.  He  says,  "  I  envy  no  quality  of  mind  or  intellect  in 
others — not  genius,  power,  wit,  or  fancy ;  but  if  I  could  choose  what  would  be 
most  delightful,  and  I  believe  most  useful  to  me,  I  should  prefer  a  firm  religious 
belief  to  every  other  blessing ;  for  it  makes  life  a  discipline  of  goodness,  creates 
new  hopes  when  all  earthly  hopes  vanish,  and  throws  over  the  decay,  the  destruction 
of  existence,  the  most  gorgeous  of  aU  lights ;  calling  in  the  most  deUghtful  visions 
•where  the  sensualist  and  the  sceptic  view  only  gloom,  decay,  and  annihilation." 
I.  Our  first  endeavour  must  be  to  ascebtain  akd  verify  "  the  faith  once  fob  at.t. 
DELIVERED  TO  THE  SAINTS."  1.  The  treasuTB.  What  is  it  ?  "  The  faith,"  that  is 
the  phrase.  It  is  a  record  of  certain  specific  facts  about  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — if 
you  please,  a  creed.  To  be  sure  there  are  creeds  and  creeds.  Men  have  built 
around  the  great  citadel  of  revelation  certain  out-works  of  theology  which  may  be 
mere  rubbish  and  worse  than  rubbish ;  and  it  is  well  for  the  citadel  itself  that  the 
enemies  of  Christianity  should  destroy  these.  2.  The  casket,  what  is  it?  It  is  that 
which  contains  the  treasure.  3.  The  custodian  is  the  church,  the  everlasting  suc- 
cession of  Christ's  true,  living,  human  witnesses,  who  fii'st  received  this  truth  from 
God.  The  truth  was  delivered,  not  invented  by  man,  not  reasoned  out  by  man's 
intellect ;  delivered,  handed  by  God  to  man ;  deUvered  once  for  aU.  11.  It  remains 
to  state  and  unfold  the  duty  of  contending  for  the  faith  once  for  all  delivered 
to  the  saints.  1.  It  is  sure  to  be  contended  against.  Christ  is  the  "  Prince  of  Peace," 
but  He  is  also  a  "  man  of  war."  He  "  came  not  to  bring  peace  on  earth  but  a 
sword."  Christ's  own  track  to  His  throne  lay  through  thorns  and  blood.  The  truth 
is  sure  to  be  contended  against.  Heretics  were  Divinely  predicted ;  therefore  they 
are  credentials  of  the  faith.  2.  It  is  worth  contending  for.  It  destroyed  the  old 
polytheistic  civilisation.  It  changed  the  face  of  the  world.  It  brought  in  a  new  and 
better  era  for  the  race  of  man.  It  emancipated  the  mind.  Look  back  eighteen 
hundred  years  to  what  the  world  was.  Gibbon  writes  of  "  a  sinking  world."  I  use 
his  phrase.  There  was  no  promise  of  a  noble  future  for  the  race.  The  home,  as 
we  conceive  it,  was  not.  The  marriage  tie  had  no  sacredness.  Man  as  man  had 
no  rights,  and  the  individual  was  sunk  in  the  state.  Power,  power  was  the  one 
idea  of  ancient  Kome.  A  modern  French  painter  has  caught  the  idea  anci  repre- 
sented it  with  wonderful  fidelity.  I  mean  G6rome ;  whose  canvas  shows  us  the 
CoUseum  with  its  eighty  thousand  spectators  hungering  for  the  sight  of  cruelty.  The 
gladiatorial  combat  has  proceeded,  until  the  wretched  victim  has  fallen  ac  tiie  feet 
of  his  more  brawny  or  fortunate  conqueror.  He  is  weak,  let  him  die.  So  said  the 
vestal  virgins,  and  so  said  ancient  Eome.  It  was  not  far  from  that  very  time  that 
a  plain,  homely  man  wrote  a  letter  to  some  people  in  Eome  and  said,  "  I  am  ready 
so  much  as  in  me  Ues  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you  which  are  at  Kome  also ;  for  it  is 
power."  Here  is  power  against  power.  It  is  the  power  of  God  against  the  power  of 
man.  It  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  "  as  against  man's  power  of  destruc- 
tion. 3.  It  is  worth  our  while  to  contend  for  it.  God's  great  way  of  making  His 
truth  mighty  is  by  putting  that  truth  into  living  men.  His  way  of  getting  for  His 
truth  currency  in  the  world  is  by  putting  it  into  the  mouths  and  Uves  of  men  with 
hot  hearts,  making  their  hot  hearts  hotter  by  means  of  it,  and  so  thrusting  it  before 
the  unbelieving  multitude.  It  is  wonderful  how  any  truth  once  lodged  in  a 
human  soul  will  enlarge  and  ennoble  that  soul.  Many  a  scientific  thought 
without  any  moral  aspect  has  lifted  up  a  man  into  nobler  thinking,  and 
more  earnest  working,  and  a  higher  grade  of  living.  Thoughts  essentially 
moral  and  reUgious  have  stUl  higher  developing  power.  (C.  D.  Foss,  D.D.) 
The  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints: — ^I.  Christianity  has  a  ceeed.  There  is  a 
body  of  dogmatic  teaching  which  can  be  called  "  the  faith,"  the  thing  to  be  beUeved. 
Indifference  to  religious  truth  is  sheer  folly,  to  say  the  least.     Do  we  allow  that  il 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

makes  no  difference  what  a  man  thinks  on  the  subject  of  geology  provided  he  i» 
devoted  to  his  favourite  science  ?  Do  we  say  that  a  man's  opinion  on  a  point  of 
law  is  of  no  consequence  so  long  as  he  is  sincere  in  advocating  it  ?  Far  from  it. 
The  question  we  ask  in  all  these  cases  is,  whether  the  opinions  are  correct.  We 
know  that  truth  may  be  one  thing,  and  what  a  man  thinks  to  be  truth  a  very 
different  thing.  Why,  then,  should  men  adopt  the  opinion  that  on  the  subject  of 
religion  it  is  a  small  matter  what  a  man  thinks?  II.  This  body  of  truth  is 
KEVEALED.  It  was  "  delivered  " — divinely,  as  we  know  from  other  statements  of 
God's  Word.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  intuition.  Intuitions  cannot  be  pleaded  in 
behalf  of  the  common  practices  of  morality  even,  far  less  for  a  complete  system  of 
religious  faith.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  philosophical  speculation.  It  is  final,  and  it 
is  authoritative.  It  is  of  great  moment  to  find  out  exactly  what  the  truth  is  which 
has  been  revealed,  for  once  found  we  may  have  a  faith  which  is  sure  and  which 
binds.  III.  It  is  a  complete  body  of  truth.  It  was  delivered  "  once,"  not  once 
upon  a  time,  but  once  for  all.  Nineteenth  century  sinners  are  like  the  sinners  of 
all  the  preceding  centuries,  and  nineteenth  century  salvation  is  the  same  salvation 
which  Paul  preached.  IV.  It  was  "  delivered  to  the  saints."  And  so  has  it 
come  down  the  line  of  evangelical  succession  ever  since.  The  Church  and  the 
family  have  been  God's  appointed  agencies  for  perpetuating  and  spreading  far  and 
wide  His  truth.  Do  we  despise  knowledge  which  comes  to  us  through  the  channel 
of  tradition  ?  Is  the  boy's  belief  in  the  earth's  figure  less  real  because,  instead  of  a 
scientific  proof  of  it,  he  has  been  told  only  that  it  is  round  like  an  orange  and  not 
flat  like  a  plate?  Then  why  should  we  undervalue  the  religious  beliefs  which 
multitudes  hold  because  they  were  taught  to  hold  them,  and  it  has  never  occurred 
to  them  to  call  them  in  question  or  even  to  verify  them.  We  may  trust  the  Church 
to  act  as  trustee  of  the  Bible  without  allowing  it  to  make  the  Bible,  or  without 
accepting  doctrines  which  it  teaches  outside  of  the  Bible,  just  as  we  may  trust  a 
servant  to  go  to  the  druggist  to  bring  some  medicine,  when  we  would  not  aUow  him 
to  put  up  the  prescription.  If,  then,  the  Church  is  in  possession  of  a  definite  body 
of  truth — if,  moreover,  this  truth  is  contained  in  the  Bible — it  would  seem  to  follow 
that  any  objection  to  a  formulated  expression  of  it  is  very  weak.  For  the  Bible  is 
practically  of  no  use  to  us  unless  we  are  able  to  impose  a  meaning  on  what  it  says. 
We  have  entered  into  an  inheritance  of  truth  because  of  a  pious  parentage  and  a 
faithful  ministry,  and  we  are  under  solemn  obligation  to  transmit  that  truth  to  the 
coming  generation.  {The  Study.)  Defenders  of  the  faith : — I.  What  are  wb  to 
UNDERSTAND  BY  THE  FAITH  which  was  ouce  delivered  to  the  saints  ?  1.  The  faith 
is  Divine  in  its  origin.  2.  The  faith  is  adapted  to  man's  moral  needs.  Three 
truths  force  themselves  upon  our  notice  when  we  study  man  in  his  moral  relations. 
(1)  The  sense  of  guilt  and  moral  weakness.  (2)  The  liability  to  temptation  and 
trouble.  (3)  The  certainty  of  death  and  a  future  state.  These  exist  in  aU  men 
everywhere.  The  faith  responds  to  the  sense  of  guilt  and  moral  weakness.  3.  The 
faith  is  complete  in  its  contents — "  once  delivered,"  i.e.,  complete.  To  it  nothing 
can  be  added.  Astronomy  may  discover  worlds  of  light  in  the  heavens,  but  it  does 
not  add  to  the  universe.  Every  star  was  there  before  astronomers  Ufted  their 
telescopes  skyward.  Astronomy  may  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  the  heavens  and 
thrill  us  with  new  views  of  heavenly  beauty,  but  it  cannot  create  a  new  star. 
Music  cannot  add  a  new  tone  to  the  scale.  The  octave  is  the  final  measure  of 
possible  tones.  So  with  the  faith.  Theology  cannot  add  to  it.  The  Bible  will 
gain  in  interpretation,  but  no  new  principles  can  be  added  to  its  contents.  II.  To 
WHOM  WAS  THE  FAITH  DELIVERED  ?  "  To  the  saiuts. "  1.  Saints  are  the  dcpositarics 
of  the  faith.  2.  Saints  are  the  disseminators  of  the  faith.  III.  What  is  our  duty 
IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE  FAITH  ?  "  Contend  earnestly,"  &c.  1.  We  must  hold  to  it 
experimentally  and  consistently.  N©t  to  the  theory,  but  to  the  practice ;  not  to 
doctrine  merely,  but  to  salvation  as  a  blessed  reality.  2.  We  must  hold  it  with 
courage  and  resolution.     3.  We  must  contend  for  it  with  simplicity  and  sincerity. 

4W.  Hansom,  D.D.)  Contending  for  the  faith  : — I.  What  we  must  contend  fob. 
■"or  every  truth  of  God,  according  to  its  moment  and  weight.  The  dust  of  gold  is 
precious,  and  it  is  dangerous  to  be  careless  in  the  lesser  truths  (Matt.  v.  19).  There 
is  nothing  superfluous  in  the  canon.  Better  heaven  and  earth  should  be  blended 
together  in  confusion,  saith  Luther,  than  one  dust  of  God's  truth  should  perish. 
If  the  Lord  call  us  out  to  the  defence  of  them,  whatever  cometh  of  it  we  must  be 
faithful.  A  man  may  make  shipwreck  of  a  good  conscience  in  small  matters. 
Hearken  to  Satan,  and  this  will  be  a  little  one,  and  that  shall  be  a  httle  one,  till  we 
have  littled  away  all  the  principles  of  faith.     All  this  is  not  spoken  to  justify  undue 


JUDE.  21 

rigours,  such  as  are  without  any  temper  of  Christian  moderation,  or  those  frivolous 
controversies  about  trifles,  such  as  have  no  foundation  in  the  Word.  Nor  to  justify 
the  breaking  of  Church  fellowship  and  communion,  and  making  rents  in  the  body 
of  Christ,  because  of  difference  of  opinion  in  smaller  matters,  when  we  agree  in  the 
more  weighty  things.  We  are  to  "  walk  together  as  far  as  we  are  agreed  "  (Phil, 
iii.  16) ;  and  externals  wherein  we  differ,  lying  far  from  the  heart  of  religion,  are 
nothing  to  faith  and  the  new  creature  wherein  we  agree  (Gal.  v.  6,  vi.  15).  The 
most  weight  should  be  pitched  upon  the  fundamentals  and  essentials  of  religion, 
and  when  there  is  an  agreement  there  private  differences  in  smaller  matters  should 
not  make  us  break  off  from  one  another.  II.  Who  must  sTKrvE,  and  in  what 
MANNEB  ?  I  answer.  All  in  their  place,  and  in  that  way  that  is  proper  to  them.  1. 
Private  Christians  must  have  a  share  in  this  holy  contention ;  their  duty  is  partly 
— (1)  To  search  out  the  truth  that  they  may  not  fight  blindfold,  or  by  an  unhappy 
mistake  lavish  out  their  zeal  upon  fancies  which  they  affect,  or  ordinances  and 
doctrines  of  men.  (2)  To  own  the  profession  of  the  truth,  whatever  it  cost  them. 
(3)  To  honour  the  truth  by  their  conversations.  There  are  heretical  manners  as 
weU  as  heretical  doctrines  ;  and  there  are  many  that  are  otherwise  of  an  orthodox 
belief,  yet  make  others  sectaries  and  disciples  of  their  vices.  Therefore  Christians 
are  called  to  "  hold  forth  the  word  of  life  "  in  their  conversations  (Phil.  ii.  16),  and  to 
"  make  the  doctrine  of  God  the  Saviour  comely  "  (Titus  ii.  10),  by  glorifying  God  in 
that  course  of  life  to  which  they  are  disposed.  (4)  To  comprise  all  in  a  few  words, 
•whatever  maketh  for  the  truth,  either  with  God  or  men,  all  that  must  the  people 
do.  2.  There  is  something  that  the  magistrate  may  do :  "  He  is  the  minister  of 
God  for  good  "  (Eom.  xiii.  4).  I  cannot  see  how  they  can  be  true  to  civil  interest 
unless  they  be  careful  for  the  suppression  of  error.  Besides  that  error  is  masterly 
and  loveth  to  give  law,  therefore,  ere  it  be  too  late,  they  should  look  to  the  civil 
peace,  for  if  men  be  quiet  God  will  not  when  His  honour  and  truth  and  worship  is 
neglected.  3.  Ministers  are  to  contend  for  the  truth,  for  by  their  ofiBce  and  station 
in  the  Church  they  are  captains  of  the  people  in  this  war  against  Satan  and  his 
adherents  (Titus  i.  9).  Ministers  must  contend,  partly  by  preaching,  warning  the 
people  of  the  wolves  that  are  abroad  (Acts  xx.  29)  ;  partly  by  disputing  (Acts  xv.  2, 
xviii.  28),  that  by  the  knocking  of  flints  light  may  fly  out.  (T.  Manto7i.)  Con- 
tending for  the  faith: — I.  Contending  fob  the  faith  once  deliveeed  to  the 
SAINTS  IMPLIES — 1.  That,  in  opposition  to  infidels,  we  exhibit  the  evidence  of  the 
authenticity  of  the  Scriptures.  2.  The  next  step,  in  defending  the  faith  delivered 
to  the  saints,  is  to  maintain  the  ground  that  the  Bible  is  not  only  an  authentic 
record,  but  that  "  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  "  ;  that  "  holy  men  of 
God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  There  can  be  no  firmer  ground 
on  which  to  rest  our  religious  belief  and  our  hopes  of  salvation.  3.  We  are  to 
contend  for  those  principles  of  interpretation  which  will  lay  open  to  our  view 
the  true  meaning  of  the  Scriptures,  and  not  bring  to  them  a  meaning  derived 
from  our  own  preconceived  opinions.  4.  We  are  to  contend  for  the  very  system 
of  truth  which  was  delivered  to  the  saints;  to  maintain  it  in  its  simplicity  and 
purity,  unadulterated  with  additions  from  the  speculations  of  men.  5.  Contending 
for  the  primitive  Christian  faith  implies  a  defence,  not  merely  of  what  is  expressly 
stated  in  the  Scriptures,  but  also  of  what  may  be  clearly  inferred  from  the  truths 
revealed.     II.  Our  subject  may  be  further  illustrated  by  considering  some  modes  of 

THEOLOGICAL    DISCUSSION,    WHICH   ABE   NOT   NECESSABILT    IMPLIED   IN    CONTENDING   FOB 

THE  PBiMiTivE  Chbistian  FAITH.  1.  A  defence  of  Scriptural  doctrines  do  not 
necessarily  imply  that  we  prove  them  to  be  true  by  a  course  of  argument 
independent  of  revelation.  The  evidence  on  which  they  rest  is  this,  that  God, 
who  cannot  err,  and  will  not  deceive,  has  caused  them  to  be  revealed  to  us  as 
true.  But  we  have  to  deal  with  those  who  do  not  admit  the  authority  of  the 
Bible.  Is  it  not  necessary  on  their  account  to  resort  to  a  course  of  reasoning, 
to  establish  religious  principles?  If  you  can  prove  all  the  truths  of  Scripture 
by  a  course  of  reasoning  independent  of  Divine  testimony,  what  need  is  there 
of  inspiration?  2.  Contending  for  the  faith  delivered  to  the  saints  does  not 
necessarily  imply  that  we  contend  for  any  particular  form  of  words,  different 
fl-om  those  of  Scripture,  in  which  we  or  others  have  thought  proper  to  express 
this  faith.  3.  Defending  the  truths  of  revelation  does  not  imply,  of  course,  a 
defence  of  the  philosophical  theories  or  hypotheses  which  have  been  proposed 
to  explain  the  grounds,  and  reasons,  and  causes  of  what  is  revealed.  4.  Coa- 
tending  for  the  faith  delivered  to  the  saints  does  not  imply  that  we  undertake 
to  free  it  from  all  the  difficulties  which  may  be  connected  with  the  truths  revealed. 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

5.  Defending  the  primitive  faith  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  we  earnestly  contend 
for  every  point  which  may  be  connected  even  with  fundamental  doctrines.  6. 
Contending  for  the  Christian  faith  does  not  imply  a  defence  of  all  the  additions 
which  have  been  made  to  this  faith,  with  a  view  to  supplying  supposed  deficiences 
in  the  Scriptures.     (Jeremiah  Day,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  For  there  are  certain  men  crept  in  unawares. — Secret  enemies  in  the 
Church : — 1.  The  apostle  saith  there  are  certain  men  crept  in,  which  some  think  to 
note  the  uncertainty  of  their  persons,  as  who  should  say  there  are  certain  wicked 
and  ungodly  persons  in  the  Church,  but  who  they  be  we  cannot  tell  very  well. 
And  surely  the  uncertainty  of  their  persons,  which  are  wicked,  will  stir  up  those  which 
are  wise,  and  have  care  of  their  salvation  to  greater  diligence,  and  more  circum- 
spectly to  observe  and  mark  all  men,  lest  at  any  time  or  by  any  means  they  be 
deceived.  But  howbeit  the  number  be  indefinite  in  that  they  are  certain,  yet  it  may 
seem  that  he  giveth  us  to  understand  that  the  enemies  of  the  Church  were  divers, 
and  therefore  the  saints  have  greater  cause  to  contend  against  them.  2.  As  they 
are  certain,  so  are  they  within  the  bosom  of  the  Church  already,  therefore  both  the 
danger  is  the  greater  and  the  contention  must  be  the  sharper.  The  enemies  of  the 
Church  are  not  without  the  walls,  where  the  better  they  might  be  dealt  withal,  but 
entered  in  already,  and  walk  in  the  midst  thereof,  the  greater  peril  is  like  to  follow, 
and  the  greater  courage  must  be  showed  in  this  contending.  3.  And  as  they  are 
already  within,  so  are  they  crept  in  craftily,  and  therein  their  subtle  dealing  is 
noted,  whereby  the  danger  is  also  increased.  There  is  no  greater  danger  than  that 
intended  by  a  subtle  enemy,  whose  person  as  it  is  most  hardly  discerned,  so  the 
danger  by  him  is  least  perceived  and  rarely  avoided,  but  that  peril  is  the  lesser 
when  the  enemy  is  known  and  the  matter  suspected.  Wherefore  the  cunning  of 
the  wicked  must  sharpen  and  whet  our  care  to  contend  against  them.  {R.  Turn- 
bull.)  The  character  of  the  heretics : — I.  Nameless  men.  He  may  have  been 
induced  to  advert  to  them  merely  as  "  certain  men."  1.  With  the  view  of  avoiding 
those  irritating  personalities  by  which  religious  controversies  are  so  apt  to  be 
characterised.  2.  With  the  view  of  marking  the  holy  disdain  with  which  he 
regarded  them,  as  if  he  considered  them  unworthy  of  being  more  particularly 
mentioned.  3,  For  the  purpose  of  not  adding  to  the  notoriety  which  they  very 
probably  courted.  II.  Deceivers.  "They  crept  in  unawares."  This  may  mean 
either  that  the  parties  in  question  assumed  the  office  of  spiritual  teachers  without 
the  knowledge  or  consent  of  the  brethren,  or  that  they  contrived  by  false  professions 
to  induce  the  rulers  of  the  Church  to  admit  them  to  that  office.  The  latter  is 
probably  the  real  meaning  of  the  words  (2  Pet.  ii.  1).  III.  Reprobates.  "  Of  old 
ordained  to  this  condemnation."  {W.  McGilvray,  D.D.)  Enemies  within  the 
Church : — The  adversaries  impugn  the  faith,  therefore  the  saints  must  stand  for  it. 
The  Church  hath  many  adversaries,  like  motes  in  the  sun.  As  there  is  a  contrary 
in  all,  day  and  night,  cold  and  heat,  sickness  and  health,  life  and  death,  so  in 
religion.  The  godly,  the  faithful  are  as  lambs  amongst  wolves,  as  lilies  amongst 
thorns,  as  doves  amongst  ravens.  Many  oppugn  the  faith,  therefore  we  must  be 
ready  to  defend  it,  yea,  strive  for  it  unto  death ;  as  Joab  fought  for  God,  so  let  us 
speak  for  God  and  write  for  God.  But  to  come  to  the  description  of  these  adver- 
saries, they  are  here  described  two  ways.  1.  They  are  described  by  their  life,  and 
they  are  said  first  to  creep  into  the  Church.  They  have  butter  in  their  mouths,  but 
swords  in  their  hearts.  A  dog  that  barketh  may  be  prevented  before  he  bite,  and 
the  serpent  that  hisseth  before  he  sting,  and  the  fire  that  smoketh  before  it  burn  ; 
so  may  a  known  enemy,  but  a  secret  enemy,  a  creeper,  is  hard  to  prevent.  2.  They 
are  here  described  by  their  impiety.  He  saith  that  they  were  dOtoi,  without  (Jod, 
without  faith,  without  religion  ;  they  deny  God  the  only  Lord  and  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  so  Paul  said  (Eph.  ii.  12 ;  Phil.  iii.  17,  18).  The  world  is  full  of  such 
atheists,  they  swarm  like  bees,  they  abound  like  lice  in  Egypt.  3.  The  wicked  are 
here  described  by  their  carnality  and  liberty ;  they  turn  grace  into  wantonness,  for 
ungodliness  hath  two  branches,  iniquity  in  life  and  manners  and  impurity  in 
religion.  Of  the  first  he  saith.  They  turn  grace  into  wantonness  ;  of  the  second  it 
is  said  that  they  denied  God  and  Christ  Jesus.  They  are  like  ^sop's  snake,  that 
lay  still  in  the  frost,  but  stung  him  that  warmed  her  in  his  bosom ;  so  long  as  God 
keepeth  us  sick  and  lame  and  poor  we  are  in  some  order,  our  ears  are  full  of 
sermons,  our  lips  full  of  prayers,  our  hands  full  of  alms,  our  hearts  full  of  holy 
meditations ;  but  if  we  come  to  health  and  wealth  and  strength  we  rage  like  giants, 
we  are  like  bad  ground,  which  the  moi"e  sweet  dews  it  receiveth  the  more  weeds  it 


JUDE.  23 

bringeth  ont.     {S.  Otes.)        False  teachers  foretold  : — I.  The  insidiousness  with 

WHICH    FALSE    TEACHERS   EFFECT   AN    ENTRANCE    INTO    THE    ChTJRCH.        They    "  Creep    in 

unawares."  Now  craft,  you  will  observe,  is  the  assumed  Scriptural  characteristic  of 
all  heresy  (Matt.vii.  15  ;  Eph.  iv.  14 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  13).  The  word  which  the  apostle 
nses  to  describe  this  method  of  entrance  is  one  which  supposes  that  they  had  recourse 
to  certain  surreptitious  and  fraudulent  means.  It  literally  means  the  getting  into  a 
house  under  ground,  or  by  means  of  some  clandestine  and  unsuspected  entrance. 
Let  us  note  some  of  the  byways  by  which  false  teachers  get  an  entrance  for  their 
erroneous  teaching.  1.  One  way  is  they  keep  back  the  full  scope  and  tendency  of 
their  doctrines.  Things  that  are  to  be  really  believed  are  only  partially  discovered, 
the  rest  being  wrapped  up  in  skilful  ambiguities,  only  to  be  elicited  when  some 
Buperior  disputant  will  press  their  doctrines  to  their  legitimate  consequences.  2. 
Another  of  the  byways  by  which  false  teaching  creeps  into  a  Church  is  by  a  skUf ul 
mixing  up  with  it  a  good  deal  of  sound  and  wholesome  doctriae,  which  is  always 
paraded  with  a  great  show  of  orthodoxy.  The  apostle  therefore  in  the  text  exhorts 
us  to  see  that  we  look  to  a  man's  teaching  as  a  whole.  He  may  teach  truth  in 
regard  of  all  the  attributes  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  yet  if  he  obscure  or  distort  or 
keep  back  other  truths,  if  he  tamper  with  the  great  doctrine  of  our  justification  by 
faith  ia  the  atonement,  we  are  to  denounce  him  as  a  deceiver  and  an  antichiist. 

II.    The    REASON    why    these    false     TEACHERS    ARE    PERMITTED    TO    HAVE   A    CERTAIN 

MEASURE  OF  SUCCESS.  They  have  "  crept  in,"  being  "  before  of  old  ordained  to  this 
condemnation."  1.  First,  you  will  observe,  the  apostle  meets  the  supposed  objections 
advanced  on  the  general  score  of  the  Divine  predestination — on  that  fixed  immuta- 
bility of  purpose  which,  however  contrary  things  may  appear  to  us,  will  cause  that 
God  shall  "  work  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  own  will."  There  can 
be  no  counsel  against  the  Lord  ;  there  can  be  no  unforeseen  obstacle  to  the  spread 
of  His  gospel.  He  ordains  the  chosen  vessel  to  preach,  and  He  ordains  the  means 
by  which  this  preaching  may  for  a  time  be  thwarted.  2.  "  To  this  condemnation." 
What  does  the  apostle  mean  by  this  word  ?  Does  he  mean  that  they  are  ordained 
to  the  irrevocable  judgments  of  an  angered  God  ?  to  the  future  penalties  denounced 
against  the  disobedient?  I  think  not.  A  deluded  teacher  may  bring  in  false 
doctrine,  may  even  for  a  time  draw  after  him  many  unstable  souls,  and  yet  he  may, 
through  the  enlightening  and  recovering  grace  of  the  Spirit,  be  brought  to  see  the 
error  of  his  ways,  and  afterwards  become  valiant  for  the  truth  of  God.  It  is  said 
with  regard  to  these  false  teachers,  that  the  longer  they  continue  to  deal  out 
poisoned  food  to  their  people,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  they  should  be  given  over  to 
a  judicial  blindness,  which  must,  unless  the  grace  of  God  should  take  it  away,  issue 
in  the  final  perdition  of  their  souls.  III.  The  great  doctrines  which  it  is  the 
aim  of  these  false  teachers  to  subvert.  Men  "  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into 
lasciviousness,  and  denying  the  only  Lord  God  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1. 
And  first,  as  to  the  expression,  "  the  grace  of  God."  In  its  primary  import  the 
•word  means  favour,  goodness,  benefit,  something  whereby  one  is  spontaneously 
moved  to  do  an  act  of  kindness  for  another.  Hence  the  word  is  used  as  a  compre- 
hensive designation  for  all  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  These  doctrines  of  grace 
these  false  teachers  were  seeking  to  abuse,  to  turn  to  the  hateful  account  of  their 
own  licentiousness  and  sin.  2.  "  Turning  the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness  "  ; 
that  is,  not  necessarily  into  any  particular  form  of  deadly  sin,  but  that  they 
turned  "  the  grace  of  God,"  the  free  mercy  of  God  vouchsafed  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ, 
into  a  pretext  for  any  and  all  forms  of  self-indulgence  and  self -pleasing  which 
might  minister  to  the  gratification  of  the  carnal  mind.  Examine  any  system  of 
error,  and  you  will  find  that  more  or  less  it  resolves  itself  into  some  form  of  experi- 
ment on  the  Divine  mercy,  a  calculation  upon  God's  willingness  to  do  that  which 
He  has  said  He  never  will  do — a  presumptuous  expectation  that  we  may  make  as 
wide  as  we  wiU  that  gate  which  God  has  declared  to  be  narrow — a  belief  that 
without  a  changed  heart,  without  anything  that  could  come  up  to  the  Scriptural 
notion  of  holiness,  it  would  be  possible  for  a  man  to  see  the  Lord.  And  thus  it  is 
weU  said  by  the  apostle  afterwards,  that  this  turning  the  mercy  of  our  God  to  their 
own  worldly  and  selfish  and  unrighteous  purposes  practically  amounted  to  a 
denial  of  "  the  only  Lord  God,  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  (D.  Moore, 
M.A.)  Nocturnal  enemies : — Nocturnal    birds    of    prey    fly    without    making 

the    least    noise.      They    can,    therefore,    pounce    unawares    on    their    victims, 
seizing   them   before   they   have   any   idea   of    necessity    for    escape.  Grace 

abused: — There  are  two  things  that  most  men  desire,  and  they  are,  power  and 
liberty;   and  when  they  have  attained  them  I  may  say  they  are  unto  men  as 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

they  describe  waters.  They  are  easily  apt  to  run  over  in  what  vessels  soever  you 
put  them  in.  The  grand  exhortation  in  this  Epistle  is  set  down  ver.  3,  "  Contend 
earnestly  for  the  faith  once  given  unto  the  saints."  It  is  not  enough  to  strive  once, 
and  to  assert  the  truths,  but  ye  must  do  it  again  and  again,  after  one  another,  as 
often  as  the  truth  of  God  is  opposed.  And  he  gives  the  reason  of  this  exhortation. 
First,  because  it  is  a  depositum  that  the  Lord  hath  in  mercy  deUvered  imto  the 
saints,  which  the  Lord  requires  them  to  keep :  you  are  but  stewards  of  it ;  it  la 
committed  unto  you  that  you  should  transmit  it  unto  posterity.  Secondly,  it  was 
but  "  once  given,"  and  therefore  you  cannot  expect  that  if  you  part  with  it  the 
Lord  will  again  bestow  it  unto  you.  It  is  like  the  file  upon  the  altar  that  was  at 
first  kindled  from  heaven,  and  was  there,  by  the  industry  of  the  priests,  to  be  kept 
aUve,  and  was  never  to  go  out.  Thirdly,  he  doth  press  this  from  the  danger  of  it, 
in  regard  that  the  enemies  lie  in  wait,  there  are  certain  men  crept  in  unawares,  <fec. 
First,  false  teachers :  they  do  not  rush  in,  for  then  they  would  be  observed,  but  they 
creep  in  secretly.  Secondly,  the  things  that  they  trade  in  are  the  truths  of  God  and 
the  souls  of  men.  Therefore  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith,  for  when  false 
teachers  come  it  is  the  faith  that  they  do  mainly  aim  at.  And  the  apostle  comes 
also  to  a  description  of  the  persons  with  whom  your  contention  was  to  be.  First, 
they  are  described  by  the  act  of  God  upon  them,  what  they  are  in  God's  predeter- 
mination. Secondly,  by  the  act  of  sin  within  them,  and  what  they  are  by  their 
own  corruptions.  All  ungodly  men,  pretend  what  they  will,  they  have  no  fear  of 
God  in  them,  nor  any  respect  unto  God.  They  are  men  that  are  strangers  unto 
God,  and  live  without  Him  in  the  world — that  is  their  general  description.  They 
are  ungodly  men  that  have  no  fear  of  God  in  their  hearts,  and  that  do  whatsoever 
they  do  without  any  respect  unto  God,  though  they  are  many  times  great  pre- 
tenders. Secondly,  they  are  more  particularly  described.  First,  by  their  desperate 
opinions — "they  turn  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness."  Secondly,  by  their 
devilish  conversations — "they  deny  the  Lord  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
It  is  spoken  in  respect  of  their  lives  and  ways  (2  Tit.  i.  16).  First,  what  is  meant 
by  the  grace  of  God?  As  given  unto  us  grace  is  taken  two  ways  in  Scripture, 
either  for  the  gospel,  the  Word  of  His  grace,  as  it  is  called  (Acts  xx.  32),  and  so  it  is 
taken  (2  Cor.  vi.  1).  Secondly,  it  is  put  for  the  impress  of  this  Word  upon  the  heart, 
for  it  is  the  Word  writ  in  the  heart.  They  are  the  habits  of  grace  in  us ;  it  is  into 
this  mould  we  are  cast  (Eom.  vi.  17).  It  must  here  be  meant  of  the  Word  of  His 
grace,  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Secondly,  what  is  meant  by  wantonness  ?  The 
word  signifies  a  wanton,  vain,  licentious,  and  unruly  disposition  of  heart.  Thirdly, 
what  is  it  to  turn  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness  ?  The  word  signifies  to  trans- 
pose a  thing,  and  put  it  out  of  its  place ;  to  turn  away  a  thing  or  a  person  and  put 
it  out  of  its  former  condition.  And  when  men  make  use  of  the  doctrines  of  the 
gospel  to  serve  their  own  lust,  and  do  grow  more  loose  under  them,  this  is  to 
pervert  the  gospel  of  grace  unto  an  end  for  which  it  was  never  appointed.  I. 
There  is  a  wantonness  in  corrupt  teachers;  there  are  both  wicked  doctrines 
and  wicked  practices,  for  they  both  go  together  in  the  same  men.  First,  this  will 
appear  by  the  descriptions  everywhere  given  of  them  in  the  Scripture ;  they  are 
described  and  placed  in  the  highest  rank  of  wicked  men.  Secondly,  it  must  needs 
be  so  if  we  consider  from  whence  doth  heresy  come.  We  have  the  rise  of  it  (Rev. 
ix.  1,  2).  Thirdly,  they  are  in  Scripture  resembled  unto  the  wickedest  men  that 
ever  were  (2  Pet.  ii.  15).  Fourthly,  no  men  are  so  industriously  wicked  as  they  are, 
and  they  will  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  a  proselyte,  and  make  him  tenfold  the 
child  of  hell  when  they  have  done  more  than  he  was  before  (Eev.  ix.  10,  18, 19). 
Fifthly,  the  people  of  God  have  abhorred  them  as  the  wickedest  men  that  ever  were 
in  the  world,  and  therefore  there  is  no  sort  of  sinners  that  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  so 
Bet  Himself  and  the  Spirit  of  His  saints  so  much  against  as  these  (Tit.  iii.  10). 
Sixthly,  they  are  such  sort  of  sinners  as  are  most  immediately  acted  by  the  devil  of 
any  men  in  the  world ;  they  have  the  most  immediate  influences  from  hell,  and 
therefore  (Rev.  xvi.  13,  14).  II.  Men  take  special  cabe  that  the  Word  or  God 
SHOULD  BE  brought  IN  TO  PATRONISE  THEiB  LUSTS.  They  will  be  wantou,  but  they 
would  also  wrest  the  Word  of  God  and  have  that  countenance  it.  First,  carnal 
reason  is  lust's  counsellor,  and  the  strongholds  of  sin  lie  therein.  It  is  a  great 
pleader  for  sin.  Men  sought  out  inventions  (Eccles.  vii.  29;  2  Cor.  x.  5).  There 
is  a  great  contribution  that  corrupt  reason  gives  to  lust.  Secondly,  but  never  so 
much  as  when  it  is  from  the  Word  of  God,  that  being  the  rule  of  a  man's  actions. 
Let  lust  have  something  from  it  to  satisfy  it  and  then  the  man  sins  securely. 
Thirdly,  the  bitterest  enemies  that  ever  the  Church  of    God  had,  have  been  those 


JUDE.  25 

that  have  owned  the  same  Scriptures  with  themselves,  as  the  Samaritans  and  the 
Jews  and  the  Papists  unto  us,  for  hereby  wickedness  comes  under  the  title  of  a 
duty  (John  xvi.  2).  Consider  but  these  four  things.  First,  is  this  the  return  you 
make  for  all  the  goodness  of  God  towards  you?  Consider  the  evil  of  it.  First, 
hereby  you  do  dishonour  God  in  that  which  is  highest  to  Him,  and  which  He  has 
most  exalted  next  to  His  Son  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  2).  Secondly,  hereby  you  do  gratify 
the  devil,  for  that  hath  been  his  great  design.  Thirdly,  no  men  bring  on  themselves 
greater  destruction  than  these  men  do,  who  turn  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness 
by  bringing  into  the  Church  damnable  heresies  (2  Peter  ii.  3).  Fourthly,  this 
is  a  dangerous  forerunner  of  destruction  to  any  nation  or  Church.  {W.  Strong.) 
Perversion  of  the  truth : — I.  A  great  crime.  Why  should  men  want  to  change 
the  truth  of  the  living  God?  Look  into  the  text  and  you  have  the  answer. 
(1)  Because  the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  their  soul — "  ungodly  men."  When  the 
helm  is  broken  the  vessel  will  drift  in  every  direction.  Reverence  for  God  is  the 
first  essential  of  faith  in  revelation.  (2)  Because  to  human  appearance  sin 
appears  less  hideous  when  committed  in  the  name  of  religion — "turning  the  grace 
of  our  God  into  lasciviousness."  (3)  Because  the  authority  of  "our  only  Master 
and  Lord  "  is  against  the  license  they  would  afford  the  flesh.  Take  Christ  out  of 
the  gospel  and  any  use  might  be  made  of  it ;  but  give  Him  His  place  in  the  sphere 
of  Divine  truth,  and  the  force  against  sin  is  irresistible.  II.  An  awful  doom. 
(1)  It  is  a  defiance  of  Divine  authority  :  God  is  contradicted.  When  this  is  done 
moral  government  is  at  stake.  (2)  It  is  the  greatest  wrong  that  can  be  done 
to  others.  If  you  do  not  know  the  way,  say  so,  but  to  know  the  way,  and  direct 
the  man  to  go  in  the  contrary  direction,  is  to  cause  him  harm.  (3)  It  is  an  offence 
against  the  love  of  God,  who  sent  His  only  Son  to  make  us  good,  and  lead  us  to 
virtue.  (T.  Davies,  D.D.)  Before  of  old  ordained  to  this  condemnation. — Man 
responsible  for  sin : — Having  described  the  wicked  which  were  before  of  old  ordained 
to  condemnation  by  their  life,  he  cometh  now  to  describe  them  by  their  end.  Here 
they  fare  weU ;  but  they  walk  upon  ice,  in  the  end  they  fall.  Wheat  and  chaff  go 
together  tiU  they  come  to  the  flail ;  gold  and  dross  go  together  till  they  come  to  the 
furnace,  but  then  the  gold  is  the  purer  and  the  dross  is  molten.  God's  glory  is  above 
the  heavens  ;  we  may  bark  at  it,  as  dogs  do  against  the  moon,  but  we  cannot  pull 
it  down.  To  speak  more  fully— God's  will  is  a  reason  of  all  reasons ;  it  is  the  rule 
of  all  equity.  The  judgments  of  God  are  oftentimes  secret,  hid,  but  never  unjust. 
God  ordains  no  man  to  be  evil,  though  He  hath  ordained  the  evil  unto  punishment, 
for  should  God  ordain  men  unto  sin  then  should  God  be  the  author  of  sin.  He 
ordains  indeed  the  incitements  and  occasions  of  sin  to  try  men  withal ;  He  also 
orders  sins  committed,  and  doer,  limit  them;  and  in  these  regards  is  said  as  before 
to  work  in  them  and  to  will  them  ;  in  which  regards  also  they  are  in  Scripture 
attributed  unto  Him  sometiTiies  (2  Sam.  xii.  11,  12 ;  xv.  16).  A  man  rideth 
upon  a  lame  horse,  and  stirs  liim  ;  the  rider  is  the  cause  of  the  motion,  but  the 
horse  himself  of  the  halting  motion.  So  God  is  the  author  of  every  action,  but  not 
of  the  evil  of  the  action.  The  like  is  in  the  striking  of  a  jarring  and  untuned 
harp — the  fingering  is  thine,  the  jarring  or  discord  is  in  the  harp  or  instrument. 
The  earth  giveth  fatness  and  juice  to  all  kind  of  plants ;  some  of  these  plants  yield 
pestilent  and  noisome  fruits.  Where  is  the  fault,  in  the  nourishment  of  the  ground 
or  in  the  nature  of  the  herb,  which  by  the  native  corruption  decocteth  the  goodness 
of  the  ground  into  venom  and  poison  ?  The  goodness  and  moisture  is  from  the 
earth,  the  venom  from  the  herb;  the  sounding  from  the  hand,  the  jarring  from 
the  instrument.  So  the  action  is  from  God,  the  evil  in  the  action  from  the  impure 
fountain  of  thy  own  heart.  (S.  Otes.)  Divine  preordination: — 1.  The  object 
of  the  Divine  decrees  are  not  only  men's  ways,  but  men's  persons.  He  doth  not 
only  say  that  their  condemnation  was  preordained,  but  they  also  were  ordained 
of  old  to  this  condemnation.  2.  God  hath  His  books  and  registers,  wherein 
the  persons,  behaviours,  and  eternal  estates  of  all  men  are  recorded  (Rev.  xx. 
12).  3.  In  all  those  things  which  appertain  to  the  judgment  of  sinners  God  doth 
nothing  rashly,  but  proceedeth  by  foresight  and  preordination.  4.  No  man  ever 
perverted  the  truths  of  God  but  to  his  own  loss.  We  play  with  opinions,  but 
do  not  consider  that  damnation  is  the  end  of  them ;  the  way  of  truth  is  the  way 
of  life,  but  error  tendeth  to  death.  5.  Heresies  and  errors  do  not  fall  out  by 
chance,  but  according  to  the  certain  preordination  and  foreknowledge  of  God. 
There  are  two  reasons  for  it: — Nothing  can  come  to  pass  without  His  will,  and 
nothing  can  come  to  pass  against  His  will.  Briefly,  the  concurrence  of  God  in 
and  about  the  errors  of  men  may  be  conceived  in  these  things :— (1)  He  denieth 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


grace  and  light,  which  might  direct  and  sanctify.  (2)  He  leaveth  difficulty  enough 
in  the  Word,  that  men  who  will  not  be  satisfied  may  be  hardened  (Mark  iv.  11,  12). 
(3)  God  leaveth  them  to  foUow  the  course  of  their  own  hearts  ;  He  doth  not  incline 
and  compel  their  wills,  or  infuse  evil  to  them  (Hosea  iv.  17 ;  1  Kings  xxii.  22 ; 
Psa.  Ixxxi.  12)  ;  He  hindereth  not  their  wickedness — yea,  permitteth  it,  that  so  His 
wise  counsels  may  take  place.  (4)  God  ordereth  it  for  good,  thereby  bringing  great 
advantage  to  His  own  name  (Exod.  ix.  16).  (5)  Once  more,  God's  permission  of 
error  conduceth  to  the  just  ruin  of  His  enemies  (Matt,  xviii.  6,  7 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  25). 
The  point  may  be  applied  many  ways.  (1)  Here  is  comfort  to  those  that  regard  the 
affairs  of  Sion ;  all  the  confusion  and  troubles  that  are  in  the  Church  are  ordered 
by  a  wise  God  ;  He  will  bring  some  good  issue  out  of  them.  (2)  It  checketh  fear  ; 
it  is  all  in  the  hands  of  a  good  God  ;  as  God  trieth  you  to  see  what  you  will  do,  so 
you  must  wait  upon  God  to  see  what  He  wUl  do :  He  will  bring  forth  His  work  in 
due  time.  (3)  It  showeth  their  wickedness  that  take  occasion  to  turn  atheists  from 
the  multitude  of  errors.  (4)  It  is  a  ground  of  prayer  in  times  of  delusion  :  Lord, 
this  was  ordained  by  Thee  in  wisdom,  let  us  discern  Thy  glory  in  it  and  by  it  more 
and  more.  (5)  It  informeth  us  what  a  foolish  madness  it  is  to  think  that  God 
seeth  not  the  sin  which  we  secretly  commit :  surely  He  seeth  it,  for  He  foresaw  it 
before  it  was  committed ;  yea,  from  all  eternity.  {T.  Manton.)  Turning  the 
grace  of  our  God  into  lasciviousness. — The  perversion  of  grace  : — I.  The  gospel  and 
GRACE  OF  God  in  itself  is  not  pliable  to  carnal  purposes,  yieldeth  no  carnal  con- 
clusions. They  turn  it,  saith  the  apostle ;  there  is  no  such  thing  gotten  out  of  the 
gospel  till  the  art  of  a  deceiver  hath  passed  upon  it.  1.  It  yieldeth  no  leave  to  sin, 
but  liberty  to  serve  God ;  this  is  the  great  design  of  it.  Freedom  from  wrath  and 
hell  is  a  privilege,  but  freedom  from  duty  and  obedience  is  no  privilege.  In  the 
gospel  there  is  pardon  for  failings,  but  not  to  encourage  us  in  our  failings,  but  our 
duties.  We  were  never  so  much  obliged  to  duty  as  since  the  gospel,  because  now 
we  have  more  help  and  more  advantages,  stronger  motives  and  greater  encourage- 
ments. 2.  There  are  frequent  and  constant  dissuasives  from  this  perverting  our 
liberty  in  Christ  to  the  service  of  any  fleshly  design  (Kom.  vi.  1 ;  Gal.  v.  13 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  6).  3.  Because  in  the  gospel  itself  there  are  quite  contrary  inferences  from  those 
which  flesh  and  blood  would  draw  from  the  gospel.  The  gospel  hath  been  abused 
to  three  ends — to  looseness,  laziness,  licentiousness.  Now,  you  shall  see  the  Word 
carrieth  things  in  a  quite  contrary  way  to  what  carnal  men  do.  To  looseness  :  men 
have  been  the  more  careless,  because  grace  hath  abounded  in  the  discoveries  of  the 
gospel ;  but  the  apostle  disdaineth  it,  as  a  most  abhorrent  conclusion  from  gospel 
principles  (Kom.  vi.  1).  The  gospel  teacheth  quite  contrary  (Titus  ii.  11,  12); 
not  wantonness,  but  weanedness,  "to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts  "  (Eom. 
vi.  16 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  1).  A  bee  gathereth  honey  thence  from  whence  a  spider 
sucketh  poison.  Again,  to  laziness  :  men  are  apt  to  lie  down  upon  the  bed  of  ease, 
and  say  Christ  must  do  all,  and  so  exclude  all  use  of  means  and  the  endeavour  of 
the  creature.  This  is  a  foul  abuse ;  for  the  Scripture  inferreth  thence  the  care  and 
work  of  the  creature,  because  God  doth  all  (Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  Use  1.  It  serveth  to 
inform  us,  in  the  first  place,  that  carnal  men  are  ill-skilled  in  consequences  ;  from 
the  very  gospel  would  they  draw  a  liberty  to  sin,  than  which  from  such  premises  no 
conclusion  can  be  more  strange.  Use  2.  Again,  it  serveth  for  caution ;  when  you 
meet  with  such  base  inferences  from  evangelical  principles,  do  not  blame  the 
gospel  or  the  ministry.  (1)  Not  the  gospel,  as  if  it  were  not  clear  enough,  or 
faithful  enough,  or  wary  enough.  They  that  have  a  mind  to  faU  shall  not  want  a 
stone  of  stumbling ;  they  that  will  only  be  feasted  with  comforts,  no  wonder  if  they 
contract  a  spiritual  sickness,  and  undo  their  souls  by  a  misunderstood  and  mis- 
applied gospel.  (2)  Do  not  blame  the  ministry  and  dispensation  of  the  gospel, 
because  some  abuse  free  grace,  others  cannot  endure  to  hear  it  preached ;  but 
children  must  not  be  kept  from  their  bread  because  dogs  catch  at  it.  II.  Though 
okace  itself  be  not  pliable  to  such   conclusions,  yet  wicked  men  are  vert 

APT    to    abuse    it    to    THE    COUNTENANCING    OF    THEIR    BINS    AND    LUSTS.       1.    BeCaUBO 

carnal  hearts  do  assimilate  all  that  they  meet  with,  and  turn  it  into  the  nourishment 
of  their  carnal  lusts :  as  the  salt  sea  turneth  the  fresh  rivers  and  the  sweet  showers 
of  heaven  into  salt  waters,  so  do  carnal  men  pervert  the  holy  principles  of  the 
gospel ;  or  as  sweet  liquors  are  soon  soured  in  an  unclean  vessel,  so  do  truths  lose 
their  use  and  efficacy  when  laid  up  in  a  carnal  heart,  and  are  quite  turned  to 
another  purpose.  2.  Because  they  would  fain  sin  securely,  with  a  free  dispensation 
from  God,  and  therefore  seek  by  all  means  to  entitle  God  to  the  sin,  and  the  sin  to 
God.     They  would  find  a  great  deal  of  ease  from  gripes  of  conscience  if  they  could 


JUDE.  27 

make  God  the  author,  or  at  least  the  countenancer,  of  their  evil  practices;  and 
therefore  when  they  can  rub  their  guilt  upon  the  gospel,  and  pretend  a  liberty  by 
Christ,  the  design  is  accomplished.  3.  Because  man  is  obedient  naturally  no 
longer  than  when  under  impressions  of  awe  and  fear;  "the  cords  of  a  man" 
(Hosea  li.  4)  work  little  with  us-  like  beasts  we  only  put  forward  when  we  feel  the 
goad.  4.  Because  we  aU  naturally  desire  liberty,  carnal  liberty,  to  be  left  to  our 
own  sway  and  bent,  and  therefore  we  catch  at  anything  that  tendeth  that  way. 
We  would  be  as  gods,  lords  of  our  own  actions,  and  so  are  very  apt  to  dream  of  an 
exemption  from  all  kind  of  law  but  our  own  lusts.  {Ibid.)  Grace  turned 
into  lasciviousness  : — But  how  can  they  turn  the  grace  of  our  God  into  lascivious- 
ness  ?  Is  grace  capable  of  a  conversion  into  lust  or  sin  ?  WUl  what  was  once 
grace  ever  become  wantonness  ?  It  is  the  doctrine,  not  the  real  substance  of  grace, 
that  is  intended.  The  doctrine  of  forgiveness  is  this  grace  of  God,  which  may  be 
thus  abused.  From  hence  do  men,  who  have  only  a  general  notion  of  it,  habitually 
draw  secret  encouragements  to  sin  and  foUy.  {J.  Owen,  D.D.)  The  folly 
of  presuming  on  redeeming  grace : — Would  any  man  be  so  simple  as  to  set 
his  house  on  fire  because  he  has  a  great  river  rimning  by  his  door,  from 
whence  he  may  have  water  to  quench  it ;  or  wound  himself,  because  there  is 
an  excellent  plaster  which  has  cured  several?  (S.  Charnock.)  Divine  grace 
abused: — 1.  To  turn  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness  is  to  take  a  pre- 
tence and  occasion  to  wax  wanton,  by  the  grace  of  God,  whose  favour  the 
greater  it  is  towards  them  the  more  wicked  and  wanton  they  be.  Such  are  the 
presumptuous  sinners,  which  will  therefore  sin  of  purpose  because  God  is  merciful. 
These  are  they  which  in  the  apostle  say.  Let  us  do  evU  that  good  may  come  thereof : 
let  us  sin  that  God  may  be  merciful :  let  us  commit  iniquity  that  God's  glory  may 
be  revealed ;  yet  is  their  condemnation  just.  And  this  grace  of  God  is  turned  into 
wantonness  of  divers  and  diversely.  (1)  When  we  think  ourselves  exempted  from 
all  duties,  homage,  and  service  to  men,  because  we  are  freed  by  Jesus  Christ. 
(2)  They  also  turn  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness  which  outwardly  profess  the 
gospel,  frequent  the  Word  of  God,  hear  the  wholesome  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ : 
but  wrest  it  to  maintain  their  wanton  and  filthy  desires.  (3)  They  furthermore 
turn  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness  who  profess  the  gospel,  that  under  colour 
thereof  they  may  play  the  wanton  more  freely  and  may  live  thereunder  more  idly. 
{R.  Turnbull.)  Denying  the  only  Lord  God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Denying 
God  : — Now  there  be  many  ways  to  deny  God.  Some  deny  His  power,  as  the  proud 
do ;  some  His  providence,  as  the  infidels  ;  some  His  justice,  as  the  impenitent ; 
some  His  mercy,  as  the  desperate  ;  some  His  truth,  as  Uars  ;  some  His  strength,  as 
the  fearful  do.  But  especially  we  deny  God  in  our  lives,  in  our  deeds,  thus  the 
Cretians  denied  Him.  They  professed  they  knew  God,  but  by  works  they  did  deny 
Him,  and  were  abominable,  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate.  The 
profession  of  Qod  is  known  by  the  fruits  of  it,  as  life  is  discerned  by  the  motion  of 
man.  On  the  contrary,  if  a  man  would  persuade  us  that  there  is  fixe  whereas 
there  is  no  heat,  or  that  there  were  life  in  a  carcase  that  never  moved,  we  would 
not  believe  him  ;  so  believe  not  him  that  speaketh  of  God  and  liveth  not  in  God. 
Seeing  all  things  are  made  for  man,  it  cannot  be  but  man  is  made  for  another,  and 
that  is  God  only  :  but  the  wicked  shaU  find  God  and  feel  Grod  when  it  is  too  late, 
though  here  they  do  deny  Him.  God  here  is  called  the  only  God  to  note  the 
Trinity  in  Unity  ;  there  is  one  God,  one  essence  of  the  three  persons.  The  heathen 
thought  it  impossible  for  one  God  to  govern  this  great  world,  therefore  they  made 
one  god  for  heaven,  as  Jupiter  ;  another  for  hell,  as  Pluto  ;  one  for  bread,  as  Ceres ; 
another  for  wine,  as  Bacchus ;  one  for  the  sea,  as  Neptune ;  another  for  the  wind, 
as  ^olus  ;  one  for  learning,  as  Minerva ;  another  for  merchandise,  as  Mercury. 
Again,  they  deny  Christ,  of  which  sort  there  be  many.  The  Jews  deny  that  He  is 
come ;  the  pagans  deny  that  ever  He  will  come  ;  the  Turks  confess  that  He  is  come, 
but  yet  as  a  man,  not  as  a  God,  inferior  to  their  Mahomet.  But  to  speak  orderly, 
men  deny  Christ  many  ways.  Some  deny  His  Divinity,  as  the  Arians  ;  some  His 
humanity,  as  the  Ubiquitaries ;  some  His  natures,  by  rending  them  asunder,  as 
the  Nestorians,  who  make  two  Christs — one  the  Son  of  God,  another  the  son  of 
Mary ;  some  deny  them  by  confounding  them,  as  Eutyches,  which  said  that  His 
humanity  was  swallowed  up  of  His  Divinity  ;  some  deny  Him  by  concealing  Him 
in  time  of  persecution,  as  the  Nicodemites  do.  But  chiefly  we  deny  the  Lord  Jesus 
two  ways  :  first,  by  denying  the  sufficiency  of  His  death,  as  the  Galatians  did  and 
as  the  Jews  did.  Secondly,  we  deny  the  Lord  Jesus  by  denying  the  efiicacy  or 
virtue  of  His  death,  not  dying  unto  sin.    For  as  the  sun  doth  not  warm  all  whom 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

it  lighteneth,  as  the  people  under  the  North  Pole,  who  have  the  sun  six  months 
together,  and  yet  freeze,  so  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  not  cause  aU  to  feel  the 
virtue  of  His  death,  whom  He  illuminateth  with  the  knowledge  of  His  death. 
The  profession  of  Christ  standeth  not  in  words,  but  in  deeds ;  not  in  tongue, 
but  in  heart;  not  in  opinion,  but  in  life.  The  apostle  nameth  a  true  know- 
ledge, for  many  know  not  God  truly.  (S.  Otes.)  Denying  Christ  the  Lord: — 
I.  Jesus  Chbist  is  Master  and  Lord  (Rev.  xv.  3).  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the 
Church "  (Eph.  i.  22).  In  the  world  the  attribute  manifested  is  power ;  in  the 
Church,  grace.  Lord,  let  me  feel  the  efficacy  of  Thy  grace  rather  than  the  power 
of  Thine  anger  !  II.  Christ  is  Lord  and  Jesus  ;  He  came  to  rule  and  He  came  to 
save.  III.  Again,  from  the  words  observe,  the  Son  op  God  was  Christ,  that  Hb 
might  be  Lord  and  Jesus  ;  anointed  of  the  Father  that  He  might  accomplish 
our  salvation.  This  anointing  signifieth  two  things.  First,  it  noteth  the  nature 
of  His  offices.  Under  the  Old  Testament  three  sort  of  persons  were  anointed — 
kings,  priests,  and  prophets,  and  aU  these  relations  doth  Christ  sustain  to  the 
Church.  Secondly,  it  noteth  the  authority  upon  which  His  office  is  founded  ;  He 
was  anointed  thereto  by  God  the  Father,  who  in  the  work  of  redemption  is  repre- 
sented as  the  offended  party  and  supreme  judge  ;  and  so  it  is  a  great  comfort  to  us 
that  Christ  is  a  mediator  of  God's  choosing.  IV.  Once  more,  observe,  that  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Master  of  the  world  and  Lord  of  the  Church,  is  true  God.  For  it  is 
said  here,  denying  the  only  Lord  God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That  Christ  is 
God  appeareth  by  express  Scripture,  where  He  is  called  "  the  true  God  "  (1  John  v.  20); 
•'  the  great  God  "  (Titus  ii.  13),  to  show  that  He  is  not  a  God  inferior  to  the  Father, 
but  equal  in  power  and  glory,  and  that  not  by  courtesy  and  grant,  but  by  nature. 
So  He  is  called  "  the  mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father  (Isa.  ix.  6),  and  "  God 
over  all "  (Eom.  ix.  5).  Again,  God  He  must  needs  be,  if  you  consider  the  work 
He  ought  to  do.  Tne  work  of  the  Mediator  could  be  despatched  by  no  inferior 
agent.  Uses.  Well,  then,  we  learn  hence— 1.  That  Christ  is  a  proper  object  for 
faith.  2.  Since  He  was  God  by  nature,  let  us  observe  the  love  of  Christ  in  becoming 
man.  3.  It  is  an  invitation  to  press  us  to  come  to  Christ,  and  by  Christ  to  God. 
V.  I  COME  NOW  TO  the  WORD  IMPLYING  THEIR  GUILT,  "denying."  Observe,  that  it  is 
a  horrible  impiety  to  deny  the  Lord  Jesus ;  when  He  would  make  these  seducers 
odious.  He  giveth  them  this  character.  Now  Christ  is  many  ways  denied.  I  shall 
refer  them  to  two  heads — in  opinion  and  practice.  1.  In  opinion  :  so  Christ  is 
denied  when  men  deny  His  natures  or  offices.  2.  Christ  is  denied  in  practice; 
and  so — (1)  By  apostasy  and  total  revolt  from  Him  (Matt.  x.  33).  (2)  By  not  pro- 
fessing Christ  in  evil  times,  for  not  to  profeSs  is  to  deny  (Matt.  x.  32,  33 ; 
Mark  viii.  38).  (3)  Men  deny  Christ  when  they  profess  Him  and  walk  unworthily 
and  dishonourably  to  their  profession.  Actions  are  the  best  image  of  men's 
thoughts.  Now  their  actions  give  their  profession  the  lie  (Titus  i.  16).  (T.  Manton.) 
Denying  Christ : — (1)  As  in  profession  God  the  only  Lord  and  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  denied,  so  is  God  and  Christ  denied  in  doctrine.  (2)  God  the  only  Lord 
and  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  is  denied  of  me  in  conversation,  when  in  words 
we  give  our  names  to  Christ's  religion,  yet  in  our  deeds  will  not  be  obedient. 

(3)  God  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  denied  of  men  by  vainly  trusting  in  worldly 
things,  and  not  reposing  all  confidence  in  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

(4)  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  is  denied  by  revolting,  backsliding,  and 
falling  away  from  the  religion  of  God  and  the  profession  of  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.  (5)  Finally,  when  we  do  not  deny  openly  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  and 
the  Word  of  God,  yet  notwithstanding  we  will  not  obey  the  admonitions  of  the 
ministers  of  Jesus  Christ,  nor  fear  the  threatenings  and  punishment  sounded  oat 
against  our  sins,  we  deny  the  Lord  Jesus.    {R.  Turnbull.) 

Ver.  5.  I  will  therefore  put  you  in  remembrance. — Truth  to  be  remembered : — 1. 
Great  is  the  sin  of  those  who  despise  repeated  truths.  A  Christian  must  not  have  aa 
itching,  but  a  humble  and  obedient  ear.  Every  truth,  like  a  lease,  brings  in  revenue 
the  next  year  as  well  as  this.  2.  Christians  must  not  only  receive,  but  retain 
also  the  truths  of  God.  Our  memories  must  be  heavenly  storehouses  and  treasuries 
of  precious  truths ;  not  like  hour-glasses,  which  are  no  sooner  full  but  they  are 
running  out.  To  help  us  in  remembering  heavenly  truths,  let  us — (1)  Be  reverent 
and  heedful  in  our  attentions,  as  receiving  a  message  from  God.  (2)  Love  every 
heavenly  truth  as  our  treasure ;  delight  helps  memory  (Psa.  cxix.  16),  and  what  wo 
love  we  keep.  (3)  Our  memories  should  not  be  taken  up  with  vanities.  The 
memory  which  is  filled  only  with  earthly  concerns,  is  Uke  a  golden  cabinet  filled 


JVDE.  29 

with  dung.  (4)  Let  instruction  be  followed  with  meditation,  prayer,  conference, 
and  holy  conversation ;  by  all  these  it  is  hid  in  the  heart  the  deeper,  and  driven 
home  more  thoroughly  (Deut.  vi.  6,  7 ;  Psa.  ciix.  97).  3.  There  is  a  constant 
necessity  of  a  conscientious  ministry.  People  know  and  remember  but  in  part,  and 
till  that  which  is  imperfect  be  done  away  we  cannot  spare  ministerial  remembrances. 
4.  The  forgetfulness  of  the  people  must  not  discourage  the  minister.  A  boat  is  not 
to  be  cast  up  and  broken  in  pieces  for  every  leak.  5.  The  work  of  ministers  is  not 
to  contrive  doctrines,  but  to  recall  them.  {W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.)  Afterward  destroyed 
them  that  believed  not. — Unbelief — its  pusillanimity,  impiety,  and  ruinous  conse- 
quences  (with  Psa.  Ixxviii.  40)  : — Of  the  Church  of  God  in  the  world,  it  is  true, 
as  of  the  world  itself,  that,  with  much  that  may  be  called  variety,  there  is  substan- 
tial sameness,  in  aU  ages,  in  its  condition.  In  all  ages  behevers  have  enjoyed  the 
same  privileges.  Their  trials  and  dangers  have  also  been  similar  as  to  their 
effects ;  bearing,  at  one  time,  on  the  growth  of  their  knowledge  and  their  faith ; 
and,  at  another,  on  the  open  profession  of  their  attachment  to  Jesus.  When  we 
thus  look  on  the  condition  of  the  Church,  in  one  aspect,  as  being  as  unchanged 
by  the  lapse  of  time,  and  yet,  in  another,  as  partaking  of  all  the  mutability  of  man 
and  of  the  world,  we  are  prepared  to  find  that,  with  circumstances  of  unfailii^ 
security  in  its  condition,  it  is,  nevertheless,  not  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of 
danger  and  loss.  The  Church,  and  every  member  of  it,  true  to  Christ  the  Head, 
is  encompassed  with  God's  favour  as  with  a  shield.  But  unbelief  detaches  the 
hold  from  the  Bock  of  Ages — from  an  unchangeable  Saviour  and  His  unchanging 
word.  In  consequence,  so  far  as  unbelief  prevails  in  individuals  or  in  Churches, 
they  are  exposed  to  wander,  they  cannot  but  fall  into  sin,  and  ultimately  into  ruin. 
I.  Let  us  endeavour  to  apprehend  the  spibit  of  our  text,  and  the  convictions 

PRESENT   TO   the  APOSTLE'S   MIND,   WHEN   HE   OCCUPIED   THE   POINT   OF  STANDING   FROM 

WHICH  HE  CONTEMPLATES  THE  VISIBLE  Church.  Several  things  are  presupposed  in 
the  language  of  our  text.  In  the  salvation  of  man,  memory  has  its  province  as  well 
as  faith.  Knowledge,  like  the  light,  must  enter  the  soul,  and  remove  its  dark- 
ness. But  if  knowledge  be  of  a  vague  and  indefinite  nature,  it  has  no  hold  on 
the  convictions  and  no  power  on  the  heart.  And  yet  truth,  once  well  known, 
may  fade  from  the  view,  and  become,  although  not  entirely  forgotten,  yet  practically 
inoperative  in  the  life.  Faded  impressions,  then,  need  to  be  revived,  and  forgotten 
truths  recalled,  so  as  to  be  ever  present,  as  a  light  from  heaven,  shining  on  the 
soul  and  path  of  the  man,  and  guiding  him  in  all  his  purposes  and  acts,  in  a 
world  of  darkness  and  sin.  The  light  of  God's  truth,  pre-eminently  so  called,  is 
the  revelation,  not  of  the  purity  of  His  law  and  nature,  nor  of  the  unity  of  His  God- 
head and  the  supremacy  of  His  government,  but  of  the  reality  and  fulness  of  His 
grace.  It  is  implied,  however,  in  our  text,  that,  notwithstanding  aU  this  manifold 
grace  of  God,  one  and  another,  and  many,  may  ultimately  perish,  and  "  that  we 
may  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain."  How  many  who  profess  to  receive  it 
obviously  show  that  they  have  never  intellectually  apprehended  its  nature,  nor  felt 
its  influence  at  all  ?  A  sense  of  grace  received  has  never  expanded  their  hearts  in 
generous  love,  either  to  God  or  man.  But  our  text  not  only  implies  the  possi- 
bihty  of  all  this,  but  assumes  it  as  a  fact  that  grace  may  be  abused  to  lascivious- 
mess  (ver.  4) ;  so  that  those  who  have  externally  received  grace,  may  become 
eminently  more  godless  and  wicked  than  if  they  had  never  known  of  its  existence. 
But  what  Christian  can  say  that  he  never  needs  the  exhortation  of  the  apostle, 
"  to  fear  lest  a  promise  being  left  him  of  entering  into  rest,  he  may  come  short 
of  it  through  unbelief  "  ?  II.  Let  us  consider  the  fact  to  which  the  apostlb 
SPECIALLY  directs  OUR  ATTENTION,  viewiug  the  siu  in  the  light  of  the  description 
of  it  which  the  Psalmist  gives.  "  How  oft  did  they  provoke  Him  in  the  wilderness 
and  grieve  Him  in  the  desert  I  "  And  often  did  the  Lord  destroy  some  of  them. 
But  we  shall  confine  our  remarks  to  that  one  occasion  on  which  the  Lord  sware 
that  they  should  not  enter  into  His  rest  (Numb.  xiv.  12).  1.  In  order  that  we  may 
receive  the  fuU  benefit  to  be  derived  from  this  alarming  example,  let  us  notice 
the  stage  in  their  history  when  they  so  grievously  sinned  against  God  by  unbelief. 
We  find  that,  in  a  period  of  little  more  than  a  year,  the  Lord  had  brought  them 
from  out  of  the  house  of  bondage  in  Egypt,  through  the  perUs  of  the  wilderness, 
to  the  very  confines  of  the  land  of  promise.  It  would  be  easy  to  trace,  at  least, 
ten  instances  of  provocation  ;  but  it  is  enough  to  remark,  as  displaying  the  grace 
and  forbearance  of  God  with  his  stiff-necked  people,  that  in  almost  every  march, 
or  at  every  stage  throughout  their  journey,  they  tempted  God.  God  had  visited 
them  with  marks  of  His  anger,  but  He  still  carries  them  forward,  continues  to  be 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR, 

their  God  and  guide,  and  the  promised  land  now  stretches  out  to  their  view.  His  mira- 
cles, which  they  saw  in  Egypt  and  in  the  wilderness,  afforded  every  confirmation  that 
God  was  able  to  fulfil  His  word ;  and  they  had  no  cause  to  fear  or  to  be  dis- 
couraged whatever  obstacles  might  arise.  We,  like  them,  are  called  by  God  to  take 
possession  of  blessings  guaranteed  by  the  oath  of  God  to  Abraham's  spiritual 
seed.  The  kingdom  of  Christ,  with  all  its  blessings,  is  brought  near  to  us,  afford- 
ing a  rest  to  the  weary  and  heavy  laden  traveller  of  the  world.  Wherever  the 
gospel  comes,  every  man  is  called  to  go  up  and  possess.  But  this  kingdom  and 
its  subjects  have  enemies, — the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh ;  those  who  go 
up  to  possess  the  kingdom  of  God,  must  engage  in  conflict  with  these  enemies, 
and  only  expect  perfect  rest  in  the  degree  to  which  the  destruction  of  these 
enemies  is  accomplished.  The  one  unrecalled  command  standing  from  age  to 
age  is,  Go  into  aU  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel.  Sinners  !  go  up  and  possess  ; 
fear  not,  neither  be  discouraged ;  behold  the  Lord  hath  set  the  land  before  you. 
2.  Let  us  next  consider  how  the  people  treated  this  command  of  God.  Did  they 
at  once  obey  God's  command  ?  No.  Did  they  positively  refuse  ?  Their  disobedi- 
ence did  not  manifest  itself  in  that  manner  at  first.  Moses  tells  us  that  the 
people  "  came  near  to  him  and  said,  We  will  send  men  before  us,  and  they  shall 
search  out  the  land  by  what  way  we  must  go  up,  and  to  what  oities  we  shall 
come  "  (Deut.  i.  22).  Some  of  you  may  say.  Could  anything  be  more  reason- 
able ?  But  you  must  observe  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  the 
children  of  Israel  were  placed.  They  had  the  unequivocal  command  of  God  to 
go  up.  This  first  hesitation,  therefore,  to  go  up,  this  prudent  expedient,  was  in 
itself  no  small  sin,  and  evinced  the  operation  of  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief.  It 
formed  part  of  the  turning  back  and  limiting  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  of  which 
the  Psalmist  speaks.  But  is  this  conduct  of  the  children  of  Israel  without  its 
parallel  among  us,  in  our  treatment  of  the  call  and  the  commands  of  the  gospel  ? 
Are  there  no  expedients  to  which  we  have  recourse,  by  which  to  modify  the  authority 
and  uncompromising  severity  of  the  Word  of  God ;  and  by  which  we  are  actually,  from 
fear  and  unbelief,  regulating  our  steps  by  an  ungodly  prudence  ?  3.  Let  us  observe 
how  God  deals  with  those  who,  by  unbelief,  had  shrunk  from  the  course  to  which  He 
had  called  them.  Did  God  instantly  visit  their  transgression  with  judgment  ?  So 
far  from  this.  He  bore  with  their  abject  timidity  and  dishonouring  distrust.  He 
permitted  Moses  to  approve  of  the  proposal  of  the  people  to  send  spies.  Accordingly, 
the  twelve  "  rulers  "  go  forth  to  explore  the  land,  and  find  that  it  surpasses  their 
most  sanguine  expectations.  "  Nevertheless,"  said  the  spies,  "  the  people  be  strong, 
the  cities  walled,  and  very  great ;  moreover  we  saw  the  children  of  Anak  there." 
The  disheartening  effect  of  this  intelligence  on  the  hearts  of  the  people  was 
such  that,  when  commanded  to  go  up,  they  refused  to  obey.  Persisting  in 
their  unbelief  of  this  oath-secured  presence  of  God,  the  anger  of  the  Lord  burned 
against  them.  This  sin  crowned  all  the  past,  and  was  aggravated  by  every 
possible  enhancement  of  guilt.  It  was  a  rejection  of  God's  guidance,  and  a 
limitation  of  God's  grace  and  power.  He  swears  in  His  wrath  that  He  would 
destroy  "  all  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward  which  have  murmured  against  Me ; 
and  your  little  ones  which  ye  said  should  be  a  prey,  them  I  will  bring  in,  and  they 
shall  know  the  land  which  ye  have  despised."  Thus  it  was,  that  those  whom 
God  saved  out  of  Egypt  He  destroyed  in  the  wilderness.  Hence  we  learn  that  it  is 
a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Uving  God — the  Holy  One  of  Israel. 
In  all  ages  there  are  some  who  do  not,  and  who  cannot,  enter  in,  because  of 
unbehef .  Are  any  of  us  of  that  class  ?  1.  The  first  lesson  which  we  learn  from 
the  admonition  of  our  text  is,  that  it  is  with  the  very  same  God  who  destroyed 
unbelieving  Israel  that  we  have  to  do.  The  greater  or  less  fulness  of  revelation 
which  God  gives  of  Himself  does  not  affect  His  nature  any  more  than  the  obscurity 
or  brightness  of  a  day  affects  the  brightness  or  nature  of  the  sun.  2.  Mark  the 
grace  of  God  as  exhibited  at  the  period  when  He  destroyed  them  who  beUeved  not. 
He  permitted  the  spies  to  be  sent.  He  bore  with  the  pusillanimity  and  unbelief  of 
the  people ;  and  so  He  always  does  in  no  small  dcg-ee.  But  God,  although  He  thus 
graciously  tolerate  much  unbelief,  does  not  prosper  His  people  in  the  expedients 
which  they  adopt  under  its  influence.  3.  You  learn  from  the  fact  to  which  our 
attention  has  been  turned,  that  faith  is  not  of  efficacy,  by  any  arbitrary  appoint- 
ment of  God.  As  the  captain  who  would  lead  an  army  to  victory  niust  possess 
their  confidence,  and  as  every  teacher,  who  shall  be  able  to  educate  his  disciples, 
must  possess  their  respect  for  his  ability  to  instruct — so  must  the  God  and  Captain 
of  our  Salvation  possess  the  unfeigned  and  unwavering  faith  of  His  people.     4.  We 


JUDE.  31 

learn  also  that  unbelief  is  not  a  trivial  but  most  heinous  sin.  It  operates  at  the  seat  of 
spiritual  life  in  the  heart  within — it  is  only  suspicion,  doubt,  questioning,  shrinking, 
and  simple  inaction.  But  as  the  word,  the  promise,  and  the  command  come  from 
God,  it  treats  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  with  as  much  contumely  and  distrust  as  God 
lays  to  the  charge  of  Israel,  when  they  turned  back,  tempted  God,  and  limited  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel.  5.  But  this  passage  of  Jewish  history  admits  of  application 
to  the  conduct  of  communities  as  well  as  of  individuals.  There  is  ground  for 
apprehension,  that  the  doctrine  of  God's  decrees,  instead  of  forming  a  source  of 
comfort  and  strength  in  arduous  duties,  is  often  abused  as  an  apology  for  inaction, 
and  operates  as  a  sedative  on  the  moral  sensibilities  and  aspirations  of  the  heart. 
Now,  looking  at  this  passage  in  the  history  of  the  Israelites,  we  find  it  was  God's 
will,  and  could  have  been  compatible  with  God's  purposes,  that  they  should  have 
entered  into  possession  of  Canaan  forty  years  before  the  time  that  the  land  became 
theirs.  6.  Let  sinners,  therefore,  see  that  they  are,  under  the  gospel,  saved  to  the 
extent  that  the  children  of  Israel  were,  when  delivered  out  of  Egypt,  and  brought 
to  the  verge  of  the  promised  land.  Immanuel's  kingdom  stretches  out  before  them, 
in  the  promises  and  privileges  of  the  gospel,  and  God's  command  to  them  is,  "  Go 
up  and  possess  the  land."  And  if  any  have  been  so  far  awakened  by  God's  Spirit 
as  to  understand,  in  some  measure,  the  better  things  which  God  has  provided,  but 
are  yet  halting  between  two  opinions,  or  turning  away  sorrowful,  from  the  require- 
ment to  yield  themselves  unreservedly  to  Christ's  revealed  will  and  authority,  let 
them  know,  that,  in  thus  shrinking  through  unbelief,  and  returning  to  the  world, 
they  cannot  engage  in  the  pleasures  and  pursuits  of  the  world  as  they  did  before,  at 
least  for  a  time.  They  will  experience  a  misery  which  may  fitly  be  represented  by 
being  driven  into  the  wilderness  to  wander  and  drag  out  a  dreary  life,  as  if  with 
God's  oath  sounding  in  their  ears,  that  they  shall  not  enter  into  His  rest.  (John 
Grant. ) 

Ver.  6.  And  the  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate. — The  fall  of  angels  a 
warning  to  men : — I.  The  loss  of  an  exalted  state.  1.  By  whom  lost.  2. 
What  they  lost.  An  "  estate "  of  spotless  purity,  exalted  dignity,  supreme 
felicity.  3.  How  they  lost  it.  By  rebellion  against  God.  Probably  pride  was 
their  special  sin  (1  Tim.  iii.  6).  Beware  of  this  sin;  it  is  the  first  of  which  we 
have  any  knowledge,  and  I  may  say  the  dread  parent  of  every  other.  Unbelief  is  a 
great  sin,  but  the  hidden  germ  of  that  sin  is  pride.  Old  Quarles  says,  "  It  hates 
superiors,  it  scorns  inferiors,  its  owns  no  equals ;  .  .  .  till  thou  hate  it  God  hates 
thee."  II.  The  withholding  of  saving  grace.  Angels  sinned  and  were 
destroyed,  then  let  men  beware.  IH.  The  sealing  of  an  awful  doom.  Notice  the 
contrast — angels  yet  in  chains,  under  darkness.  Beings  once  of  supernal  light  now 
dwelling  in  infernal  gloom.  1.  Observe  that  punishment  is  according  to  abused 
privileges.  This  is  not  a  mere  arbitrary  law.  Privileges  create  a  capacity  for 
suffering.  To  confine  a  poor  beggar  in  prison  for  a  year  would  not  be  a  tenth  so 
irksome  as  a  year's  imprisonment  to  a  prince.  2.  The  punishment  of  the  wicked  is 
not  intended  to  be  disciplinary.  At  least  six  thousand  years  have  akeady  hovered 
over  these  fallen  angels  since  first  they  fell.  But  no  reformation  has  been 
wrought  in  their  characters.  Hell  is  not  the  place  to  burn  the  rebellious  spirit 
out  of  fallen  angels,  nor  yet  of  lost  men.  3.  The  punishment  of  such  as  rebel 
against  God  is  not  at  its  worst  until  the  judgment-day.  4.  The  punishment 
of  apostate  angels  will  be  side  by  side  with  that  of  unsaved  sinners.  They  shall 
be  companions  in  misery.  {W.Williams.)  Defection  from  God  : — 1.  The  best  of 
created  perfections  are  of  themselves  defectible.  2.  Nothing  is  so  truly  base  and 
vile  as  sin.  3.  In  defection  from  God  there  is  an  imitation  of  Satan.  4.  It  is 
diflScult  to  be  high  and  not  to  be  high-minded ;  to  be  adorned  with  any  excellen- 
cies, and  not  unduly  to  reflect  upon  them.  5.  The  better  the  persons  are  who 
become  wicked,  the  more  obstinate  they  are  in  wickedness.  When  angels  fall 
into   sin,   they  continue    in    it    with    pertinacity.      {W.    Jenkyn,  31. A.)  The 

apostasy  of  the  angels  irrecoverable  : — The  sin  of  angels  is  notorious,  and  their 
punishment  is  as  famous ;  they  are  fallen  from  light  to  darkness,  from  heaven  to 
hell,  from  felicity  to  misery ;  Valerian  fell  from  a  golden  chair  to  a  cage  of  iron ; 
Dionysius  fell  from  a  king  to  a  schoolmaster ;  Alexander  IH.  fell  from  being 
pope  to  be  a  gardener  in  Venice ;  Nebuchadnezzar  fell  from  a  man  to  a  beast ;  but 
the  celestial  spirits  fell  from  angels  to  devils.  For  their  sin  of  apostasy  was  great, 
it  cried  to  God  for  vengeance.  The  Lord  Jesus  noteth  this  apostasy  in  them  to  shaw 
that  their  sin  was  not  by  creation  but  by  wilful  corruption.     And  this  is  the  cause, 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

saith  Augustine,  why  God  hath  redeemed  men  and  not  angels,  for  that  they  sinned 
from  within  and  of  themselves  maliciously  and  rebelliously ;  man  sinned  from 
without  and  by  provocation.  Their  fall  was  great,  so  was  their  punishment.  The 
higher  their  state  and  condition  the  more  grievous  their  fall.  If  it  was  much  for  Cain 
to  be  a  vagabond,  and  Adam  to  be  driven  out  of  Paradise,  and  Ishmael  out  of  his 
father  Abraham's  house,  how  much  more  for  the  angels  to  be  driven  out  of  heaven 
and  not  to  return,  like  Noah's  dove,  to  the  ark,  but  to  live  in  darkness  for  ever  ? 
But  in  that  God  hath  reserved  them  in  chains,  it  is  a  thing  of  singular  comfort. 
Here,  therefore,  we  learn  that  they  cannot  pass  their  bounds,  they  are  under  God, 
they  depend  on  His  beck.  Well,  God  hath  reserved  them  in  everlasting  chains  under 
darkness,  they  are  punished  already,  but  their  full  punishment  is  not  before  the  day 
of  judgment.  As  yet  they  are  but  as  prisoners  in  fetters  and  irons ;  the  great  assizes, 
the  day  of  execution,  is  yet  to  come.  Lastly,  note,  that  the  day  wherein  the  angels 
shall  be  judged  is  called  a  great  day.  It  is  so  called  in  three  respects :  great  in 
respect  of  the  Judge  (Dan.  vii.  9,  10) ;  great  in  respect  of  the  assistants — the 
angels ;  great  in  respect  of  the  prisoners  that  shall  be  arraigned.  Good  Lord !  what 
a  great  day  will  this  be,  when  all  the  saints  out  of  heaven,  all  the  damned  out  of 
hell,  all  the  dead  bodies  out  of  the  earth  must  appear  I  Not  an  angel  spared,  not  a 
devil  respited,  not  a  saint  or  sinner  rescued,  but  all  must  be  summoned  to  give  their 
attendance  and  to  make  their  appearances.  But  to  proceed  a  little  further,  this  day 
is  called  "  a  day  "  by  an  excellency.  For  never  day  was  like  unto  it.  For  if  the  day 
of  Christ's  humiUation  was  so  glorious,  what  shall  be  the  day  of  His  glorification  ? 
(S.  Otes.)  Fallen  angels  : — 1.  They  whose  course  and  trade  of  life  is  in  sin  most 
resemble  Satan.  2.  Torments  cannot  reform  devils.  Hellish  horrors  cannot  change 
heUish  hearts.  3.  Restraint  much  differs  from  reformation.  Devils  may  have  a 
chain  upon  them  and  yet  no  change  within  them.  4.  Satan  can  do  nothing  but  by 
God's  permission.  5.  Satan  cannot  hurt  us,  unless  he  gets  us  within  the  compass 
of  his  chain.  6.  God  can  make  an  offender  his  own  afflicter,  a  terror  to  himself, 
and  constantly  to  carry  his  own  chains  of  terror  and  torment  about  him.  Powder 
which  blows  up  the  house  cannot  itself  escape  from  burning.  7.  There  is  no  liberty 
to  be  found  in  forsaking  God's  service.  A  saint  loses  nothing  but  his  bonds  and 
fetters  by  becoming  holy  ;  nor  is  holiness  a  chain  to  any,  but  those  who  know  no 
other  freedom  than  a  house  of  bondage.  8.  The  pleasures  of  sin  bear  no  proportion 
to  the  horrors  thereof.    {W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.)        Restricting  injluenee$ : — I.  It  is  m 

THE   NATUBE   OP  SIN  TO  BEL1NQDI8H  THAT  WHICH  IS  VZBTUOUS,  BEAUTEFDIi,  AND  HAPPT. 

Dissatisfaction,  ambition,  or  a  love  of  change  might  have  been  the  cause.  (1)  It 
was  an  interference  with  the  Divine  order  of  things.  Eternal  wisdom  was  con 
temned.  Sin  is  an  offence  against  the  majesty  and  sovereignty  of  God.  (2)  It 
depreciated  present  blessing  and  neglected  duty.  (3)  It  deprived  them  of  their 
beautiful  home.  H.  God  has  appointed  restricting  intldences,  and  a  final  doom 
FOB  THE  SINFUL.  There  are  chains — bounds  which  the  transgressors  cannot  over- 
step. Sin  is  apprehended  by  law,  justice,  and  the  moral  sense.  But  all  sin  is  on 
its  way  to  a  finality.     (T.  Davies,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah. — The  sin  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah : — 1.  Cities  and 
countries  suffer  for  the  evU  of  the  inhabitants.  Carnal  men  are  usually  moved  by 
•arnal  arguments,  and  tremble  more  to  hear  of  the  loss  of  their  estates  than  of  their 
souls ;  we  are  startled  to  hear  of  scarcity,  and  famine,  and  fires,  and  pestilences ;  all 
these  are  the  fruits  of  sin.  2.  Those  cities  were  utterly  destroyed,  and  accordingly 
is  the  destruction  of  Sodom  put  for  an  utter  overthrow  (Isa.  xiii.  19  ;  Zeph.  ii.  9 ; 
Jer.  xlviii.  18,  1.  40 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  6).  Observe  thence,  that  in  judgments  wicked  men 
may  be  brought  to  an  utter  destruction.  The  synagogue  of  Satan  may  be  utterly 
destroyed,  but  not  the  city  of  God ;  in  the  saddest  miseries  there  is  hope  of  God's 
children.  3.  Fellowship  in  evil  can  neither  excuse  sin  nor  keep  off  wrath.  It  can- 
not excuse  sin ;  nothing  more  usual  than  for  men  to  say,  they  do  as  others  do  ;  if 
you  do  as  others  do  you  shall  suffer  as  others  do ;  example  doth  not  lessen  sin,  but 
increase  it,  partly  because  their  own  act  is  an  approbation  of  the  act  of  others. 
Again,  it  doth  not  keep  off  wrath  ;  multitudes  and  single  persons  are  all  one  to 
avenging  justice.  Well,  then,  learn  to  live  by  rule  and  not  by  example,  and  pro- 
pose the  sins  of  others  to  your  grief,  not  imitation  :  "  Have  no  fellowship  with  the 
unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  but  reprove  them  rather "  ;  their  practice  will  never 
afford  you  excuse  nor  exemption.  To  walk  with  God  is  praiseworthy,  though  none 
do  it  besides  thyself ;  and  to  walk  with  men  in  the  way  of  sin  is  dangerous,  though 
miUions  do  it  besides  thee.     4.  The  lesser  cities  imitated  the  greater.     Admah  and 


JVDE.  33 

Zeboim  followed  the  example  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  An  error  in  the  first  con- 
coction is  seldom  mended  ia  the  second.  When  the  first  sheet  is  done  off,  others 
are  printed  by  the  same  stamps.  Diodorus  Siculus  teUeth  us  of  a  people  in  Ethiopia, 
that  if  their  kings  halted,  they  would  maim  themselves  that  they  might  halt  like- 
wise. The  vices  of  them  in  place  and  power  are  authorised  by  their  example  and 
pass  for  virtues  ;  if  they  be  slight  in  the  use  of  ordinances,  it  will  be  taken  up  as  a 
piece  of  religion  by  inferiors  to  be  so  too.  5.  From  the  first  crime  here  specified, 
giving  themselves  over  to  fornication,  that  adulterous  uncleanness  doth  much  dis- 
please God.  When  they  were  given  over  to  fornication  they  were  given  over  to 
judgment.  (1)  This  is  a  sin  that  doth  not  only  defile  the  soul  but  the  body  (1  Cor. 
tI.  18).  It  is  a  wrong  to  the  body,  considered  either  as  our  "  vessel  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  4), 
or  as  "  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  If  you  consider  it  as  our 
vessel  or  instrument  for  natural  uses,  you  wrong  it  by  uncleanness — namely,  as  it 
destroyeth  the  health  of  the  body,  quencheth  the  vigour  of  it,  and  blasteth  the 
beauty,  and  so  it  is  self-murder.  If  you  consider  it  as  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
it  is  a  dishonour  to  the  body  to  make  it  a  channel  for  lust  to  pass  through.  Shall 
we  make  a  sty  of  a  temple  ?  (2)  It  brawneth  the  soul ;  the  softness  of  all  sensual 
pleasures  hardeneth  the  heart,  but  this  sin,  being  the  consummate  act  of  sensuality, 
much  more  (Hos.  iv.  11).  (3)  Next  to  the  body  and  soul  there  is  the  name,  now  it 
blotteth  the  name  (Prov.  vi.  33).  (4)  It  blasteth  the  estate  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  God  will 
judge  others,  but  surely  these,  and  that  remarkably  in  this  life.  (5)  This  doth 
exceedingly  pervert  the  order  of  human  societies  ;  Solomon  maketh  it  worse  than 
theft  (Prov.  vi.  29-32).  (6)  It  is  a  sin  usually  accompanied  with  impenitency — 
namely,  as  it  weareth  out  remorse  and  every  spark  of  good  conscience  (Prov.  xxii. 
14,  ii.  19  ;  Eccles.  vii.  26-28).  Beware  of  aU  tendings  that  way ;  do  not  soak  and 
steep  the  soul  in  pleasures.  Guard  the  senses,  cut  off  the  provisions  of  the  flesh, 
avoid  occasions,  be  employed.  6.  Again,  from  the  other  sin,  and  going  after  strange 
flesh,  observe,  sin  is  never  at  a  stay ;  first,  uncleanness,  and  then  given  over  to 
uncleanness,  and  then  strange  flesh.  When  a  stone  runneth  down  hill  it  stayeth 
not  till  it  cometh  to  the  bottom.  7.  The  wicked  Sodomites  were  not  only  burnt  up 
by  that  temporal  judgment,  but  cast  into  heU,  which  is  here  called  "  eternal  fire." 
The  scourges  of  conscience  that  we  meet  with  here  are  too  great  price  for  the  short 
pleasures  of  a  brutish  lust,  much  more  "the  worm  that  never  dleth,  the  fire  that 
shall  never  be  quenched."  8.  There  is  one  note  more,  and  that  is  from  that  clause, 
"  are  set  forth  for  an  example."  Observe  thence,  that  Sodom's  destruction  is  the 
world's  great  example.  You  wiU  say.  What  have  we  to  do  with  Sodom,  their  sina 
being  so  unnatural,  their  judgments  so  unusual  ?  (1)  As  to  their  sins,  I  inquire,  Are 
there  none  of  Sodom's  sins  amongst  us?  If  not  "going  after  strange  flesh,"  yet 
"fornication"  ;  if  not  fornication,  yet  "pride  and  idleness  and  fulness  of  bread  "? 
We  sin  against  more  light,  more  love,  &c.  (2)  As  to  the  judgments,  though  God 
doth  not  nowadays  smite  a  country  with  judgments  immediately  from  heaven,  yet 
His  displeasure  is  no  less  against  sin ;  and  it  not  the  same,  a  like  judgment,  one 
Tery  grievous,  may  come  upon  us.  (T.  Manton.)  The  extermination  of  sin: — L 
God's  hatred  of  sin  demonstbated  by  the  destruction  of  sinnebs.  The  punish- 
ment of  evil-doers  forms  a  large  portion  of  the  sacred  volume.  Sin  is  never 
unpunished  if  not  pardoned.  This  is  a  beneficent  as  weU  as  just  treatment.  The 
safety  of  moral  beings  is  thereby  secured.  II.  National  sins  visited  by  univebsaIi 
DESTETJCTION.  III.  SiN  MUST  BE  EXTERMINATED.  God  docs  dcstroy  Sin  by  recon- 
structing, and  He  reconstructs  the  order  of  society  by  destroying.  IV.  The  wabninci 
IS  THE  STRONGEST.     {T.  Davies,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  These  filthy  dreamers  defile  the  fiesh. — Filthy  dreamers: — I.  Soma 
interpret  this  literally  of  dreaming  in  sleep.  A  strong  inducement  hence  for 
every  one  to  keep  their  hearts  with  all  diligence  from  those  impure  thoughts  in  the 
day-time,  which  may  otherwise  make  them  filthy  dreamers  in  the  night,  and  when 
they  go  to  sleep  to  beseech  God  to  keep  the  key  of  their  imagination,  that  it  may  not 
run  out  to  dreaming  impurely.  H.  Others  interpret  it  metaphorically,  conceiving 
that  the  apostle,  in  caUing  these  seducers  dreamers  in  sleep,  compares  them  to  such. 
1.  These  seducers  were  spiritually  overwhelmed  in  a  deep,  sound  sleep  of  sin 
(Isa.  xxix.  10 ;  1  Thess.  v.  6).  2.  These  seducers  are  compared  to  dreamers  in  sleep 
in  regard  of  their  vain,  false,  empty  imaginations.  (1)  Sinners  delude  themselves 
in  dreaming  of  their  persons.  Dreaming  that  they  are  not  so  bad  as  others  because 
they  abstain  from  gross  abominations  (Luke  xviii.  11).  Dreaming  that  they  are  in 
a  good  and  happy  estate  before  God,  being  indeed  miserable  and  bad  (Rev.  iii.  17 ; 

C6 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

Gal.  vi.  3).      (2)  Sinners  delude  themselves  in  dreaming  concerning  their  actions 
that  they  are  good,  because  done  with  a  good  intention,  not  considering  that  a  work 
may  be  good  in  a  man's   own  eyes   and  the   issues   thereof  the  ways  of  death 
(2  Sam.  vi.  7;   Prov.  xvi.  25).      Lessons:     1.  Spiritual  judgments  are  the  sorest. 
Insensibleness  in  sin  and  self-delusion  were  judgments  which  made  these  seducers 
miserable ;  they  are  judgments  which   seize  upon   the   soul.      2.  AU  the  sinful 
sleepiness  of  saints  differs  much  from  that  of  the  wicked  (Cant.  v.  2).     3.  Self- 
soothing,  delusion,  flattering,  are  very  dangerous   and   destructive,  as   being  the 
foundation  of  the  wickedness  and  woe  of  these  seducers,  these  dreamers.     4.  It  is 
our  wisdom  to  take  heed  of  spiritual  sleeping  in  sin.   For  which  purpose — (1)  Make 
much  of  a  stirring  ministry  ;  (2)  Labour  for  a  fruitful  improvement  of  sufferings  ; 
(3)  Endeavour  for  a  tender,  trembling  heart  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  sohcitations 
of  sin  ;  (4)  Labour  for  faith  in  threatenings  ;  (5)  Vigorously  and  constantly  exercise 
thyself  in  godliness  ;  (6)  Keep  company  with  waking  Christiails.     (W.  Jenkyn,M.A.) 
Filthy  dreamers  and  defilers  of  the  flesh  and  evil  speakers  : — I.  From  that  "  filthy 
DREAMERS,"  note  that  the  erroneous  thoughts  of  wicked  men  are  but  a  dream.     1. 
Wicked  men  are  dreamers — (1)    In  regard  of  their  state  and  condition,  every  carnal 
man  is  in  a  state  of  a  "deep  sleep"  (Isa.  xxix.  10),  without  any  sense  of  danger.  (2) 
In  regard  of  the  suitableness  between  their  vain  thoughts  and  a  dream.     A  dream 
tickleth  with  a  false  delight,  and  deceiveth  with  a  vain  hope.      (3)    Tiekleth  with  a 
false  delight,  they  embrace  the  contentments  and  pleasures  of  the  world  instead  of 
the  true  riches.      (4)  Deceiveth  with  a  vain  hope  (Isa.  xxix.  7,  8).     Many  flatter 
themselves  with  fair  hopes  till  they  awake  in  flames,  but  then  all  is  gone.      (5) 
Take  heed,  then,  of  being  deceived  by  your  own  dreams  and  the  fictions  of  your  own 
brain ;  there  are  no  di'eams  so  foolish  as  those  we  dream  waking.     There  are  dreams 
in  point  of  hope ;  and  so — (a)  Some  wholly  mistake  in  the  object,  and  dream  of 
an   eternal    happiness  in    temporal   enjoyments   (Psa.   xUx.    11 ;    Luke   xii.   19 ; 
Bev.  xviii.  9).     (b)  Others  dream  of  attaining  the  end  without  using  the  means  ;  they 
live  in  sin,  and  yet  hope  to  die  comfortably  and  go  to  heaven.     Others  mistake  about 
the  means,  because  they  have  a  cold  form ;  they  are  apt  to  be  conceited  of  their 
spiritual  condition  and  estate  (Eev.  iii.  17).     If  you  would  not  dream  in  this  kind, 
examine  your  hearts  often ;  examination  is  like  a  rubbing  of  the  eyes  after  sleep. 
II.  From  that  "defile  the  flesh,"  observe  that  dreams  of  error  dispose  to  practices 
of  sin  and  uncleanness,  and  impurity  of  religion  is  usually  joined  with  unclearmess 
of  body  (Hosea  iv.  12,  13).     III.  Again,  observe  that  sin  is  a  defilement  :  itstaineth 
and  darkeneth  the  glory  of  a  man  (Matt.  xv.  20).   Desire  to  be  washed,  and  that 
thoroughly  (Psa.  li.  2).     IV.  Again  observe,  that  of  all  sins  the  sin  of  uncleanness 
is  most  defiling.     It  defileth  the  whole  man,  but  chiefly  the  body,  and  therefore  it  is 
said  they  defile  the  flesh.     It  staineth  the  soul  with  filthy  thoughts  (Matt.  xv.  20),  it 
staineth  the  name  (Prov.  vi.  33),  but  in  a  singular  manner  it  poUuteth  the  body 
{1  Cor.  vi.  18).     It  wasteth  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  body  (Prov.  v.  9-11), 
hindereth  our  serviceableness.     Are  not  your  beauty,  health,  strength,  concernments 
too  good  to  be  spent  upon  so  vile  an  interest?     V.  From  that  "despise  dominion." 
Observe  that  errors,  especially  such  as  tend  to  sensuality,  make  men  unruly.    Error 
taketh  off  the  dread  of  God,  and  sedition  the  dread  of  the  magistrate,  that  so  they 
may  more  freely  defile  the  flesh.     VI.  Again,  I  observe  from  the  same  clause,  that 
it  is  a  sin  to  despise  dominions.     For  it  is  here  charged  upon  these  seducers.     It  is 
a  sin,  because  it  is  against  the  injunctions  of  the  word  (Rom.  xiii.  1 ;  Titus  iii.  1). 
Again,  it  is  a  sin,  because  dominion  preserveth  human  societies.     VII.  The  last 
expression  is  that "  speak  evil  of  dignities,"  or  of  glories,  by  which  probably  Church 
oflicers  are  intended,  such  being  spoken  against  in  that  age  (3  John  10).      Note, 
there  is  a  respect  due  to  persons  invested  with  Church  power.     This  is  established 
by  God's  ordinance,  and  therefore   should  not   be   set  at  nought.     (T.  Manton.) 
Waking  dreamers  : — Hence  we  may  note  the  cause  why  so  few  entertain  the  doctrine 
of  the  gospel,  so  few  forsake  their  sins  and  turn  unto  God,  and  that  is  because  men 
are  dreamers.      As  first,  some  plead  that  they  were  never  book-learned,  they  could 
never  write  nor  read,  therefore  they  must  be  excused  in  their  ignorance  as  not  being 
bound  to  know  the  Word  of  God.     Secondly,  others  dream  that  because  they  have 
lived  thus  long  and  yet  had  never  any  such  cross  as  they  see  befall  others,  therefore 
they  are  most  happy  men,  and  God  loveth  them.     Thirdly,  others  have  learning  and 
knowledge,   and   begin   to   dream  that  therefore  they  want  nothing;    they  bless 
themselves  in  their  naked  knowledge,  and  never  have  care  in  their  hearts  to  receive 
Christ.     Fourthly,  others  are  profane  and  dream  that  the  Master  will  not  come  yet ; 
God  will  not  yet  call  them  ;  they  shall  have  time  enough  to  repent  in,  for  they  crave 


JUDE.  35 

but  one  hour  on  their  death-beds.     Lastly,  it  is  a  common  dream  amongst  men  that 
the  promise  of  eternal  life  is  but  a  dream,  and  so  many  make  but  a  dream  of  the 
whole  Word  of  God  and  all  religion.      Even  so  men  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel, 
but  as  a  dream,  seeing  they  can  hold  it  in  opinion,  but  never  endeavour  to  reform 
their  Uves  by  it;  but  such  dreams  disappoint  men  commonly  of  salvation.     The 
most  powerful  ministry  shall  little  prevail  so  long  as  men  come  with  their  hearts 
full  fraught  with  their  carnal  imaginations  and  with  such  heaviness  of  spirit.     {W. 
Ferkins.)         Unchastity  : — 1.  Sins  of  carnal  uncleanness  are  peculiarly  against  the 
body  or  flesh  of  men  (1  Cor.  vi.  18).     The  body  not  only  concurs,  but  suffers  by  this 
sin  more  than  any  other,  both  by  dishonour  and  diseases.     (1)    Dishonour,  in  the 
staining  and  defiling  that  noble  piece  of  workmanship,  curiously  wrought  by  the 
finger  of  God  Himself.      (2)  By  diseases,  this  lust  being  not  only  a  conscience- 
wasting  but  a  carcase- wasting  enemy.     Sensual  men  kill  that  which  they  pretend 
most  to  gratify.     2.  Sins  of  unchastity  are  peculiarly  defiling.     All  sin  in  general  is 
called  uncleanness,  but  fornication  is  particularly  to  be  branded  with  that  name. 
There  is  a  peculiar  opposition  between  fornication  and  sanctification  (1  Thess.  iv.  3). 
The  saints  of  God   should  have  a  peculiar  abhorrence  of  this  sin  (Eph.  v.  3 ; 
2  Cor.  vii.  1).     The  body  is  the  garment  of  the  soul,  and  a  clean  heart  wiU  preserve 
a  pure  body.     3.  The  love  of  lust  makes  men  erroneous  and  seducers.     They  who 
make  no  conscience  of  ordering  their  conversation  will  soon  be  heretical.     These 
seducers  who  opposed  the  faith  were  unclean  and  flesh-defilers.     If  the  light  be  too 
much  in  men's  eyes,  they  will  either  shut  then-  eyes  or  draw  the  curtains.     Lusts  will 
pervert  the  light  which  is  brought  in,  making  men  instead  of  bringing  their  crooked 
lives  to  the  straight  rule,  to  bring  the  straight  rule  to  their  crooked  lives  ;  and  instead 
of  bringing  their  hearts  to  the  Scripture,  to  bring  the  Scripture  to  their  hearts.    God 
in  judgment  gives  up  such  who  will  not  see  to  an  inability  to  discern  what  they 
ought,  and  to  a  reprobate  mind ;  they  who  will  not  be  scholars  of  truth  are  by  God 
justly  deUvered  up  to  be  masters  of  error.     {W.  Jenkyn,M.A.)        Despise  dominion. 
— Rulers  not  to  he  despised : — Eebellion  of  all  sins  showeth  the  corruptions  of  our 
nature,  yea,  rebellion  and  contempt  of  government  is  unnatural,  for  God  hath  made 
a  chiefty  in  all  things,  and  everything  keepeth  his  place.      Among  the  angels  there 
be  Cherubim  and  Seraphim ;  among  the  planets  the  sun  is  the  chief,  and  the  rest 
borrow  their  hght  from  him ;  among  the  fowls,  the  eagle ;  among  the  beasts,  the 
lion ;  among  the  serpents,  the  basilisk ;   among  the  fishes,  the  whale ;  among  the 
wethers  there  is  a  leader,  a  bell-wether  ;  among  the  cranes  there  is  one  as  a  captain 
that  goeth  before  the  rest ;  in  a  flock  there  is  dux  gregis,  a  leader ;  in  an  hive  of  bees 
there  is  a  master-bee  ;  the  very  pismyres  have  there  governor ;  and  the  grasshoppers 
go  forth  by  bands.    And  hath  not  God  made  a  chief,  a  ruler  among  men  ?     God 
forbid,  therefore,  that  we   should   despise  government.     Promotion   and  honour 
Cometh  neither  from  the  east,  nor  from  the  west,  nor  from  the  south,  but  it  is  God 
that  lifteth  up  one  and  puUeth  down  another.    And  God  hath  famously  revenged 
this  sin,  as  ever  any.    Absalom  rebelled  against  his  father,  but  God's  vengeance 
overtook  him,  for  he  was  hanged.     (S.  Otes.)        Despising  dominion : — 1.  What  we 
are  to  understand  by  "  dominion."     The  word  in  the  original  is  the  same  with  that 
in  2  Pet.  ii.  10,  translated  "  government,"  and  means  the  civil  magistrate.     2.   What 
is  meant  by  "  despising  dominion."     These  seducers  did  not  cast  off  governing  so 
as  to  make  it  cease ;  that  was  not  in  their  power ;  but  in  their  judgment,  desires, 
insinuations,  they  laboured  to  make  it  accounted  void.     3.  Upon  what  ground  the 
apostle  condemns  them  for  despising  dominions.     (1)  This  was  a  sin  against  an 
ordinance  of  God  (Prov.  viii.  15  ;  Eom.  xiii.  1).     (2)  It  was  a  sin  against  the  welfare 
and  happiness  of  the  public.      (3)  By  this  despising  of  government  they  were  in  an 
especial  manner   their   own   enemies,    and   sinned   against   their  own  happiness 
(Prov.  xxiv.  22 ;   Eccl.  x.  8).     Lessons  :     1.  How  provident  is  God  for  man's  peace 
and  welfare.     2.  God  is  highly  provoked  by  sin,  when  He  suffers  magistrates  to  be 
burdensome  to  a  people,  and  dominion  to  be  abused;  when  their  deliverers  and 
saviours  become  their  destroyers  (Prov.  xxviii.  2).     3.  God  is  much  seen  in  causing 
men's  subjection  to  magistrates.  .  4.  The  power  given  by  God  to  magistrates  should 
be  improved  for  the  Giver.     5.  The  enemies  of  godliness  soon  become  opposers  of  civil 
dominion.     They  who  fear  not  God,  will  not  be  afraid  to  "  speak  evil  of  dignities." 
6.  Christianity  does  not  destroy  but  strengthen  magistracy.     7.  Lust  opposes  restraint, 
is  an  enemy  to  dominion,  loves  not  to  be  bridled.     {W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9,  10.    Yet  Michael  the  archangel,  when  contending  with  the  devil. — 
Archangel  versus  devil : — We  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  interview  between  Michael 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

and  Satan  was  communicated  to  St.  Jude  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  such  a  novel 
revelation  would  have  rather  startled  his  readers  than  illustrate  the  truth  he  was 
setting  before  them.  To  treat  it  as  a  fable  without  foundation  in  fact  would  have 
weakened  the  argument  of  the  apostle.  Some  think  that  the  reference  is  to  Zech. 
iii.  1. — "  And  he  shewed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest  standing  before  the  Lord,  and 
Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  him.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  The 
Lord  rebuke  thee,  0  Satan,"  &c.  But  there  was  no  reference  then  made  to  the 
burial  of  Moses,  and  the  similarity  in  the  exi^ression  is  too  slender  a  foundation  to 
connect  the  two.  Origen  mentions  an  apocryphal  book  called  'Ava\»;»//ic  row 
Mioffiwg,  which  was  extant  in  his  time.  That  the  apostle  quoted  from  that  book  is 
not  improbable,  although  there  is  nothing  in  the  narrative  before  us  to  warrant  the 
belief.  Then  there  is  the  other  supposition  that  among  the  traditions  held  by  the 
Jews  there  was  one  relative  to  a  controversy  between  the  two  chiefs  of  the  opposing 
angels  about  the  burial  of  Moses.  As  these  traditions  were  largely  taught  in  those 
days,  it  may  be  that  the  apostle  simply  reads  a  lesson  to  the  false  teachers  from 
their  own  teaching.  They  brought  railing  accusations  against  the  apostles,  which 
even  an  archangel  dared  not,  as  the  higher  and  final  judgment  awaits  all.  The 
apostle  therefore  conveys  but  one  lesson  by  his  reference  to  the  dispute  about  the 
body  of  Moses,  viz.,  that  the  final  judgment  is  reserved  in  God's  own  keeping.  1. 
The  text  teaches  that  there  are  two  orders  of  spirits  in  conflict  concerning  matters 
affecting  the  human  race.  Not  only  angels  are  ministering  to  the  necessities  of  the 
saints,  and  devils  using  influence  to  destroy  them,  but  the  corner  of  the  veil  is  lifted 
up  in  the  text,  that  we  may  mentally  see  the  battlefield  on  which  these  power- 
ful spirits  meet  to  contend  for  their  side.  The  fact  administers  to  the  strength  of 
our  faith.  2.  The  text  teaches  that  controversy  must  be  confined  to  its  proper 
limits.  Michael  was  right,  but  he  did  not  go  further  than  controversy.  However 
certain  one  may  feel  that  he  is  contending  for  the  truth,  he  must  not  utter  impre- 
cations on  the  head  of  his  adversary,  3.  The  text  teaches  that  judgment  belongs 
to  the  Lord  alone.  The  term  rebuke  implies  far  more  than  correction  or  admoni- 
tion :  it  means  to  censure.  Here  we  take  it  to  indicate  that  God  only  has  the  power 
of  final  decision.  Omniscience,  impartiaUty,  and  power  belong  to  Him.  4.  The 
text  teaches  also  another  valuable  lesson,  viz.,  that  the  strongest  side  of  controversy 
is  an  appeal  to  God.  Bring  your  adversary  into  the  presence  of  his  Maker  and 
leave  him  in  the  Divine  balance.  (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  Aversion  to  religion  and  iU 
tource  : — The  sentence  immediately  preceding  represents  the  persons  described  in 
it  as  defiled  with  gross  immoraUties,  as  despising  the  dominion  that  would  have 
restrained  them,  and  treating  in  contemptuous  language  the  most  dignified  of  the 
powers  which  had  been  set  up  in  defence  of  purity  and  good  order.  The  text  is 
meant  to  apply,  more  or  less  directly,  to  aU  these  views.  But  you  will  not  fail  to 
notice  that  it  begins  with  what  in  the  previous  statement  is  last  mentioned,  and 
exposes  the  crime  of  "  evil-speaking,"  when  the  mahgnancy  of  its  revilings  is 
turned  against  the  sacred  institutions  of  moral  authority.  And  surely  it  may  bo 
allowed  that  this  end  is  answered  with  a  peculiar  degree  of  force,  owing  to  the 
extreme  case  of  forbearance  which  the  text  sets  before  us.  It  represents  two  spirits 
of  high  order,  but  of  opposite  character,  engaged  in  controversy.  The  one,  in  his 
designs,  ever  actuated  by  a  base  and  malevolent  principle.  The  other,  the  special 
messenger  and  servant  of  God,  ever  employed  in  advancing  the  purposes  of  truth 
and  righteousness.  Wrong  is  altogether  on  the  one  side,  iiight,  without  a  sinister 
motive  to  tarnish  it,  is  altogether  on  the  other.  And  in  setting  these  before  us,  the 
apostle  would  lead  us  to  mark  the  quality  of  that  resistance  alone,  which,  even  in 
these  circumstances,  the  pure  spirit  felt  himself  justified  in  making.  Was  it  dis- 
tinguished by  violence,  by  the  opprobrious  and  furious  language  of  rage  ?  Was  the 
accusation  (so  justly  to  be  brought  by  the  archangel)  a  railing  accusation  ?  The 
reverse  in  every  respect.  In  accusing,  he  mixed  not  abuse  with  his  just  condem- 
nation. His  reverence  for  God  and  his  regard  to  the  solemnity  and  holiness  of  truth 
kept  him  back  from  it.  His  cause  was  good  and  required  not  adventitious  support. 
His  own  nature  was  pure,  and  would  have  been  essentially  defiled  had  the  evil 
passions  in  another  been  resisted  by  the  indulging  of  similar  passions  in  himself. 
Above  all — God  is  the  Judge  "  unto  whom  vengeance  belongeth  " — and  therefore  to 
God  the  appeal  must  be  made.  Hence,  by  every  motive,  the  "  archangel "  abstained 
from  bringing  the  "  railing  accusation  against  "  his  adversary.  Now  the  apostle's 
peculiar  argument,  as  introduced  in  application  to  the  persons  whom  he  had  such 
cause  for  reprehending,  stands  thus : — If  no  boisterous  or  reviling  language  was  em- 
ployed in  controversy  even  with  a  fallen  and  perverse  spirit — the  acknowledged  foe  of 


JUDE.  37 

God  and  goodness — it  was  said  simply,  yet  still  with  dignity,  "  The  Lord  rebuke 
thee  "  — if  thus  the  archangel  committed  himself  to  God  and  left  the  final  decision  to 
be  passed  by  the  supreme  authority ;  in  such  a  cause,  and  with  such  an  adversary,  if 
"  Michael"  thus  proceeded,  say  how  aggravated  must  be  the  guilt  which  "rails 
against "  sacred  things  themselves  and  viUfies  all  whose  influence  is  employed  for 
their  support  ?  It  has  been  found,  in  the  greater  number  of  instances,  that  where 
men  carrying  on  any  controversy  are  fully  possessed  of  their  subject,  and  have  the 
clearest  knowledge  of  its  nature,  they  will  have  a  coUectedness  proportioned  to  their 
knowledge.  This  remark  may  form  the  tie  by  which  we  may  associate  the  tenth 
with  the  ninth  verse.  The  persons  who  are  there  rebuked  were  "  speaking  evil  of 
those  things  which  they  knew  not."  Having  their  understandings  darkened 
they  saw  not  the  beauties  of  righteousness.  Becoming,  through  their  immoral 
lives,  obdurate  to  the  sense  of  what  was  pure,  they  brought  themselves  to  contem- 
plate iniquity  without  aversion.  Having  their  inclinations  turned  in  a  direction 
the  opposite  of  what  the  law  required  them  to  foUow,  they  gathered  hostility  to  the 
curb  of  the  commandment.  By  persisting  in  criminal  courses  they  formed  in  them- 
selves an  utter  disrelish  of  the  habits  of  godliness.  In  this  state  they  "  spoke  evil " 
against  its  sanctions.  The  dominion  of  civil  power  they  stigmatised  as  tyranny. 
The  dominion  of  the  religious  principle  as  the  trick  of  priesthood.  The  dominion 
of  conscience  as  prolonging  the  sway  of  superstition  and  perpetuating  the  influence 
of  childish  terrors.  But  they  "  spoke  evil  of  those  things  which  they  knew  not." 
How  otherwise,  except  in  a  state  of  the  grossest  ignorance,  could  they  have  ventured 
to  deduce  from  the  blessed  doctrines  of  grace  the  occasions,  the  incentives,  or  the 
cloak  for  immorality  ?  Is  there  one  portion  of  the  Christian  plan  of  salvation  that 
does  not  bear,  with  the  mightiest  influence  of  moral  power,  against  the  love  and 
practice  of  iniquity  ?  Can  there  be  a  purer  law  than  what  the  gospel  reveals  for 
enforcing  righteousness  ?  Above  all,  what  motives  to  righteousness  are  derived  from 
the  Cross  of  Christ !  I  ask,  then,  if  ib  these  circumstances  it  proceeds  not  from 
ignorance  the  most  culpable,  that  any  should  venture  to  draw  from  the  doctrine  of 
Divine  grace  an  inference  which  is  even  in  the  slightest  measure  favourable  to  sin  ? 
— And  yet  the  persons  whom  St.  Jude  was  confuting  did  so.  Surely,  therefore, 
they  were  "  speaking  evil  of  things  they  knew  not,"  or  of  things  the  nature  and 
tendency  of  which  they  refused  to  acknowledge.  But  still,  I  must  bring  you  back 
once  more — and  in  doing  so  I  would  connect  the  last  clause  of  ver.  10  with  all 
that  precedes  it — to  the  real  source  of  this  perverseness.  The  origin  of  the  whole, 
we  must  repeat,  was  moral  pollution.  The  speaking  evU  of  the  sacred  things,  of 
which  these  men  refused  to  acknowledge  the  sanction  and  the  use,  arose  from  their 
"  corruption  in  those  very  things  "  with  which  they  were  familiarly  and  fully  con- 
versant. They  knew  (led  as  the  inferior  creatures  are  by  instinctive  propensities) 
the  use  of  the  appetites.  "  The  natural  man,"  according  to  the  language  of  St. 
Paul,  is  thoroughly  qualified  to  "  discern  "  that.  But  among  all  who  are  "  unre- 
newed in  the  spirit  of  their  minds,"  and  to  whom  consequently  a  spiritual  discern- 
ment belongs  not,  how  is  it  that  the  objects  of  this  natural  knowledge  are  most 
frequently  employed  ?  Are  they  not  of tener  abused  than  rightly  employed  ?  The 
desires  and  propensities  of  nature  are  wilfully  corrupted.  The  lawful  desire  of 
personal  good  degenerates  into  selfishness.  The  allowable  desire  of  human  esteem 
swells  into  the  insatiable  longing  after  "  the  praise  of  men."  The  sensuahties  of 
the  world  are  chosen  as  the  chief  good.  The  vitiated  heart  grows  impatient  under 
restraint.  By  a  thousand  acts  of  hostility  does  the  "  carnal  "  mind  show  itself  to 
be  "enmity  to  God,"  tiU  the  foe  of  the  "Cross  of  Christ"  chooses  the  lowest 
desires  as  his  ruling  divinities,  glories  in  his  shame,  and  is  at  last  altogether  sunk 
in  earthly  things.  Thus  it  took  place  with  the  persons  whom  the  apostle  was  called 
to  withstand.  Having  corrupted  themselves  in  what  they  knew  the  use  of,  by 
means  of  their  natural  senses,  they  were  soon  led  to  oppose  those  things  of  which 
they  had  no  spiritual  discernment,  or  for  which,  at  least,  they  had  no  relish — and 
hence  they  were  prepared  to  "  despise  the  dominion  of  righteousness  "  and  to 
"  speak  evil  "  with  "  railing  accusations  "  of  the  supporters  of  that  dominion  how- 
ever dignified  their  office  and  venerable  their  authority.  Would  that  the  condem- 
nation which  the  Epistle  conveys  were  considered  by  the  multitudes  who  still  labour 
to  bring  contempt  upon  religion  and  morality,  whose  hatred  to  the  Christian  truth 
is  even  greater  than  their  opposition,  and  whose  invective  is  as  coarse  as  their 
arguments  are  weak !  Mark  the  bearings  of  their  character — their  likings  and  their 
aversions — in  order  that  you  may  be  convinced  how  utterly  unworthy  of  reception 
are  the  objections  which  they  utter  against  the  purity  and  the  majesty  and  the  use- 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

fulness  of  Christian  truth.  Fix  in  your  minds  this  principle — that  aversion  to  so 
precious  a  system  of  moral  "  dominion  "  as  Christianity  is,  arises,  and  must  arise 
chiefly    from    "  corruptions "    of   the    heart.      (W.    Midr,    D.D.)  But   these 

speak  evil  of  those  things  which  they  know  not. — Ignorant  speech : — 1.  None  are 
60  ready  to  speak  as  the  ignorant.  2.  Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  opposing  the  ways 
of  God.  Did  men  either  see  the  deformity  of  sin  or  the  beauty  of  hoUness,  they 
would  neither  delight  in  the  former  nor  dislike  the  latter.  3.  How  great  is  the  sin 
of  speaking  evil  of  those  things  the  worth  whereof  we  do  know !  All  sin  against 
light  borders  on  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  We  should  speak  against 
known  evils,  and  for  what  we  know  to  be  good.  5.  Corrupt  affections  blear  and 
darken  the  judgment.  He  who  will  be  disobedient  in  heart  shall  soon  have  a  dull 
head.  6.  It  is  our  duty  to  forbear  speaking  against  anything  which  we  understand 
not.  (W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.)  Scejiticism  corrupting  itself : — There  are  few  who  are 
not  desirous  of  arriving  at  an  accurate  conception  of  their  personal  appearance 
generally,  and  more  specially  of  the  lineaments  which  distinguish  the  face  or  coun- 
tenance. When  such  a  view  as  this  is  presented  to  our  thoughts  we  may  very 
appropriately  note  it  as  a  matter  of  regret  that  there  is  not  more  anxiety  to  reach 
the  means  of  forming  correct  notions  of  the  true  characteristics  and  condition  of 
our  immortal  part,  or  imperishable  souls.  Beauty  or  deformity  affecting  the  person 
or  body  is  a  very  small  matter  compared  with  what  beautifies  or  deforms  the  never- 
dying  spirit.  What  special  medium  ought  to  be  used  for  obtaining  such  portraiture 
is  a  problem  easily  solved,  for  Jehovah  hath  provided  a  looking-glass  for  the 
purpose  ;  and  that  looking-glass  is  His  own  imperishable  Word.  I.  The  charge  as 
here  preferred  against  the  system  lies  in  the  two  statements,  that  it  leads  men  to 
speak  evil  of  things  which  they  know  not ;  and  to  corrupt  themselves  in  what  they 
know  in  common,  or  naturally,  with  brute  beasts.  These  were  at  least  conjoined  in 
the  parties  herein  condemned ;  and  we  are  safe  in  holding  it  as  all  but  universally 
true  that  wherever  there  is  a  thorough  spirit  of  infidelity  there  will  be  found  in 
combination  less  or  more  of  the  evil  speaking  and  the  evil  acting  thus  denounced. 
Many  begin  with  indulgence  in  wild  infidel  speculations,  and  then  proceed  to  the 
indulgence  of  wild  infidel  practices.  Or,  reversing  this  order,  they  give  themselves 
up  to  less  or  more  profligacy,  and  then  systematically  adopt  atheistic  theories,  for 
the  sake  of  helping  to  quiet  the  remonstrances  of  their  own  conscience.  In  the 
one  case  the  mind  is  made  the  instrument  of  corrupting  the  body,  not  less  than 
itself ;  and  in  the  other  the  body,  through  its  appetites  and  passions,  is  made  the 
instrument  of  aiding  to  corrupt  the  mind.  If  the  intellectual  and  moral  faculties 
get  debauched  by  the  adoption  of  infidel  sentiments,  these  may  soon  lend  their  aid, 
to  a  ruinous  extent,  in  promoting  the  strength  of  the  animal  passions ;  and  then 
the  miserable  victims  may  fully  realise  the  striking  sentiment  of  the  text,  in 
corrupting  themselves  in  what  they  know  naturally  as  brute  beasts.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  the  gross  animal  or  brutish  passions  take  the  lead,  every  faculty  of  the 
soul  may  be  reduced  to  a  state  of  utter  degradation.  It  is  said  of  the  Lord 
Eochester,  who  was  so  well  known  for  a  time  as  a  prominent  sceptic  and  libertine, 
that  as  a  prodigal  son,  after  he  had  come  to  himself,  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the 
Bible  and  emphatically  remarked,  "  The  only  grand  objection  to  this  book  is  a  bad 
life."  A  bad  life  is,  indeed,  blasphemy  reduced  to  practice ;  but,  as  already 
intimated,  a  bad  life  is  sure  of  conducting  to  the  acceptance  of  more  and  more 
theoretical  and  systematic  infidelity ;  and  therefore,  as  a  natural  consequence, 
must  lead  its  victims  to  speak  more  and  more  "  evil  of  those  things  which  they 
know  not."  Hence  in  seeking  to  put  you  on  your  guard  against  the  encroach- 
ments of  anything  like  religious  scepticism,  we  are  more  than  justified  in  bidding 
you,  were  it  for  this  reason  alone,  avoid  all  kinds  of  sinful  indulgence — all 
whereby  you  may  thus  corrupt  yourselves.  II.  Although  it  is  admitted  that  there 
have  been  false  teachers — teachers  of  very  erroneous  doctrines — and  very  wild 
speculators  otherwise,  against  whom  no  heavy  charge  could  be  made  as  to 
immorahty;  it  is  nevertheless  true  of  rejectors  and  impugners  generally  of  Reve- 
lation, that,  going  the  length  of  speaking  evil  of  those  things  they  know  not, 
they  do  not  stop  there,  but  proceed  to  corrupt  themselves  in  what  they  know 
naturally  as  brute  beasts.  Let  it  be  noted  as  a  very  striking  proof  of  this  that 
in  the  Middle  Ages,  as  they  are  called,  and  towards  the  beginning  of  the 
Reformation,  the  morals  of  the  popish  clergy  themselves  were  in  the  most  corrupt 
state,  when  their  false  and  ruinous  teaching  was  as  then  the  least  unchecked.  At 
the  time  when  they  took  full  and  unlimited  scope  in  teaching  the  Scripturally 
denounced  devil-doctrine  of  forbidding  to  marry,  they  were  never  more  than  then 


JUDE.  39 

given  up  to  licentiousness ;  so  that  whilst  in  setting  themselves  in  opposition  to 
God's  Word,  they  were  speaking  evil  of  things  they  knew  not,  they  were  in  what 
they  knew  naturally  as  brute  beasts  corrupting  themselves,  and  to  a  fearful 
extent.  By  little  short  of  daring  challenges  to  high  Heaven  even,  they  profanely 
advocated,  as  a  cover  for  their  libertinism,  that  in  priests  or  any  other  ecclesiastics 
concubinage  was  holier  than  marriage!  It  is  often  for  the  express  purpose  of 
reaching  such  acting,  and  seeming  to  have  an  excuse  for  it,  that  false  or  infidel 
Bentiments  are  adopted,  just  as  Mahomet— the  false  prophet — added  an  additional 
chapter  to  the  Koran,  when  he  meant  to  sin  farther  by  adding  another  wife  to 
those  he  already  had.  Much  in  this  style  Scriptureless  speculators  try  to  make  a 
new  sceptical  chapter  to  themselves,  that  it  may  be  used  as  a  ladder  whereby  they 
may  reach  some  forbidden  fruit.  Conscience,  they  find,  requires  some  little 
bribing  to  quiet  its  remonstrances,  in  respect  of  the  sensual  course  they  wish  to 
pursue ;  and  thus  far  they  prepare  the  way  by  putting  a  new  chapter  or  a  new 
verse  into  their  seLf-revealed  speculative  Bible,  or  infidel  chapter.  We  thus  discern 
one  of  the  causes  leading  to  the  ignorant  speaking  about  the  truths  of  God 
referred  to  in  the  text :  and  another,  which  is  as  fruitful  of  mischief,  lies  directly 
in  pride  of  intellect,  or  the  supreme  conceit  men  are  apt  to  have  of  their  own 
supposed  superior  wisdom  and  discernment.  The  principle  so  much  acted  on 
through  this  species  of  intellectual  conceit,  that  nothing  can  well  be  accepted  or 
believed  save  it  be  thoroughly  understood,  if  pushed  to  its  full  logical  consequences, 
would  leave  little  to  be  accepted  at  all,  since  there  is  less  or  more  of  mystery  in 
everything,  and  which  no  human  being  can  reach  and  comprehend.  To  the 
atheistic  materiahst  matter  is  his  god,  but  yet  he  does  not  understand  this  his  own 
god.  No  wonder  then,  since  that  which  he  daily  sees,  and  handles,  and  lives  upon, 
gets  after  all  so  much  beyond  his  comprehension,  he  should  find  something  greatly 
transcending  aU  his  powers,  in  attempting  to  comprehend  the  nature  of  the 
uncreated  and  eternal  existence  of  the  Supreme.  But  what  is  more  specially 
noticeable  and  worthy  of  our  serious  consideration  is  the  fact  that  very  often  the 
loudest  and  most  persistent  declaimers  against  Kevelation  are  not  merely  in  much 
ignorance  with  regard  to  its  general  spirit,  but  even  of  the  very  letter  of  its  contents. 
Sometimes  what  they  seem  to  know  of  these  has  not  been  acquired  by  closely  ' 
examining  the  sacred  page  itself,  but  from  their  taking  up  and  retailing  what  infidel 
writers  before  them  had  stated  in  order  to  condemn  and  ridicule.  It  is  of  the 
highest  importance  to  notice  that  the  Scriptures  very  frequently  allude  in  one  form 
or  another  to  man's  tendency  to  fall  into  error  and  consequent  danger,  through  the 
conceit  he  may  have  of  himself  or  mental  powers,  and  hence  justly  says,  "  He  that 
trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool."  Nor  is  any  one  more  liable  to  exemplify  this 
than  the  mere  sciolist,  or  superficially  learned.  It  is  even  very  frequently  obtrusively 
illustrated  by  parties  who  may  be  said  to  have  scarcely  any  learning  or  knowledge 
at  all — for  oft  they  pretend  to  be  oracles  of  wisdom — and  truly  may  the  Spirit 
say  of  any  such  an  one,  as  in  speaking  by  Paul,  "  If  a  man  think  himself  to  be 
Bomething,  when  he  is  nothing,  he  deceiveth  himself."  Mere  natural  or  unassisted 
human  reason  will  not,  as  thus  so  clearly  stated,  lead  any  one  to  receive  the 
things  of  God.  Left  simply  to  its  own  resources,  and  without  any  superior 
controlling  or  guiding  power,  it  is  certain  to  proceed  in  speaking  evil  of  them, 
but  neither  to  intelligently  or  spiritually  discern  their  true  character,  or  receive 
them  as  principles  of  action.  If,  instead  of  Divine  Kevelation,  or  "  the  things  of 
God,"  men  take  as  their  text-books  such  wretched  infidel  productions  as  Paine's 
"Age  of  Eeason,"  we  must  look  for  the  reproduction  of  Paine's  ribaldry  and  pro- 
fligacies ;  and  hence  the  sad  realisation  of  the  black  picture  furnished  in  our 
text — speaking  evil  of  those  things  which  they  know  not,  and  what  they  know 
naturally  as  brute  beasts,  in  those  things  corrupting  themselves.  (J.  Allan.) 
Abuse  of  natural  knowledge  : — There  be  three  kinds  of  knowledge  incident  unto  the 
creature.  1.  Natural  knowledge,  arising  from  the  instinct  of  nature  common  to 
man  and  beast,  and  consisting  in  the  senses  of  sight,  taste,  touching,  &c.,  by 
the  benefit  whereof  the  beast  itself  can  discern  what  is  food  fit  for  itself,  and 
what  is  not ;  what  is  profitable,  and  what  is  hurtful  for  it ;  unto  which  is  joined 
a  natural  appetite,  by  the  benefit  of  which  the  creature  can  choose  or  refuse 
his  food  and  meat  in  season.  2.  The  second  is  reasonable  knowledge,  proper  to 
man,  and  is  nothing  else  but  the  light  of  understanding,  whereby  he  reacheth 
far  higher,  and  discerneth  meat,  drink,  apparel,  and  rest,  to  be  God's  good 
gifts,  and  knoweth  the  civil  use  of  them  ;  with  the  which  is  joined  election  of 
will,  whereby  he  can  choose  or  refuse  the  civil  or  uncivil,  honest  or  dishonest  use 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

of  them.  3.  The  third  is  spiritual  knowledge,  not  proceeding  either  from 
natural  instinct  or  reason  itself,  but  from  the  enlightenment  of  the  spirit  of 
God,  and  it  hath  sundry  fruits.  First,  it  enableth  men  to  know  these  things  in 
their  right  causes,  as  that  these  gifts  of  meats,  drinks,  and  such  like  proceed 
from  God,  not  as  he  is  God  of  nature  only,  but  as  by  grace  in  Christ,  so  they 
become  pledges  of  His  special  mercies.  Secondly,  this  knowledge  causeth  men  to 
know  them  in  the  due  measure  of  their  goodness  and  excellency,  rightly  discerning 
them  from  spiritual  blessings,  so  as  the  heart  shall  not  be  set  upon  them  in  the 
first  place,  but  upon  the  other  as  of  far  higher  esteem.  Thirdly,  it  instructeth  men 
in  the  right  use  of  them,  namely,  when  it  worketh  this  persuasion  in  their  hearts, 
that  till  their  persons  please  God,  they  can  never  use  them  well.  What  is  the  thing, 
then,  condemned  in  these  seducers?  The  sin  condemned  is,  that  in  the  use  of  the 
creatures  of  God  they  are  not  guided  by  reasonable,  much  less  this  spiritual  know- 
ledge ;  but  only  by  nature,  sense,  and  appetite,  as  the  beast  is.  Secondly,  from  the 
reprehension  we  are  taught  to  labour  for  spiritual  knowledge,  whereby  we  might  be 
led  into  the  right  use  of  these  temporal  things ;  for  then  and  not  before  shall  we  use 
them  as  pledges  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ.  Thirdly,  in  that  they  are  said  to  be 
guided  only  as  the  beast  which  is  without  reason,  that  is,  by  nature,  sense,  and 
appetite  ;  note  the  practice  of  the  devil  which  is  to  keep  men  in  their  natural 
knowledge,  and  will  not  suffer  them  to  attain  to  that  which  is  spiritual ;  yea,  and 
which  is  more,  he  corrupteth  also  that  natural  knowledge  which  men  have.  The 
second  point  is  the  sin  itself,  and  property  of  it — "In  those  things  they  corrupt 
themselves."  This  sin  of  intemperance  causeth  men  in  the  abuse  of  meat,  drink, 
and  apparel,  to  corrupt  themselves ;  here,  then,  are  two  things  to  be  spoken  of, 
wherein  the  whole  nature  of  intemperance  is  sufficiently  comprised.  First,  of  the 
abuse  of  the  creatures  ;  secondly,  of  his  corruption  that  thus  abuseth  them.  Con- 
cerning the  former,  the  abuse  of  the  creatures  is  four  ways :  first  in  excess,  when 
men  use  them  beyond  their  calling,  or  that  which  nature  requireth.  Secondly,  in 
curiosity,  when  men  are  not  content  with  ordinary  meat,  drink,  apparel,  but  devise 
new  fashions  of  apparel,  and  new  kinds  of  ways  of  stirring  up  and  whetting  of 
appetite.  Thirdly,  in  affection,  when  men  so  addict  themselves  to  meats  and 
drinks,  as  they  cannot  be  without  them.  Fourthly,  in  time,  when  these  good 
creatures  are  used  unreasonably  (Eccles.  x.  16 ;  Isa.  v.  11).  The  second  point  is, 
how  intemperate  persons  in  these  things  corrupt  themselves  ;  namely,  four  ways  : 
first,  in  regard  of  their  bodies,  upon  which  by  their  sin  of  intemperance  they  call 
sundry  sicknesses,  yea,  and  hasten  their  death.  Secondly,  they  deface  God's 
image,  making  themselves  worse  than  the  beasts  themselves.  Thirdly,  they  destroy 
their  souls;  for  no  drunkard  or  riotous  person  shall  inherit  heaven  (1  Cor.  3). 
Fourthly,  they  overthrow  their  families  in  wasting  their  substance  to  the  main- 
taining of  their  intemperance,  and  so  bring  ruin  to  the  places  where  they 
live.  {W.  Perkins.)  The  sin  of  ignorant  railing  : — As  fire  lieth  not  long  in 
the  stubble  or  in  tne  flax,  but  the  flame  breaketh  out,  so  hatred  lieth  not  long  in 
these  men's  hearts,  but  breaketh  out  in  evil  speeches,  and  many  times.  They  will 
speak  evil  of  things  they  know  not.  As  an  image  is  not  seen  in  water  that  is 
troubled,  no  more  is  truth  in  a  mind  that  is  malicious,  but  it  sendeth  forth  with 
violence  all  manner  of  evil  speakings.  Yet  the  world  is  as  full  of  evil  speakers  as 
Nilus  of  crocodiles,  as  Sodom  of  sulphur,  and  Egypt  of  lice.  Can  the  wound  be 
cured,  so  long  as  the  iron  remain  in  it  ?  Can  the  iron  be  cold,  so  long  as  it  is  in 
the  smith's  forge  ?  Can  the  river  cease  running  so  long  as  the  fountain  floweth  ? 
And  can  the  tongue  refrain  from  evil  speaking  so  long  as  hatred  boileth  in  the 
heart?  And  as  the  water  turneth  the  wheel,  so  the  heart  the  tongue.  They  rail 
in  their  ignorance  on  things  which  they  know  not.  The  birds  have  no  such  enemy 
as  the  owl;  nor  the  mariner  no  such  enemy  as  the  mermaid;  so  the  learned  no 
such  enemy  as  the  ignorant.  Saint  Peter,  speaking  of  the  epicures  and  atheists  of 
the  world,  saith,  "  They  knew  not,  and  that  willingly."  And  Paul  said  of  the 
Gentiles,  that  they  walked  "  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind,  having  their  cogitation 
darkened,  and  being  strangers  from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  is 
in  them."  As  there  be  degrees  in  sin,  so  is  there  a  gradation  in  ignorance.  It  is  a 
sin  to  be  ignorant  in  that  we  should  know,  but  a  greater  to  be  ignorant  in  that  we 
are  bound  to  know.  A  man  without  knowledge  is  as  a  workman  without  his  hands, 
as  a  painter  without  his  eyes.  Only  the  wise  man  is  a  right  man  ;  and  the  man  of 
understanding  is  only  wise.  But  to  proceed,  if  it  be  a  sin  to  rail  in  ignorance,  how 
execrable  is  it  when  it  is  in  knowledge !  Then  it  is  a  double  sin.  But  pride 
planted  it,  and  envy  watered  it ;  they  sinned  in  knowledge,  not  in  ignorance ;  they 


JUDE.  41 

said  that  they  knew  God  as  well  as  God  knew  Himself.  But,  to  return ;  most  men 
rail  in  ignorance;  they  are  like  unto  Herpasta  Socrates,  the  fool,  that  having  lost 
her  eyes  did  not  believe  that  she  was  blind,  but  thought  the  house  to  be  dark.  So 
we  are  blind,  and  yet  will  not  see  it ;  it  is  nothing  to  name  the  Ten  Command- 
ments, the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  twelve  Articles  of  Faith,  the  two  sacraments,  but  to 
understand  them.  Men  are  not  ignorant  for  want  of  teaching,  but  for  want  of 
learning ;  we  will  not  learn.  Nay,  Jude  chargeth  them  further,  that  they  abused 
themselves,  in  that  they  knew  not.  Like  the  Doctors  of  Ephesus,  of  whom  Paul 
reporteth  thus  :  "  They  would  be  doctors  of  the  law,  and  yet  understand  not  what 
they  speak,  neither  whereof  they  affirm."  And  also  in  that  they  knew ;  for,  saith 
Jude,  "Whatsoever  things  they  know  naturally,  as  beasts,  which  are  vrithout  reason, 
in  those  things  they  corrupt  themselves  "  ;  so  that  every  way  they  are  vile  and 
miserable,  as  Apoc.  iii.  17.  Some  things  they  knew  naturally,  as  beasts  that  know 
Bweet  from  sour,  good  from  evil,  meat  from  poison.  Where  let  me  distinguish 
of  knowledge,  that  there  is  a  natural  knowledge  and  a  spiritual  knowledge ;  the 
first  of  these  the  apostle  calleth  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh ;  the  second,  the  wisdom  of 
the  spirit.  Lastly,  he  compareth  them  to  beasts  ;  for  in  many  things  the  wicked 
are  as  beasts,  if  not  worse ;  by  creation  little  inferior  to  the  angels ;  by  conversation 
much  inferior  to  brute  beasts.  Let  us  then  no  longer  Uve  beastly,  lest  we  perish 
with  the  beast,  but  hve  Christianly,  that  so  we  may  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in 
the  land  of  the  Uving.  (S.  Otes.)  The  condemnations  of  ignorance  : — I.  Truth 
IS  USUALLY  SLANDERED  OUT  OF  IGNORANCE  ;  bccause  men  do  not  understand  the 
ways  and  things  of  God,  therefore  they  do  condemn  them.  It  is  the  devil's  cunning 
to  keep  us  at  a  distance  from  truths,  and  therefore  burdeneth  them  with  prejudices, 
that  we  may  suspect  rather  than  search,  and  condemn  that  out  of  ignorance 
which  upon  knowledge  we  could  not  choose  but  love  and  profess ;  and  it  is  man's 
perverseness  and  pride  to  speak  evil  of  things  above  his  reach,  and  to  disprove  that 
which  he  has  not  attained  unto  or  cannot  understand.  II.  Blockish  and  stupid 
MEN  ARE  MOST  BOLD  IN  REPROACHING.  A  fool's  wrath  falleth  Very  heavy,  because 
it  falleth  with  all  its  weight,  there  being  nothing  to  restrain  and  stop  it  (Prov. 
xxvii.  3).  What  ado  have  we  in  the  ministry  with  young  heady  professors,  that 
have  more  heat  than  light !  III.  Men  of  corrupt  minds  are  usually  sensual, 
and  sensual  men  are  usually  men  of  corrupt  minds ;  an  unsound  heart  is  best 
sheltered  under  unsound  doctrine,  and  carnal  delights  blunt  and  weaken  the  edge 
and  intension  of  the  mind,  so  that  they  are  very  liable  to  mistakes.  Therefore,  on 
the  one  side,  we  should  labour  to  keep  the  mind  right  and  sound  in  the  faith ;  fish 
stink  first  at  the  head;  when  the  judgment  is  poisoned,  the  taint  is  soon  conveyed 
to  the  affections.  On  the  other  side,  "add  to  your  knowledge  temperance" 
(2  Pet.  i.  6).  That  is  the  best  knowledge  that  endeth  in  temperance,  or  begets  a 
holy  moderation  in  the  use  of  sensual  pleasure ;  if  we  cannot  govern  our  affections, 
we  "  know  nothing  as  we  ought  to  know  " ;  nay,  otherwise,  your  knowledge  will 
be  corrupted  by  your  affections ;  many  errors  take  their  rise  and  beginning  from 
evil  manners  and  filthy  lusts.     IV.  Wicked  men,   left  to  themselves,  do  but 

ABUSE  AND  CORRUPT  THAT  NATURAL  GOODNESS  AND  KNOWLEDGE  WHICH  THEY  HAVE  IN 

THEM.     Natural  abilities  are  soon  depraved  with  evil  habits.    V.  Sin  where  it 

REIGNETH   TURNETH   A    MAN    INTO   A    BRUTE    BEAST    (Psa.    xlix.    12).      If    WC    had    the 

head  of  a  horse,  or  the  face  of  a  swine,  or  the  hoofs  of  an  ass,  how  should  we 
be  looked  upon  as  monsters  ;  but  to  have  the  hearts  of  the  beasts  is  worse ;  to  be 
like  them  in  the  inward  man  is  more  monstrous  in  the  sight  of  God.  The 
beasts  know  their  stint  and  measure;  a  horse  or  a  dog  will  not  be  drunk,  &c. 
Sin  doth  not  only  make  a  beast  of  you,  but  a  devil  of  you  (John  vi.  70).     VI.  It  is 

A.   SIGN  OF  A  MAN  TURNED  BEAST  TO  FOLLOW  THE  PASSIONS  AND  LUSTS  OF  CORRUPT 

NATURE.  Why  ?  For  then  the  government  of  reason  is  renounced,  and  all  is 
yielded  up  into  the  hands  of  lust  and  appetite.  In  men  reason  should  have  the 
chief  governance,  and  exercise  a  coercion  and  restraint  over  our  affections.  I 
shall  take  occasion  here  to  show  you  how  many  ways  a  man  turneth  beast.  1.  By 
an  addictedness  to  sensual  pleasures  and  delights.  2.  When,  in  the  use  of  these 
dehghts,  we  keep  neither  modesty  nor  measure,  this  is  but  like  swine  to  wallow  in 
our  own  filthiness  ;  a  beast  can  do  no  more.  3.  When  men  live  by  appetite  rather 
than  reason  and  conscience,  feeding  without  fear,  and  nourishing  the  body,  but 
taking  no  care  to  refresh  the  soul.  VII.  Sensuality  doth  but  make  way  for 
corruption:  you  may  counterpoise  the  temptation  to  the  sin  with  the  punish- 
ment ;  usually  secret  sins  and  sweet  sins  meet  with  a  heavy  punishment ;  secret 
sins,  that  do  not  betray  us  to  shame,  may  yet  beget  horror  when  we  think-'df  what. 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR. 

•will  ensue :  and  sweet  sins,  that  entice  our  affections,  to  prevent  them  we  may 
counterbalance  one  affection  with  another,  delight  with  fear.     (T.  Manton.) 

Yet.  11.  They  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain,  .  .  .  Balaam,  .  .  .  Core. — Responsi- 
hility  for  irreligious  speculations  and  sinful  practices  : — The  "  woe  "  itself  was 
undoubtedly  to  be  proportioned  to  the  extent  of  their  criminality.  One  decided 
way  of  measuring  the  extent  of  their  criminality  was  to  be  found  Ih  the  evil  effects 
of  their  speculations  and  practices.  Murderers,  in  the  legal  sense  of  the  word,  they 
were  not.  It  is  on  the  consequences  of  their  evil  speculations  and  practices  that 
they  were  so  designated.  By  the  unsoundness  of  doctrine  and  by  the  criminality 
of  their  practice,  they  had  diffused  around  them  a  fatal  taint.  Licentiousness  of 
principle  and  licentiousness  of  conduct  entail  a  remediless  "  woe  "  both  upon  the 
body  and  the  soul.  It  is  true  the  plea  might  be  offered  that  the  fatal  consequences 
had  arisen,  as  it  were,  incidentally,  without  their  being  formally  planned.  But, 
according  to  the  decision  of  the  apostle,  this  circumstance  alters  not  the  case.  On 
the  contrary,  that  men  are  responsible  for  the  effects  of  their  conduct,  even  though 
they  are  directly  pursuing  other  ends,  he  shows  us,  by  referring  to  the  remarkable 
history  of  Balaam.  It  might  not  be  alleged  that  even  Balaam,  perverse  as  he  was, 
had  set  himself  out  of  rooted  hatred  to  the  Israelites,  to  plot  their  destruction. 
Still,  however,  for  determining  the  measure  of  his  guilt,  it  must  be  marked  that  his 
resolution  was  to  enjoy  the  gratification  of  his  covetousness  at  any  expense.  And 
thus  it  was  exactly  in  regard  to  the  persons  whom  St.  Jude  reprehends.  They 
might  be  following  some  scheme  of  personal  aggrandisement.  It  might  only  be  in 
pursuing  this  scheme  that  they  ceased  to  inculcate  the  doctrines  of  Christian  self- 
denial  and  purity.  Besides,  to  justify  the  "  woe  "  pronounced,  the  apostle  takes 
away  every  excuse  for  their  conduct  by  showing  that  their  resistance,  both  to  the 
authority  of  religion  and  to  the  well-being  of  the  Church,  was  parallel  with  the 
"  gainsaying  of  Core."  "  Core "  knew  perfectly  the  origin  of  the  lawgiver's 
authority — knew  the  meaning  of  the  Mosaic  ordinance  and  its  sanctions,  and  the 
utility  of  obeying  it — and  yet  he  "  gainsayed"  the  whole.  How  easily  the  applica- 
tion of  all  this  might  be  made  to  the  irreligious  and  ungodly  of  our  own  time  !  It 
applies  to  the  bold  speculators  who,  whatever  be  their  general  professions  of  regard 
for  reUgion,  undermine  by  false  reasonings  the  foundations  of  Christianity.  It 
applies  to  the  band  of  the  ambitious  who,  like  Core,  would  destroy  the  peace  of 
mankind  in  rendering  themselves  celebrated.  It  applies  to  the  hordes  of  the 
covetous  who,  greedy  for  filthy  lucre  as  Balaam,  care  not  what  a  curse  they  inflict 
on  others,  if  so  be  they  may  enrich  themselves  with  the  reward  of  iniquity.  Let 
me  request  you,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  to  observe  that  serious  responsibility 
which  men  of  literary  eminence  have  often  incurred  by  directing  their  writings 
against  the  cause  of  religion  and  godliness.  When  genius  degrades  itself  into  the 
auxiliary  of  scepticism  and  licentiousness,  it  entails  on  the  person  who  has 
successfully  used  it,  the  corresponding  measures  of  criminality.  Think  on  the 
mischievous  effects  which  may  flow  even  from  a  single  copy  of  a  profane  and 
immoral  writing.  But  shall  the  well-gifted  sceptics  whose  genius  has  been  employed 
to  promote  over  the  young  and  inexperienced  the  ascendancy  of  evil  principle, 
escape  responsibility  for  that  long  train  of  ills,  the  origin  of  which  is  traceable  to 
their  daring  speculations  ?  There  is  blood  in  their  hands.  They  have  destroyed 
Bouls.  Suffer  me,  however,  to  warn  you,  lest  we  allow  the  view  of  their  wickedness 
to  absorb  every  apprehension  of  our  culpability,  and  thus  remain  satisfied  with 
expressing  our  displeasure  at  the  evils  which  they  have  perpetrated,  instead  of 
examining  our  own  hearts  to  learn  how  far  we  stand  in  need  of  the  reproof.  In 
our  commonest  intercourse  we  exercise  an  influence  over  one  another  which  may 
operate  for  good  or  for  evil.  We  may  become  the  means  either  of  promoting 
spiritual  excellence  and  happiness,  or  of  vitiating  and  so  destroying  the  very  life  of 
the  soul,  in  those  with  whom  we  associate.  The  consequences  of  our  character  and 
conduct  in  these  respects,  therefore,  enter  justly  as  items  into  the  sum  of  our 
responsibility.  The  blessing  or  the  "  woe "  must  fall  down  on  us,  according  as 
these  consequences  are  beneficial  or  the  reverse.  Let  me  finish  the  discourse, 
however,  with  the  pleasing  thought,  how  much  good  may  be  done  by  us  in  the 
intercourse  of  our  mutual  relationships.  Instead  of  destroying  or  even  weakening 
the  principle  of  Divine  life  in  our  brethren,  we  may  become  the  effectual  means  of 
increasing  its  power  and  enlarging  the  sphere  of  its  exercise.  While  the  influence 
of  irreligion  and  vice  would  tend  to  seal  the  ruin,  the  lessons  and  tlie  example  of 
pious  and  godly  men  are  advancing  the  salvation  of  others.     {W.  Muir,  D.D.) 


JUDE.  43 

The  successors  of  Cain,  Balaam,  and  Core : — I.   Like  the  first  murderer,  these 

HEKETICS    WEBE    FIRED   WITH     MALICE     AGAINST     THE     KEAl     AND     FAITHFUL   FOLLOTVEES 

OF  Christ.  While  we  are  often  warned  that  the  world  is  opposed  to  the  true 
people  of  God,  it  may  at  the  same  time  be  said  that  no  class  of  men  regard  them 
with  feelings  of  such  bitter  disaffection  as  those  who  are  false  and  heretical 
professors  of  religion.  To  the  instinctive  hostility  of  nature  they  add  the  sullen 
rancour  of  religious  animosity.     II.  To  run  after  the  error  of  Balaam  is  to  teach 

DOCTRINES    CALCULATED    TO    FOSTER     THE     DEPRAVED     AFFECTIONS    OF    THE    HEART — doC- 

trines  pleasing  to  flesh  and  blood,  for  personal  and  pecuniary  ends.  Such  was  the 
case  with  the  seducers  in  the  text,  and  such  is  the  case  with  false  teachers  in  every 
age.  Having  neither  the  knowledge  nor  the  love  of  the  truth  in  them,  their  main 
concern  must  necessarily  be  to  turn  their  teaching  to  account  in  the  way  of  advanc- 
ing their  temporal  interests.  With  this  view  they  study  to  accommodate  their 
doctrines  to  the  prejudices  and  private  likings  of  human  nature,  being  well  aware 
that,  without  some  dilutions  and  transmutations  of  the  truth,  they  will  not  be  so 
successful  in  their  object.  But  of  all  the  varied  forms  of  error,  the  most  attractive 
is  that  which  has  the  twofold  effect  of  soothing  the  conscience,  and  at  the  same 
time  giving  some  scope  and  licence  to  sin.    III.  The  apostle  declares  that  these 

SEDUCERS   were    ALSO    ANIMATED   BY   THE    SPIRIT,    AND    DESTINED    TO    SUFFER  THE    DOOM 

OF  THAT  AMBITIOUS  AND  MISCHIEVOUS  REBEL,  CoRE.  Those  who  "  deny  the  only 
Lord  God "  as  they  did,  and  who  make  light  of  the  law  of  heaven,  need  not  be 
expected  to  be  very  submissive  to  any  authority  estabhshed  among  men  ;  and 
hence  heretics  have  in  every  age  been  found  to  be  seditious  subjects  and  dangerous 
members  of  civil  society.  The  very  same  qualities  of  character  by  which  they  are 
led  to  spurn  at  the  will  of  the  Supreme,  will  necessarily  dispose  them  to  resist  and 
despise  all  other  dominion.  (A.  E.  Gilvray,  D.D.)  False  teahcers  : — This  short 
Epistle  is  chiefly  directed  against  false  teachers  who  were  endeavouring  to  introduce 
pestilent  doctrines  into  the  Church,  and  to  lead  away  its  members  from  truth  and 
godliness.  It  appears  as  though  the  apostle  her6  tracked  them  through  three 
different  stages  of  guilt — "  the  way  of  Cain,"  "  the  error  of  Balaam,"  and  "  the 
gainsaying  of  Core."  I.  The  way  of  Cain.  The  apostle  is  not  to  be  supposed 
here  as  referring  to  the  atrocious  act  of  slaying  his  brother.  Whensoever  reason 
is  set  up  above  revelation,  whether  the  one  be  altogether  rejected  to  make  way  for 
the  other,  or  its  statements  reduced  and  modified  that  they  may  not  exceed  the 
other,  then  is  there  an  imitation  of  "  the  way  of  Cain."  And  if  there  be  what 
approaches  at  least  very  closely  to  a  rejection  of  Scripture,  may  it  not  be  contended 
that  men  have  taken  the  first  step  in  a  course,  of  which  utter  destruction  is  the 
probable  termination  ?  It  was  not  at  once  that  Cain  became  a  murderer ;  but 
when  he  had  adopted  his  deistical  creed,  he  had  brought  himseK  into  the  position 
of  one  whom  Satan  might  attack  with  incalculable  advantage,  and  we  marvel  not 
that,  when  fierce  jealousy  was  excited,  he  raised  his  hand  against  his  brother. 
And  thus  with  those  who  follow  him  in  setting  up  reason  as  a  standard,  by  which 
all  proof  should  be  measured ;  they  have  no  security,  no  defence  against  the  setting 
light  by  aU  their  better  convictions,  till  they  have  confounded  all  moral  distinctions 
and  persuaded  themselves  into  the  most  unlawful  practices.  11.  The  error  of 
Balaam.  It  is  evident  that  covetousness  was  a  ruling  passion  with  these  troublers 
of  the  Church ;  the  apostle  expressly  says  that  it  was  "  for  reward  "  that  they  "  ran 
greedily  after  the  error  of  Balaam,"  so  that  their  imitation  of  the  prophet,  who 
wished  to  curse  Israel  but  was  constrained  to  bless,  must  have  been  ki  the  love  of 
the  wages  of  unrighteousness.  Balaam  knew  what  was  right ;  Balaam  knew  the 
future  consequence  of  what  was  wrong ;  but,  swayed  by  present  interest,  he  deter- 
mined on  doing  the  wrong,  and  sought  only  that,  whilst  doing  it,  he  might  by  some 
equivocation  keep  his  conscience  at  ease;  he  was  not  ignorant,  he  was  not  in- 
sensible, but  he  was  bent  on  securing  a  present  advantage,  and  his  whole  concern 
was  that  in  doing  this  he  might  not  fly  openly  in  the  face  of  an  explicit  command. 
And  is  this  a  rare  or  unusual  case  ?  What !  does  not  the  world  swarm  with  men 
■who  are  thoroughly  conscious  that  they  can  gain  what  they  wish  only  through 
disobeying  God,  who  are  not  moved  by  this  consciousness  to  the  resisting  the 
desire,  but  who  look  about  to  subterfuges  and  palliations,  that  they  may  secure 
what  they  long  for,  and  yet  have  some  apology  to  cloak  the  disobedience  ?  Is  it 
unusual  to  find  an  individual  who,  with  his  moral  eyesight  in  a  great  degree 
opened  to  the  nature  and  consequence  of  his  conduct,  resolves  on  persisting  in  that 
conduct  in  hope  of  obtaining  a  favourite  object,  but  who  all  the  while  attempts 
some  process  of  seLf-deceit,  that  he  may  hide  the  offence  he  knows  he  is  committing  ? 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

m.  The  gainsaying  of  Coke.  This  appears  to  be  given  as  the  final  stage  of 
depravity,  the  reaching  which  is  the  reaching  destruction:  "  they  perished  in  the 
gainsaying  of  Core."  It  was  a  gainsaying  which  was  directed  aUke  against  the 
throne  and  the  altar.  And  the  two  are  commonly  combined.  We  say  not  that  an 
irreligious  man  must  be  also  a  disloyal;  but  we  alfirm  that  a  disloyal  is  almost 
always  an  irreligious.  We  know  not  how  it  can  be  otherwise.  We  know  not  how 
a  good  Christian  can  fail  to  be  a  good  subject,  "submitting  himself  to  every 
ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake."  For  our  own  part  we  will  never  believe 
that  loyalty  is  merely  an  acquired  principle,  drilled  into  men  by  education  and 
fostered  by  custom.  We  are  persuaded,  on  the  contrary,  that  we  are  born  with  a 
reverence  of  authority,  that  God  placed  it  in  us  as  a  part  of  that  moral  cordage  by 
which  He  would  have  society  knit  together.  Whether  or  no  they  admire  his 
personal  character,  whether  or  no  they  approve  the  acts  of  his  government,  most 
men,  we  are  convinced,  tacitly  acknowledge  the  sacredness  ©f  a  king,  and  are 
moved  by  awe  of  the  office  to  manifest  devotion  to  him  who  holds  it.  We  regard 
the  enthusiasm  thus  simultaneously  called  forth  as  expressive  of  a  kind  of  irre- 
pressible consciousness  that  a  king  is,  in  some  sense,  the  vicegerent  of  Deity,  as 
proving  what  we  might  almost  call  an  innate  persuasion  that  there  is  a  majesty  in 
him  who  wears  a  crown,  which  it  is  a  species  of  sacrilege  to  refuge  to  acknowledge. 
The  unbidding  acclamations  of  a  peasantry  pass  with  us  as  echoes  of  a  voice  which 
is  speaking  irresistibly  in  their  breasts,  proclaiming  that  it  is  by  God  that  princes 
reign,  and  that  whom  He  delegates  the  world  should  honour.  And  if  we  may  thus 
contend  that  loyalty  is  a  natural  sentiment,  we  aggravate  most  grievously  the  sin 
of  disobedience  to  all  those  precepts  of  Scripture  that  set  themselves  against  the 
gainsaying  of  authority.  And  who  shall  marvel  that  "  the  gainsaying  of  Core," 
inasmuch  as  it  proved  an  utter  contempt  of  all  instituted  authority,  both  in  civil 
and  spiritual  things,  provoked  signally  the  anger  of  God  ?  It  is  given  as  the 
description  of  the  last  stage  of  enormity.  The  man  who  could  join  this  gainsaying 
must  have  thrown  off  all  fear  of  his  Maker  ;  for  how  otherwise  could  he  take  part 
in  a  league  whose  professed  object  it  was  to  strip  of  power  the  persons  of  Divine 
appointment  and  to  give  to  the  meanest  of  the  people  that  right  of  officiating  with 
which  one  order  could  prove  themselves  exclusively  entrusted  ?  Thus  it  was  with 
these  seducers  in  the  days  of  St.  Jude.  They  had  gone  in  "  the  way  of  Cain,"  and 
run  "  after  the  error  of  Balaam  "  ;  but  there  was  a  great  obstacle  to  their  schemes; 
the  authority  of  the  apostles  or  of  their  appointed  successors  was  held  in  reverence 
in  the  Church,  and  was  directly  opposed  to  their  pi-oceedings.  Sooner  or  later  they 
would  have  to  undertake  the  overthrow  of  this  authority,  and  thus  add  imitation 
of  Core  to  that  of  Cain  and  of  Balaam.  But  God  would  at  length  interpose,  and, 
having  suffered  them  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquities,  would  visit  them 
with  the  weight  of  His  indignation.  They  should  work  their  own  ruin.  And  thus 
would  it  come  to  pass  that  they  who  had  to  describe  their  career  would  have  to 
follow  up  the  announcement  that  "they  had  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain,  and  run 
greedily  after  the  error  of  Balaam  for  reward,"  by  an  account  at  once  of  a  crime 
and  its  punishment — "  and  they  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  Core."  (H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  The  way  of  Cain  : — I.  The  way  of  Cain  is  the  way  of  sinners  in  general. 
1.  A  way  of  ignorance.  He  murdered  his  brother  because  he  hated  him ;  he  hated 
him  because  his  sacrifice  was  accepted  of  the  Lord,  whilst  his  own  was  rejected; 
his  sacrifice  was  rejected  because  he  offered  the  wrong  offering  upon  the  altar  ;  he 
gave  the  wrong  offering  because  he  was  ignorant  of  his  own  state  before  God,  and 
ignorant  of  God's  requirements.  He  was  willing  to  worship,  but  it  must  be  a 
worship  dictated  by  his  taste,  and  not  one  in  obedience  to  God's  wiU.  Cain's 
religion  is  now  the  most  respectable  and  popular  religion  of  the  day.  It  involves 
no  abasement  in  the  dust ;  no  humiliating  confession  of  sinnership ;  no  absolute 
dependence  out  of  self.  It  flatters  man's  pride,  exalts  his  reason,  and  just  suits 
the  carnal  heart  that  wants  a  religion  to  make  his  respectability  complete.  Cain's 
religion  is  the  curse  of  the  day.  It  chloroforms  men  into  insensibility  and  indiffer- 
ence. Had  they  none  there  would  perhaps  be  more  hope  for  them,  for  when  sinners 
were  appealed  to  they  would  feel  they  were  addressed,  but  as  it  is  they  put  them- 
selves down  as  part  of  "the  religious  world,"  and  perhaps  a  better  name  could 
hardly  be  found  to  describe  them,  for  they  have  a  religious  worldliness,  or  if  yon 
prefer  the  title  a  worldly  religiousness.  2.  A  way  of  worldliness.  Hardened  and 
despairing  he  goes  out  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  builds  a  city,  and  seeks  to 
drown  remorse  in  pleasure.  He  and  his  descendants  busy  themselves  in  trying  to 
make  this  world  a  pleasant  place  of  residence,  and  with  the  sound  of  the  harp  and 


JVBE.  45 

the  organ  the  guilty  man  tries  to  drown  the  voice  of  his  brother's  blood.  This  is 
the  way  of  Cain.  This  is  just  what  the  vast  majority  of  mankind  is  doing.  It 
is  trying  in  the  business  and  pleasures  of  the  city  to  find  its  all — forget  its  God — 
and  drown  unpleasant  thoughts.  But  remember,  your  burying  yourself  in  this 
world's  pleasures  does  not  remove  the  brand  of  Cain  from  off  your  brow.  3.  The 
way  to  hell.  No  scripture  sheds  one  gleam  of  hope  upon  the  way  of  Cain.  Direct 
reference  is  only  made  twice  to  him  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  both  instances 
he  is  held  up  as  a  warning,  and  nothing  else.  The  first  you  will  find  in  the  first 
Epistle  of  John,  the  third  chapter  and  twelfth  verse — "  Not  as  Cain  who  was  of 
that  wicked  one  " ;  and  the  second  is  found  in  our  text  and  the  verses  following.  Thus 
you  see  no  hope  is  even  hinted  at.  The  end  of  the  way  of  Cain  is  blackness  of  dark- 
ness for  ever.  11.  One  paeticulae  in  Cain's  way  which  is  the  way  of  many  professors. 
I  mean  his  indifference  about  his  murdered  brother.  "  Where  is  Abel  thy  brother  ?  " 
These  were  the  words  that  arrested  Cain's  attention.  May  they  arrest  yours !  I 
am  glad  to  see  you  here  this  evening,  but  where  is  your  brother  ?  Christian  young 
men,  where  have  you  left  your  brethren  this  evening  ?  Where  are  those  who  are 
related  to  you  by  ties  of  blood  ?  Where  are  those  bound  to  you  by  friendship  ? 
Where  are  those  who  are  your  brethren  in  daily  labour — those  who  work  with  you 
in  the  office,  shop,  warehouse,  or  docks  ?  Where  is  he  ?  You  are  here  singing 
God's  praises  and  listening  to  God's  Word,  but  where  did  you  leave  him  ?  Alas,  in 
the  way  of  Cain,  I  hear  some  of  you  reply,  "  I  know  not."  Stop,  sir !  that  answer 
.will  never  do.  Not  know  !  I  think  I  see  Cain  as  he  utters  the  words.  A  burning 
blush  crimsons  his  brow,  and  his  downcast  eyes  and  quivering  face  all  give  the  lie 
to  the  assertion.  He  did  know.  Christian,  such  a  miserable  falsehood  as  Cain's 
is  unworthy  of  you.  You  feel  it  as  you  try  to  tell  it.  You  ought  to  know.  Come, 
be  bold,  speak  out  the  truth,  though  it  condemns  you.  Then  I  will  answer  for  you  ? 
Like  Cain,  you  have  left  your  brother  in  his  blood.  His  soul  is  dead  if  his  body 
lives.  Indifference  about  souls  is  the  crying  sin  of  the  Church.  (A.  G.  Brown.) 
The  religion  of  nature  and  of  culture  : — Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness — 
not  God's — that  was  gone — but  his  own — and  his  own  bore  the  imprint  of  the  evil 
one,  to  whose  subtle  agency  he  had  sinfully  succumbed.  Thus  the  first  man  born 
into  the  world  was  not  only  the  child  of  Adam,  but  also,  in  some  sense,  the  child 
of  the  devil,  and  demonstrably  our  brother,  though  it  be  not  either  politic  or  pleasant 
flatly  to  affirm  it.  Cain  was  not  the  abnormal  monster  that  he  is  commonly 
supposed  to  be,  but  a  representative  man,  a  religious  man,  a  polite  and  accomplished 
man,  and  in  many  respects  a  model  man,  with  the  exception  of  a  single  rash  and 
unfortunate  deed,  perpetrated  in  a  fit  of  passion.  And  yet,  as  "  the  way  of  Cain" 
is  so  severely  deprecated  in  God's  Word,  let  us  study  the  way-marks  that  we  may 
learn  to  beware  of  it.  1.  It  was  a  religion  without  an  atonement.  He  regarded 
himself  as  God's  creature ;  he  recognised  God's  claims  upon  his  gratitude ;  and 
accordingly  he  reared  an  altar  dedicated  to  the  Deity,  and  laid  upon  it  votive 
offerings  such  as  were  not  only  aesthetically  beautiful,  but  seemed  to  be  ethically 
appropriate  and  sufficient.  Hard  by  Cain's  altar  stands  another,  a  simpler,  ruder 
structure,  on  which  no  flowers  breathe  their  fragrance,  nor  ripened  fruits  are  found. 
It  is  only  blood-besprinkled,  and  a  slain  lamb  lies  upon  it.  Strange  offering  this 
to  a  God  of  love,  and  stranger  stUl  is  the  attitude  of  Abel,  as  he  stands  beside  his 
altar,  with  his  head  bowed  as  if  in  profoundest  penitence.  "  By  faith  Abel  offered 
a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain,"  for  his  faith  humbly  grasped  the  great 
doctrine  of  the  atonement.  It  was  the  lack  of  any  conscious  need  of  an  atonement 
that  broadly  distinguished  the  way  of  Cain,  and  there  be  hundreds  of  thousands 
that  to-day  do  follow  him.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  disparage  any  of  the  rich  and 
generous  fruits  of  the  earth,  that  spring  from  germs  indigenous  in  the  soil  of  the 
human  soul.  Though  fallen,  there  is  much  left  of  beauty  and  of  native  nobleness. 
There  are  such  things  as  truth  and  honesty,  and  generosity,  and  natural  affection, 
and  broad  philanthropy.  There  are  such  things  outside  the  Church  that  go  to  show 
that  human  nature  is  not  utterly  depraved,  nor  is  a  world  hopelessly  cursed  that 
holds  the  roots  from  which  spring  such  fruits.  And  yet  it  is  of  infinite  moment  for 
us  to  remember  that  the  offering  to  heaven  of  these  alone  wUl  not  suffice  to  make 
sure  of  heaven.  For  unf alien  man  these  would  be  quite  enough,  but  for  guilty  man 
there  is  needed  an  atonement.  2.  The  way  of  Cain  was  a  heart  without  love. 
Eehgion  does  indeed  address  itseK  to  our  intelligence,  and  challenges  the  severest 
scrutiny  of  its  character  and  claims,  and  yet  it  constantly  recognises  the  sadly 
significant  fact  that  the  radical  difficulty  in  the  way  of  man's  salvation  is  not  so 
much  in  his  head  as  his  heart.    Cain's  offering  was  costly  and  beautiful,  but  there 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

was  no  heart  in  it,  and  no  love  back  of  it,  and  therefore  it  was  that  God  sternly 
rejected  both  him  and  it.  If  love  had  been  the  animating  motive,  then  the  moment 
he  discovered  its  defective  character,  he  would  with  eager  haste  have  sought  to 
remedy  the  defect.  Instead  of  that  his  brow  was  clouded,  his  countenance  fallen, 
and  his  bosom  wroth.  The  slumbering  demon  within  him  was  roused.  The 
carnal  enmity  of  his  depraved  nature  flamed  out,  and  like  an  exasperated  serpent 
he  was  ready  to  strike  with  a  mortal  blow.  We  stand  aghast  in  the  presence  of 
this  first  dread  tragedy — that  strikes  us  most  just  because  it  was  the  first.  Cain  is 
only  the  leader  of  a  long  and  infamous  historic  line.  "  And  wherefore  slew  he 
him  ?  "  the  Scripture  asks,  and  then  it  answers  the  question  of  its  own  propounding. 
"Because  his  own  works  were  evil  and  his  brother's  righteous."  And  every  age 
has  borne  witness  to  the  prevalence  of  the  very  same  spirit,  and  for  the  very  same 
reason.  True,  the  age  of  bodily  butchery  is  now  happily  past,  and  the  followers  of 
Christ  are  no  longer  thrown  to  hons,  immured  in  dungeons,  or  stretched  upon  the 
rack.  The  world  has  grown  too  decent  for  that,  and  the  devil  too  shrewdly  politic. 
And  yet  it  is  just  as  true  to-day  as  ever  that  they  who  will  live  godly — meaning 
thereby  uncompromising  and  fearless  Christians — shall  suffer  persecution.  There 
is  still  the  old  antipathy  and  enmity  to  the  worshippers  at  the  blood-besprinkled 
altar.  3.  Another  distinguishing  feature  of  this  still  much  trodden  way  is  the  sub- 
stitution of  culture  for  cleansing — culture  of  the  mind  for  cleansing  by  the  blood 
of  Christ.  God  has  abandoned  me,  thought  the  proto-murderer,  but  hope  has  not. 
The  earth  has  indeed  been  cursed,  but  it  shall  yet  be  made  a  tolerable  place  to 
dwell  in.  I  will  fertilise  it  by  toilsome  tillage,  and  embellish  it  with  choicest  art. 
I  will  drown  its  wail  of  woe  by  concourse  of  melody  and  "  notes  of  linked  sweet- 
ness long  drawn  out."  By  the  power  of  cultivation  I  will  redeem  the  world  from 
the  power  of  the  curse.  Accordingly  Cain  built  a  city  that  was  doubtless  a  marvel 
of  architectural  beauty,  while  in  his  immediate  family  were  to  be  found  artificers 
in  brass  and  iron,  and  the  fast-flying  fingers  of  cunning  performers  on  the  harp 
and  the  organ.  Had  he  lived  in  our  day  he  would  doubtless  have  been  a  patron  of 
the  arts,  a  school  director,  a  member  of  the  city  government,  a  founder  or  fosterer 
of  great  enterprises  having  for  their  object  the  instruction  of  the  ignorant  and  the 
mitigation  of  human  misery.  Having  no  hope  of  heaven  to  lure  him  on,  he  was 
determined  to  make  the  most  of  earth.  Now,  far  be  it  from  me  to  despise  or  even 
to  disparage  such  things.  We  hail  them  as  the  outcome  of  that  enlightened  enter- 
prise or  broad  philanthropy  which  distinguishes  all  Christian  lands.  We  rejoice  in 
them  not  only  for  the  sake  of  man,  whose  elevation  and  comfort  they  are  adapted 
to  promote,  but  for  God's  sake,  to  whose  glory  they  are  destined  to  be  so  largely 
tributary.  And  yet  all  these  mere  human  agencies  are  powerless  to  effect  redemp- 
tion. All  this  magnificent  engineering  of  modern  civilisation  is,  when  taken  by 
itself,  as  impotent  to  rescue  man  from  sin  and  guilt  as  the  rudest  barbarism  that 
ever  degraded  humanity.  Knowledge  is  power  indeed,  but  whether  the  power  shall 
be  beneficent  or  baneful  will  depend  entirely  on  the  principle  that  controls  it.  A 
rifle  is  a  thing  of  power,  but  a  dreadful  thing  in  the  hands  of  a  bloodthirsty  Modoc. 
So  knowledge  is  power,  and  yet  mere  knowledge  without  religious  principle  "  doth 
only  make  men  clever  devils."  Nay,  verily,  what  the  world  wants  is  not  so  much 
culture  as  cleansing.  Then  culture  comes  indeed,  but  in  its  purest,  noblest  forms. 
Then  there  are  gathered  the  richest  fruits  of  the  highest  Christian  civilisation — 
fruits  indeed  that  are  fruits  of  the  ground,  and  yet  not  fruits  of  the  ground  alone, 
but  the  outcome  of  the  blood,  for  the  ground  has  been  enriched  by  the  blood  of  the 
Cross.  (P.  S.  Henson,  D.D.)  The  way  of  Cain  : — The  way  of  Cain  is  that  course 
of  life  which  Cain  took  up  to  himself  in  following  the  lusts  of  his  own  heart  against 
the  will  of  God.  It  is  described  in  Gen.  4,  of  which  way  there  be  seven  steps  or 
degrees,  but  every  one  out  of  the  right  way.  1.  The  first  step  was  hypocrisy:  he 
worshipped  God  by  offering  sacrifice  as  Abel  did,  but  his  heart  was  not  a  believing 
heart  as  Abel's  was  ;  his  worship  was  outward  and  ceremonious,  but  not  in  spirit 
and  truth,  for  his  heart  was  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief.  2.  The  second  his  hatred 
of  his  own  and  natural  brother,  prosecuting  him  with  his  wrath  and  indignation. 
3.  The  third  his  murder,  whereby  he  slew  his  righteous  brother.  4.  The  fourth  his 
lying  unto  God,  saying  he  knew  not  where  his  brother  was.  5.  The  fifth  his 
desperation,  after  that  God  had  convicted  him  and  pronounced  sentence  against 
him.  6.  The  sixth  his  security  and  carelessness  ;  he  regardeth  not  his  sin  nor  the 
conscience  of  it,  but  busieth  himself  in  building  a  city  and  calleth  it  after  the  name 
of  his  child,  that,  seeing  his  name  was  not  written  in  heaven,  he  might  yet  preserve 
his  name  and  memory  in  the  earth.   7.  The  seventh  and  last,  which  was  the  highest 


JUDE.  47 

step  of  his  way,  was  his  profaneness  ;  for  from  thenceforth  he  cast  off  and  con- 
temned all  the  care  and  practice  of  God's  worship,  which  appeareth  (Gen.  iv.  26). 
{W.  Perkins.)  Covetousness  : — Covetousness  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  the  spawn  of 
all  sins,  a  common  factor  for  miost  villainies  of  the  world :  the  east  wind  that 
blasteth  all  the  trees  of  virtue.  And  verily,  if  men  would  but  consider  three  things  : 
first,  how  uncertain  ;  secondly,  how  unprofitable;  thirdly,  how  hurtful  these  earthly 
things  are  which  we  so  covet,  our  desire  after  them  will  soon  be  quenched.  (S.  Otes.) 
The  sin  and  punishment  of  rebellion : — I.  As  relating  to  the  fact  of  Korah  and 
HIS  company.  1.  The  nature  of  the  faction  which  was  raised  by  them.  (1)  The 
design  that  was  laid  for  that,  and  all  other  circumstances  of  the  story,  we  must  have 
resort  to  the  account  that  is  given  of  it  (Numb,  xvi.),  where  we  shall  find  that  the 
bottom  of  the  design  was  the  sharing  of  the  government  among  themselves.  They 
intend  to  lay  aside  Moses,  but  this  they  knew  to  be  a  very  difficult  task,  considering 
what  wonders  God  had  wrought  by  him  in  their  deliverance  out  of  Egypt,  what 
wisdom  he  had  hitherto  showed  in  the  conduct  of  them,  what  care  for  their 
preservation,  what  integrity  in  the  management  of  his  power,  what  reverence  the 
people  did  bear  towards  him,  and  what  solemn  vows  and  promises  they  had  made 
of  obedience  to  him.  But  ambitious  and  factious  men  are  never  discouraged 
by  such  an  appearance  of  difficulties.  Groundless  suspicions  and  unreasonable 
fears  and  jealousies  will  pass  for  arguments  and  demonstrations.  Then  they  who 
can  invent  the  most  popular  lies  against  the  government  are  accounted  the  men  of 
integrity,  and  they  who  most  diligently  spread  the  most  infamous  reports  are  the 
men  of  honesty,  because  they  are  farthest  from  being  flatterers  of  the  court.  (2)  The 
persons  who  were  engaged  in  it.  At  first  they  were  only  some  discontented  Levites 
who  murmured  against  Moses  and  Aaron,  because  they  were  not  preferred  to  the 
priesthood,  and  of  these  Korah  was  the  chief.  Korah,  being  active  and  busy  in  his 
discontents,  had  the  opportunity  of  drawing  in  some  of  the  sons  of  Eeuben,  for 
they  pitched  their  tents  near  each  other,  both  on  the  south  side  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation ;  and  these  were  discontented  on  the  account  of  their  tribe 
having  lost  the  privilege  of  primogeniture.  Thus  whatever  the  pretences  are,  how 
fair  and  popular  soever  in  the  opposition  men  make  to  authority,  ambition  and 
private  discontents  are  the  true  beginners  of  them  ;  but  these  must  be  covered  over 
with  the  deepest  dissimulation,  nothing  must  be  talked  of  but  a  mighty  zeal  for 
religion  and  the  public  interest.  (3)  The  colours  and  pretences  under  which  these 
persons  sought  to  justify  the  proceedings  of  the  faction,  (a)  The  asserting  the 
rights  and  liberties  of  the  people  in  opposition  to  the  government  of  Moses.  There 
were,  then,  two  great  principles  among  them  by  which  they  thought  to  defend  them- 
selves, (i)  That  liberty  and  a  right  to  power  is  so  inherent  in  the  people  that  it  can- 
not be  taken  from  them.  What  means,  then,  this  outcry  for  liberty  ?  Is  it  that  they 
would  have  no  government  at  all  among  them,  but  that  every  one  might  have  done 
what  he  pleased  himself  ?  If  any  man  can  imagine  himself  in  such  a  state  of 
confusion,  which  some  improperly  call  a  state  of  nature,  let  him  consider  whether 
the  contentment  he  could  take  in  his  own  liberty  and  power  to  defend  himself  would 
balance  the  fears  he  would  have  of  the  injury  which  others  in  the  same  state  might 
be  able  to  do  him.  It  follows,  then,  that  what  liberty  is  inconsistent  with  all 
government  must  never  be  pleaded  against  one  sort  of  it.  But  is  there,  then,  so 
great  a  degree  of  liberty  in  one  mode  of  government  more  than  another  that  it 
should  be  thought  reasonable  to  disturb  government  merely  to  alter  the  form  of  it  ? 
Would  it  have  been  so  much  better  for  the  people  of  Israel  to  have  been  governed 
by  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  here  mentioned  than  by  Moses  ?  Would  not  they 
have  required  the  same  subjection  and  obedience  to  themselves,  though  their  com- 
mands had  been  much  more  unreasonable  than  his  ?  What  security  can  there  be 
that  every  one  of  these  shall  not  be  worse  in  all  respects  than  him  whom  they  were 
so  willing  to  lay  aside  ?  So  that  the  folly  of  these  popular  pretences  is  as  great  as 
the  sin  in  being  persuaded  by  them,  (ii)  Another  principle  which  tends  to  the 
subverting  government  under  a  pretence  of  liberty  is  that,  in  case  of  usurpation 
upon  the  rights  of  the  people,  they  may  resume  the  exercise  of  power  and  punish 
the  supreme  magistrate  himself  if  he  be  guilty  of  it.  Than  which  there  can  be 
no  principle  imagined  more  destructive  to  civil  societies  and  repugnant  to  the  very 
nature  of  government.  For  it  destroys  aU  the  obligations  of  oaths  and  compacts. 
(6)  Another  pretence  of  this  rebellion  of  Korah  was  the  freeing  themselves  from 
the  encroachments  upon  their  spiritual  privileges  which  were  made  by  the  usurpa- 
tion" of  Aaron  and  the  priesthood.  This  served  for  a  very  popular  pretence,  for 
they  knew  no  reason  that  one  tribe  should  engross  so  much  of  the  wealth  of  the 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

nation  to  themselves,  and  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  attend  the  service  of  God  for 
it.  This  hath  always  been  the  quarrel  at  religion  by  those  who  seldom  pretend  to 
it  but  with  a  design  to  destroy  it.  II.  The  judgment  which  was  inflicted  upon 
THEM  FOB  IT.  They  had  provoked  heaven  by  their  sin,  and  disturbed  the  earth  by 
their  faction  ;  and  the  earth,  as  if  it  were  moved  with  indignation  against  them, 
trembled  and  shook,  and  then  with  a  horrid  noise  it  rends  asunder  and  opens  its 
mouth  to  swallow  those  in  its  bowels  who  were  unfit  to  live  upon  the  face  of  it. 
They  had  been  dividing  the  people,  and  the  earth,  to  their  amazement  and  ruin, 
divides  itself  under  their  feet.  By  which  we  see  God  interprets  striving  against  the 
authority  appointed  by  Him  to  be  a  striving  against  Himself.  This  was  the  first 
formed  sedition  that  we  read  of  against  Moses.  The  people  had  been  murmuring 
before,  but  they  wanted  heads  to  manage  them.  Now  all  things  concur  to  a  most 
dangerous  rebellion  upon  the  most  popular  pretences  of  religion  and  liberty,  and 
now  God  takes  the  first  opportunity  of  declaring  His  hatred  of  such  actions,  that 
others  might  hear  and  fear  and  do  no  more  so  presumptuously.     {Abp.  Stillingjleet.) 

Ver.  12.  Spots  [R.V.,  hidden  rocks]  in  your  feasts  of  charity. — Vnsmpected 
dangers  : — Hidden  rocks  are  the  seamen's  worst  dangers,  and  they  generally  prove 
the  most  fatal.  They  account  for  the  disappearance  of  many  a  gallant  barque  and 
brave  crew.  They  are  not  laid  down  on  the  chart.  I.  The  unsuspected  dangers 
WHICH  WRECK  CHRISTIAN  Churches.  The  apostle  means  that  there  were  men  who, 
instead  of  keeping  the  unity  and  peace  of  the  Christian  community,  were  the  means 
of  wrecking  both.  The  kind  of  men  they  are  is  described  in  verse  4.  1.  They  have 
crept  into  the  Church  surreptitiously,  not  being  possessed  of  the  spiritual  quaUfi- 
cations  they  professed  to  have.  2.  They  perverted  the  gospel  to  evil  ends.  "  They 
turned  the  grace  of  our  God  unto  lasciviousness."  They  divorced  religion  from 
good  morals  and  good  life.  3.  There  was  denial  of  essential  Christian  doctrine. 
"Denying  our  only  Master  and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ."  II.  The  unsuspected  perils 
OF  INDIVIDUAL  SPIRITUAL  HISTORY.  "Hidden  rocks."  1.  "Nobody  will  know." 
The  possibility  of  secret  sin  is  one  of  the  grave  perils  of  youth  and  inexperience. 
2.  "  Only  this  once."  The  tempter  has  never  had  a  more  successful  plea  to  urge 
upon  the  unwary.  But  if  for  once,  why  not  for  always  ?  3.  "  It  is  not  necessary 
to  be  so  very  particular."  But  thoroughness  is  one  great  element  of  safety.  4. 
"  Never  mind,  another  time  will  do  as  well."  This  is  perhaps  the  most  fatal  of  all. 
Procrastination  of  duties  means  the  giving  up  of  duties.  Secret  unfaithfulness 
becomes  open  apostacy.  (W.  H.  Davison.)  "  Hidden  rocks  in  your  love-feasts  " 
(R.V.) : — The  love-feast  symbolised  the  brotherhood  of  Christians.  It  was  a  simple 
meal,  in  which  all  met  as  equals,  and  the  rich  supplied  the  necessities  of  the  poor. 
It  would  seem  as  if  these  profligates — (1)  brought  with  them  luxurious  food,  thus 
destroying  the  Christian  simplicity  of  the  meal;  and  (2)  brought  this  not  for  the 
benefit  of  all,  but  for  their  own  private  enjoyment,  thus  destroying  the  idea  of 
Christian  brotherhood  and  equality.  The  whole  purpose  of  the  love-feast  was 
wrecked  by  these  men.  They  were  rooks  in  them.  (A.  Plummer,  D.D.) 
Feeding  themselves  without  fear. — Eucharistic  feeding  without  fear : — May  not 
these  words  be  applied  to  the  Eucharistic  feeding  of  those  who  come  to  the 
most  holy  feast  without  searching  of  heart,  without  self-examination,  trusting 
in  their  respectability,  their  apparent  blamelessness  in  respect  of  gross  sin  and 
such  things?  (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  Clouds  they  are  without  water. — 
Disappointing  men : — These  men  are  ostentatious,  but  they  do  no  good.  It  was 
perhaps  expected  that  their  admission  to  the  Church  would  be  a  fresh  gain  to 
Christendom;  but  they  are  as  disappointing  as  clouds  that  are  carried  past 
{■7rapa(p(p6fievai)  by  winds  without  giving  any  rain :  and  in  the  East  that  is  one 
of  the  most  grievous  among  common  disappointments.  (A.  Plummer,  D.D.) 
Clouds  without  water : — It  pleaseth  the  Spirit  of  God  in  many  places  of  the  Ola 
Testament  to  compare  prophets  and  teachers  unto  clouds,  and  their  doctrine  unto 
the  dropping  and  distilling  of  the  rain  and  sweet  showers.  So  the  Prophet  Ezekiel 
is  commanded  to  set  his  face  towards  the  way  of  Teman,  and  "  drop  his  word  toward 
the  south,"  and  his  prophecy  towards  the  forest.  My  doctrine  shall  "  drop  as  the 
rain,"  and  my  speech  shall  "  distil  as  the  dew,  as  the  shower  upon  the  herbs,  and 
as  the  great  rain  upon  the  grass  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  2).  The  word  translated  "  prophecy  " 
(Micah  ii.  7,  11)  signifieth  properly  to  drop  or  distil.  The  reason  of  which  comparison 
is  rendered.  Because  as  the  rain  falleth  upon  the  eai-th  and  returneth  not  in 
vain,  but  moistenoth  it,  and  maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it  may  give  seed 
to  the   sower,  and   bread   to   him   that  eateth  (laa.  Iv.  19,  11) ;   so   the   word  in 


JUDE.  49 

the  mouth  of  the  ministers  returneth  not  void,  but  accomplisheth  the  Lord's 
will.  The  words  then  standing  upon  this  similitude  bear  this  sense:  Though 
the  property  and  use  of  clouds  is  to  carry  water  and  rain  for  the  use  of  the 
earth,  yet  some  clouds  are  without  water;  even  so,  though  all  teachers  ought 
to  be  filled  and  fitted  with  store  of  wholesome  doctrine,  to  pour  it  out  for  the 
use  of  the  Church,  yet  these  seducers  are  utterly  destitute  thereof.  And,  again, 
as  those  clouds  without  water  are  light,  and  fit  for  nothing  than  to  be  carried  about 
with  wind,  so  these  are  altogether  variable  and  unconstant,  carried  about  with  every 
blast  of  strange  doctrine.  The  former  of  these  similitudes  condemneth  their  sin  of 
barrenness  and  unfruitfulness  ;  the  latter  their  sin  of  inconstancy  and  variableness. 
(W.  Perkins.)  Trees  whose  fruit  withereth. — Sjnritval  withering  : — 1.  Even 
corrupt  trees  bear  some  fruit,  though  but  withered.  Most  men  go  to  hell  in  the 
way  of  religious  appearances  (Matt.  vii.  22,  23).  2.  "Withering  and  decaying  in 
holiaess  is  a  distemper  very  unsuitable,  and  should  be  very  hateful  to  every 
Christian.  (1)  In  respect  of  God.  Decays  in  our  Christian  course  oppose  Hia 
nature,  in  whom  is  no  shadow  of  change.  (2)  In  respect  of  ourselves,  (a) 
Whatever  professions  have  been  made,  it  is  certain  there   never  was  sincerity. 

fb)  Spiritual  withering  renders  all  former  profession  unprofitable  and  in  vain. 
c)  Spiritual  withering  makes  our  former  profession  and  progress  therein  to 
injure  us.  (3)  In  respect  of  others,  (a)  They  who  remain  strong  and  stable 
are  much  distressed  by  the  decay  of  any.  (6)  The  weak  are  much  endangered 
to  be  carried  away  with  others  for  company,  (c)  The  wicked  are  confirmed  in 
the  sin  into  which  the  decayed  Christian  is  fallen,  and  also  much  deride  and 
reproach  that  way  of  truth  and  holiness  which  the  unsteadfast  have  forsaken. 

3.  It  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  endeavour  after  spiritual  fruitfulness  (Matt.  iii.  8 ; 
Luke  iii.  8;  2  Cor.  ix.  10;  Phil.  i.  11;  Jas.  iii.  17;  John  xv.  2,  5,  16;  Col.  i.  10). 

4.  The  greatest  flourishes  and  appearances  of  hypocrisy  cannot  reach  the  excellency 
of  the  least  dram  of  sincerity.  All  a  hypocrite  can  do  amounts  not  to  fruit.  6. 
Incorrigibleness  in  sin  is  a  dismal  condition.  It  is  a  woe  to  have  a  bad  heart,  but 
it  is  the  depth  of  woe  to  have  a  heart  that  shall  never  be  better.  6.  It  is  our 
greatest  wisdom,  and  ought  to  be  our  chiefest  care,  to  be  preserved  from  apostacy. 
To  this  end — (1)  Be  sure  to  have  the  truth  of  spiritual  life  in  you.  (2)  Forecast  the 
worst  that  can  befall  you.  (3)  Take  heed  of  the  smallest  decay,  a  beginning  to 
remit  of  thy  holiness.  7.  God  at  length  discovers  imsound,  empty,  and  decaying 
Christians  to  be  what  they  are.  (W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.)  Fruit  withering  : — I.  What 
IS  BACKSLinrNG  ?  It  is  not  everything  that  morbid  conscientiousness  may  sometimes 
mistake  for  it.  1.  It  is  not  the  loss  of  the  first  gushing  emotions  of  early  youth  or 
even  of  early  Christian  life.  2.  Nor  is  it  the  occasional  loss  of  enjoyment  or  even 
of  peace.  The  vessel  may  be  going  forward,  even  in  a  fog,  and  though  "  neither 
sun  nor  stars  "  appear,  may  be  still  obeying  her  hehn  and  speeding  to  port.  3, 
Temptation,  again,  is  not  backsliding.  This  is  one  of  our  present  tests.  It  is  the 
furnace,  but  because  the  gold  is  in  the  crucible  it  does  not  follow  there  is  alloy. 
No ;  backsliding  is  a  loss,  not  of  buoyant  feeling,  or  of  joy  merely,  or  of  freedom 
from  assault,  but  of  spiritual  life  and  power ;  not  of  the  adjuncts  of  this  life,  but 
of  itself.  When  the  eye  loses  its  lustre,  the  cheek  its  bloom,  the  form  its  roundness, 
it  is  from  a  loss  of  vitality.  The  outward  indications  are  but  symptomatic,  the 
failure  is  within.  Baekshding  is  a  loss  of  spiritual  life,  which,  of  course,  affects 
the  whole  circle  of  spiritual  experience,  spiritual  duties,  spiritual  influences,  and  in 
all  senses  makes  the  fruit  to  wither.  Is  it  not,  as  thus  understood,  a  most  wretched 
state  ?  It  is  foolish.  What  fools  we  are  to  lose  such  a  condition  as  our  former  one, 
and  to  lapse  into  this ;  to  leave  the  Father's  house,  with  its  abundance  of  provision 
and  love,  and  to  feed  on  "ashes"  and  "husks."  How  ungrateful,  too.  Think 
what  has  been  done  for  us  by  the  all-loving  Saviour;  in  us,  by  His  gracious 
Spirit.  How  opposed  to  the  genius  of  the  gospel,  too !  Christianity  intends 
growth,  advancement  in  each  grace,  in  the  entire  Christian  life,  and  this  in 
order  to  perfection.  We  have  perversely  been  realising  just  the  opposite ; 
crab-like,  have  gone  backward  instead  of  forward.  II.  What  is  the  cause 
OF  BACKSLIDING?  The  causc  may  be  one  of  many,  or  all  combined.  1.  It 
may  be  that  the  tree  itself  is  bad.  Its  surroundings  favourable,  it  may  yet 
fail  from  inherent  defect.  I  need  not  say  that  this  is  the  main  cause  with 
us.  Alas !  we  are  degenerate  trees  of  a  tainted  stock.  Sin,  that  destroyer 
of  all  good,  dwells  in  us.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  and  desperately  wicked." 
The  stock  itself  is  tainted,  the  "  tree  corrupt,"  and  no  wonder  it  fails  to  mature 
"  good  fruit."    But  has  it  not  been  engrafted  ?    It  has,  but  the  old  nature  is  not 

37 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

eradicated.  Subdued,  striven  against,  wrestled  with,  it  yet  exists,  and  is  the  cause, 
the  first  great  cause,  of  all  the  knots,  excrescences,  and  withered  fruit  which  mar 
the  beauty  of  the  tree.  2.  Not  only  may  the  tree  be  bad,  its  soil  may  be  defective. 
As  the  tree  literally,  so  we  spiritually,  draw  our  sap  from  without.  It  has  been  the 
defect  of  this  vital  influence  that  has  been  another  cause  of  our  failure.  Had  it  been 
supplied,  drawn  through  the  appointed  medium,  as  it  might  and  ought,  it  would 
have  vanquished  the  noxious  elements  already  existing,  and  produced  vigour  and 
health.  And  why  has  not  this  been  done  ?  Partly,  perhaps,  from  a  defect  in  our 
original  training.  Rejoicing  in  our  new  experience,  one  of  glowing  delight,  "  first 
love,"  we  hved  on  day  by  day,  sustained  simply  by  emotion.  This,  then,  seemed  to 
sufiice,  for  the  well  was  deep.  By  a  beneficent  law  of  nature,  however,  it  is  ordained 
that  strong  emotion  shall  be  but  temporary,  that  intense  heat  shall  evaporate  into 
steam.  When  this  ceased,  we  were  at  fault.  We  have  learnt  since  that  "  our  life  is 
hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  that  "  He  is  our  life,"  and  is  unchangeable  and  perennial. 
We  may  have  failed  to  avail  ourselves  subsequently  even  of  this,  but  at  first  we  did 
not  adequately  know  it.  3.  Another  cause  of  withering  may  be  the  surrounding 
atmosphere.  How  subtle  this  is,  and  how  insidiously  and  yet  injuriously  it  acts 
upon  the  growing  trees.  There  is  an  atmosphere  about  us  all  spiritually,  formed 
by  our  domestic  and  social  position — the  books  we  read,  places  we  frequent,  society 
we  form,  ministry  we  attend,  and  a  thousand  other  things  in  our  daily  lives.  This 
may  be  helpful ;  it  may  also  be  the  reverse.  4.  Besides  this  habitual  atmosphere, 
there  are  also  blights — states  of  the  atmosphere  when  it  is  more  fully  than  usual 
charged  with  poisonous  influences  or  parasitic  life.  Prevailing  tones  of  fashion  and 
dress,  sinful  indulgence,  habits  of  excess,  sudden  prosperity,  worldly  alliance,  lax 
sense  of  obligation — how  these  sometimes  come  over  the  promising  tree,  and  in  a 
night  or  day  destroy  its  beauty,  cover  it  with  deformity,  wither  its  fruit !  5.  Another 
cause  of  decay  is  lack  of  appropriate  means.  The  tree  needs  not  only  a  sound  stock, 
good  soil  and  atmosphere,  but  also  proper  attention.  Digging,  manure,  water, 
pruning,  are  all  requisite,  and  without  these  it  will  suffer,  at  length  decay.  That 
God  works  by  means  we  know,  and  this  in  our  best  estate  we  practically  recognised. 
How  diligently  these  were  plied  at  first.  The  Bible  was  our  joy,  and  we  had  it  "  in 
our  heart,"  that  we  might  not  sin  against  God.  Prayer,  too,  what  a  reality  it  was  I 
The  Sabbath,  how  we  loved  it !  And  the  sanctuary,  it  was  truly  Bethel,  God's  house. 
All  these,  and  kindred  ones,  were  means  of  spiritual  culture  to  us.  If  these,  any  or 
all  of  them,  have  been  neglected  by  us,  come  to  be  duties  rather  than  privileges — no 
wonder  that  we  have  become  withered,  and  that  our  fruit  has  decayed.  6.  Fruit 
may  wither  because  it  is  not  used  at  the  appropriate  time.  One  reason  why  spiritual 
life  in  our  Churches  is  so  feeble  and  sickly  a  principle  is  because  it  lacks  exercise. 
The  backsliding  Christian  is  ordinarily  to  be  found  amongst  the  "  slothful  and 
unprofitable  servants."  III.  What  is  the  kemedy?  1.  Eetum.  2.  Repent.  3. 
Resolve — to  watch,  pray,  be  diligent,  advance.  (D.  J.  Viney.)  Twice  dead. — 
"  Tivice  dead  "  : — Dean  Alford  refers  to  the  double  death  in  a  tree,  which  is  not  only 
as  it  seems  to  the  eye  in  common  with  other  trees,  in  the  apparent  death  of  winter, 
but  really  dead ;  dead  to  appearance,  and  dead  in  reality.  "  Plucked  up  by  the 
roots  "  : — So  incapable  of  ever  reviving.     (J.  Wesley.) 

Ver.  13.  RagiBg  waves  of  the  sea. — The  character  and  doom  of  the  wicked : — 
The  scope  of  the  apostle  in  all  these  similitudes  is  to  show  that  these  seducers  were 
nothing  less  than  what  they  pretended  to  be :  "  clouds,"  but  dry,  barren  clouds ; 
"  trees,"  but  such  as  bore  either  none  or  rotten  fruit ;  "  waves,"  that  seemed  to 
mount  up  unto  heaven,  and  to  promise  great  matters,  as  if  they  would  swallow  up 
the  whole  earth,  but  being  dashed  against  a  rock,  all  this  raging  and  swelling 
turneth  into  a  little  foam  and  froth.  1.  From  the  scope  observe  that  spiritual 
boasters  will  certainly  come  short  of  their  great  promises.  All  is  but  noise,  such 
as  is  made  by  empty  vessels.  2.  But  let  us  a  little  examine  the  force  of  the  words. 
The  whole  similitude  alludeth  to  what  is  said  of  wicked  men  in  general  (Isa.  Mi. 
20).  Observe  that  they  are  waves,  which  noteth  their  inconstancy  (Gen.  xlix.  4). 
Water,  you  know,  is  movable,  soon  furled,  and  driven  to  and  fro  by  the  winds  ;  so 
were  these  (Eph.  iv.  14).  Note  thence  that  seducers  are  unsettled  and  uncertain  in 
their  opinions  (2  Pet.  iii.  16).  Why?  Because  they  are  not  rooted  and  grounded 
in  their  profession,  but  led  by  sudden  affection  and  interests  rather  than  judgment ; 
they  are  unstable  because  unlearned ;  such  as  do  not  proceed  upon  clear  and  certain 
grounds.  Well,  then,  discover  them  by  their  levity ;  you  will  never  have  comfort 
and  certainty  in  following  them  who,  like  weathercocks,  turn  with  every  wind. 


JUDE.  51 

"Waves  of  the  sea."  There  you  have  their  restless  activity,  they  are  always 
tossed  to  and  fro  (Jer.  xlix.  23).  They  are  acted  by  Satan,  who  is  a  restless  spirit. 
"  Eaging  waves  of  the  sea."  There  you  have  their  turbulency  ;  they  fill  all  places 
with  troubles  and  strifes.  Why  ?  Because  they  are  urged  by  their  own  pride  and 
vanity,  and  have  lost  all  restraints  of  modesty,  and  are  usually,  as  to  their  constitu- 
tion, of  violent  and  eager  spirits.  Well,  then,  be  not  borne  down  with  impudence 
and  rage  ;  there  may  be  daring  attempts  and  much  resolution  in  an  ill  cause.  The 
next  expression  is  "  foaming  out  their  own  shame,"  as  a  raging  sea  casteth  up  mire 
and  dirt ;  or  it  alluded  to  that  scum  and  froth  which  the  waves  leave  upon  the 
rocks,  and  so  it  noteth  the  abominableness  of  their  opinions  and  practices.  So 
errors  come  in  like  a  raging  wave,  as  if  they  would  bear  all  before  them,  but  they 
go  out  like  foam  and  froth,  in  scorn  and  infamy.  Well,  then,  observe  the  fruitless- 
ness  of  all  Satan's  attempts.  We  come  now  to  the  next  similitude,  "  wandering 
stars."  It  may  be  taken  two  ways — properly  or  improperly.  (1)  Properly,  for 
the  stars  which  we  call  planets,  or  wandering,  though  indeed  no  stars  wander  less 
than  they  do;  they  have  their  name  from  the  opinion  and  common  judgment  of 
sense,  because  they  are  not  carried  about  the  whole  circuit  of  the  heavens,  but  in  a 
shorter  orb  and  course.  (2)  Improperly ;  there  are  a  second  sort  of  wandering 
stars,  which  Aristotle  calleth  running  and  gliding  stars  ;  not  stars  indeed,  but  only 
dry  exhalations  inflamed,  which  glare  much  and  deceive  the  eye  with  an  appearance 
of  light,  but  soon  vanish  and  are  quenched.  Now  these  glancing,  shooting  stars  do 
excellently  express  the  quality  of  these  seducers,  who  pretended  great  knowledge, 
being  therefore  called  Gnostics,  and  gave  out  themselves  for  illuminate  and  pro- 
found doctors,  but  were  various  and  uncertain  in  their  motions,  and  soon  extin- 
guished and  obscured.  The  guides  of  the  Lord's  people  should  be  stars,  but  not 
wandering,  gliding  stars.  These  seducers  pretended  to  be  "  stars,"  and  great  lights 
of  the  Church,  but  were  indeed  "  wandering  stars,"  and  such  as  did  seduce  and 
cause  to  err.  1.  Stars  they  should  be — (1)  In  regard  of  the  light  of  doctrine 
(Matt.  v.  14).  (2)  In  regard  of  the  lustre  of  their  conversations.  It  is  said  of  all 
Christians  (Phil.  ii.  15)  that  they  "  should  shine  as  lights  in  this  world";  they  are 
the  bright  part  of  the  world,  as  the  stars  are  the  shining  part  of  heaven ;  as  the 
star  directed  the  wise  men  to  Christ,  so  they  must  shine  to  light  others  by  their 
example  to  Him.  Alas  I  we  are  but  dim  lights ;  we  have  our  spots  and  ecMpses,  but 
this  sets  the  world  a-talking.  2.  They  must  not  be  gliding,  falling  stars ;  that 
is  charged  upon  these  seducers.  A  false  teacher  and  a  falling  star  symboliseth  in 
three  respects — (1)  It  is  but  a  counterfeit  star ;  so  is  he  an  *'  angel  of  light "  only 
in  appearance  (2  Cor.  xi.  14).  A  true  Christian  should  covet  more  to  be  than  to 
seem  to  be ;  to  be  "  light  in  the  Lord  "  before  he  is  a  "  light  in  the  world."  (2)  In 
respect  of  the  uncertainty  of  its  motion.  Falling  stars  are  not  moved  with  the 
heavens,  but  with  the  motion  of  the  air,  hither  and  thither,  and  so  are  no  sure 
direction.  So  are  they  inconstant  in  the  doctrines  which  they  teach,  running  from 
opinion  to  opinion ;  vagabond  lights,  that  seduce,  not  direct,  as  meteors  mislead 
travellers  out  of  the  way.  (3)  In  regard  of  the  fatal  issue.  A  wandering  star 
faUeth  to  the  ground,  and  becometh  a  dark  slime  and  jelly ;  so  their  pretences 
vanish  at  length,  and  they  are  found  to  be  those  that  were  never  enhghtened  and 
fixed  in  the  firmament  of  God  ;  counterfeits  cannot  last  long  ;  we  see  stars  shoot  in 
the  turn  of  an  eye,  and  Satan's  instruments  fall  from  heaven  like  lightning.  Well, 
then,  for  a  guide  to  heaven,  choose  a  star,  but  not  a  wandering  star.  New  light  is 
admired,  but  it  should  be  suspected  rather.  True  stars  have  influences ;  they  do 
not  only  enlighten  and  fill  you  with  notions,  but  enflame  and  stir  you  to  practice. 
The  last  clause  of  the  text  is,  "  to  whom  is  reserved  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever." 
In  this  threatening  three  things  are  notable — (1)  The  dreadfulness  of  the  punish- 
ment ;  (2)  the  sureness ;  (3)  the  suitableness  of  it.  1.  The  dreadfulness,  in  two 
circumstances — (1)  The  nature  of  it ;  (2)  the  duration  of  it.  (a)  The  nature  of  it, 
"  the  blackness  of  darkness."  It  is  a  Hebraism  for  exceeding  great  darkness, 
called  in  the  gospel  "  outer  darkness,"  as  being  furthest  from  God,  the  fountain  of 
life  and  glory,  and  so  expressing  that  extreme  misery,  horror,  and  torment  which  is 
in  hell.  Well,  then,  let  us  not  begin  our  hell  ourselves,  by  shunning  God's  presence, 
by  preferring  carnal  pleasures  before  the  light  of  His  countenance,  by  remaining  in 
the  night  or  darkness  of  ignorance  or  error,  by  darkening  the  glory  of  our  holy  pro- 
fession through  scandalous  living,  by  sinning  against  conscience,  and  so  providing 
food  for  the  gnawing  worm,  or  matter  of  despair  to  ourselves  to  all  eternity,  (b) 
The  next  thing  is  the  duration,  "  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever."  The  torment 
prepared  for  the  wicked  is  everlasting  (Mark  iz.  44).    This  is  the  hell  of  hell,  that, 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

as  the  torments  there  are  without  measure,  so  without  end.  Here  they  mi^ht  have 
life  and  would  not,  and  now  would  have  death,  and  cannot  (Rev.  xx.  10).  2.  So 
much  for  the  terribleness  of  the  judgment;  now,  secondly,  let  us  consider  the 
sureness  of  it:  it  is  "reserved."  Hell  torment  is  sure,  prepared,  kept  for  the 
■wicked  (Matt.  xxv.).  Carnal  men  may  lord  it  abroad  for  a  while,  and  ruffle  and 
shine  in  worldly  pomp,  but  "  the  blackness  of  darkness  is  kept  for  them."  3. 
Observe  the  suitableness  of  the  judgment  to  the  sin  ;  he  saith  "darkness,"  not  fire. 
Clouds  that  darken  the  truth  are  justly  punished  with  "  the  mists  of  darkness  for 
ever  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  17).  They  that  would  quench  the  true  light  are  cast  into  eternal 
darkness.  {T.  Blanton.)  Wandering  stars. — Wandering  stars  .-—Dean  Alford, 
with  many  other  commentators,  says,  "  These  words,  '  wandering  stars,'  mean 
comets,  which  astonish  the  world  for  a  while  and  then  pass  away  into  darkness." 
The  Bible  takes  up  this  thought  about  comets,  or  "  wandering  stars,"  and  applies  it 
to  certain  kinds  of  people.  Let  us  trace  some  of  the  features  of  similarity.  I.  In 
the  first  place,  some  folk  aee  very  much  like  comets  in  that  there  is  not  much 

SUBSTANCE   IN    THEM.      H.    Notice,  THAT    SOME   PEOPLE    ARE   LIKE  COMETS  IN  THAT  THEt 

ARE  EASILY  SWAYED  OUT  OF  THEIR  ORBITS.  The  mctaphor  applies  to  unstable  men, 
driven  hither  and  thither  by  temptations,  whose  life  presents  the  strongest  kind  of 
contrast  to  the  safe,  well-ordered  life  of  Christians,  more  fixed,  like  the  orbit  of  a 
planet,  (a)  Young  friends,  keep  to  your  orbit  of  purpose.  Have  an  aim  and  stick 
to  it.  Many  a  life  goes  to  waste  and  ruin  simply  because,  like  an  abandoned  and 
drifting  vessel,  or  a  wandering  star,  no  guiding  purpose  directs  its  course,  (b) 
More  important,  young  friends,  keep  to  your  orbit  of  right.  Let  no  Jupiter 
attraction  sway  you  out  of  it.    III.  Notice,  again,  that  comets  grow  brighter  as 

THEY  get  near  THE  SUN  AND  DARKER  AS  THEY  GO  AWAY  FROM  IT.   So  do  WC  all 

grow  more  bright  and  beautiful  as  we  get  near  to  Christ,  and  darker  as  we  go  from 
Him.  IV.  Notice,  lastly,  that  some  comets  are  truly  "  wandering  stars."  As 
unstable,  disrupted  ruins,  they  are  hastening  forward  to  a  final  darkness.  Surely 
this  is  very  suggestive  of  the  sad  ending  of  sin.  To  die  in  one's  sins  is  the 
darkest  of  deaths.  (<?.  B.  F.  Hallock.)  The  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever. — 
"  Outer  darkness  "  : — You  have  been  out  in  a  very  dark  night,  when  you  could  not 
see  an  inch  before  you,  and  the  whole  world  seemed  blotted  out  of  existence.  I 
dare  say  you  thought  that  there  could  be  no  darkness  deeper  than  that.  And  yet 
the  darkest  night  that  any  one  has  ever  seen  is  not  the  "  blackness  of  darkness"  to 
■which  the  apostle  alludes  ;  for  there  is  some  light  mixed  with  it — light  which  other 
creatures  can  see,  such  as  cats  and  owls,  though  you  cannot.  The  stars  are  shining 
aU  the  time,  and  their  rays  are  piercing  through  the  universal  gloom  and  lighting 
it  up,  so  that  it  is  not  so  dense  as  it  would  otherwise  be.  We  know  nothing  of  the 
"  blackness  of  darkness  " — darkness  without  light ;  darkness  in  blank,  empty  space. 
There  is  one  spot  in  the  visible  universe  that  can  in  some  measure  enable  us  to 
realise  the  awful  conception  of  Jude.  When  Sir  William  Herschel  examined  the 
southern  part  of  the  starry  heavens  on  one  occasion  with  his  huge  telescope,  he 
noticed  in  the  constellation  of  the  Scorpion— the  eighth  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  into  which 
the  sun  enters  about  the  23rd  of  October — a  particular  dark  spot ;  and  he  was  very 
much  startled  and  said,  "  There  is  certainly  a  hole  in  the  heavens  there."  There 
was  in  that  spot  a  total  absence  of  any  star,  or  gleam  of  light  such  as  elsewhere,  in 
countless  myriads,  overspread  the  entire  firmament.  His  son  Sir  John  was  some 
time  afterwards  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  as  Astronomer  Eoyal,  and  with  the  same 
telescope,  in  the  clear  atmosphere  of  South  Africa,  he  looked  up  at  the  same  spot 
in  the  starry  sky,  and  saw  that  his  father  was  correct.  He  was,  indeed,  looking  at 
a  hole  in  the  heavens,  where  no  mortal  eye  with  any  instrument  that  the  highest 
skill  could  devise  could  detect  one  solitary  glimmer  of  far-off  light.  It  is  into  outer 
darkness  like  that  that  lost  souls  are  cast  which  have  separated  themselves  from 
God  and  refused  to  obey  His  law  of  love  and  light.  Human  beings  cannot  bear 
darkness.  There  are  some  creatures  that  love  it — that  hide  themselves  under 
stones  and  in  dark  corners  of  the  earth.  But  man  was  made  for  the  light,  and 
therefore  dreads  darkness  more  than  anything  else.  God  has  given  to  us  this 
instinctive  fear  of  darkness  because  it  is  injurious  to  us,  except  during  the  short 
time  that  it  is  necessary  to  aid  and  deepen  our  sleep  at  night,  which  may  be  said  to 
be  a  kind  of  death.  He  meant  us  to  dread  it  and  avoid  it,  and  to  live  in  the  light. 
I  said  that  in  this  world  it  is  impossible  to  get  out  of  the  reach  of  light.  In  the 
natural  world  God  has  placed  the  orbit  of  our  earth  amid  regions  that  are  con- 
tinually ht  up  with  the  light  of  suns  and  stars  everywhere.  And  so  too  in  the 
spiritual  world  God  has  placed  your  sphere  and  orbit  in  a  region  of  light.     The 


JUDE.  53 

Sun  of  Righteousness  shines  upon  you  always.  You  cannot  get  beyond  the  reach 
of  God's  light.  Behind  the  gloom  in  which  you  bury  yourself  by  conscious  and 
wlKul  sin,  He  works  to  bring  you  out  of  the  darkness  into  His  own  marvellous 
light.  God  wishes  you  in  His  own  light  to  see  light  upon  all  the  great  things  that 
concern  your  immortal  welfare.  He  wishes  you  to  walk  in  the  light,  for  He  knows 
that  darkness  is  your  greatest  enemy  ;  for  darkness  means  the  loss  of  power  to  use 
the  organs  of  life,  the  loss  of  enjoyment  in  the  bright  and  beautiful  world  which 
He  has  made  for  your  happiness,  and,  if  carried  to  an  extreme,  the  loss  of  life 
itself.  Have  you  ever  seen  a  root,  say  a  potato,  or  a  dahlia  root,  sprouting  in  a 
dark  cellar?  What  a  brittle,  feeble,  monstrous  growth  does  it  produce;  the 
semblance  of  a  plant,  without  sap,  or  strength,  or  beauty — a  white,  death-like 
ghost !  But  even  that  feeble  abortive  eiiort  to  grow  is  caused  by  the  small  quantity 
of  light  that  finds  its  way  into  the  darkest  cellar,  and  cannot  be  shut  out.  But 
supposing  that  you  could  exclude  the  light  altogether,  and  make  the  place  absolutely 
dark,  then  not  only  would  the  root  of  the  plant  make  no  effort  to  grow,  but  it  would 
-wither  and  die  away  altogether ;  it  would  lose  the  life  that  it  had.  Complete  dark- 
ness is  fatal  to  all  life.  And  so,  hiding  yourself  from  the  light  of  God  that  shines 
all  around  you,  loving  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  your  deeds  are  evil,  you 
become  like  blind  fishes — you  lose  some  faculty  or  power  of  your  soul.  You  make 
yourself  blind  to  the  things  that  belong  to  your  peace.  You  deprive  yourself  of 
much  that  is  fitted  to  bless  and  ennoble  your  life.  But  separating  yourself  from 
God  altogether,  you  would  lose  the  life  itself  of  your  soul.  Your  living  soul  would 
become  a  dead,  inanimate  thing,  without  a  pulse  of  love  or  a  glow  of  hope.  It 
would  be  all  darkness — not  the  darkness  cast  by  the  shadow  of  God's  presence,  but 
the  utter,  deathly  darkness  of  the  absence  of  God.  You  would  wander  out  of  the 
region  of  God's  light,  out  of  the  Milky  Way  of  God's  gracious  influences,  into 
outer  darkness,  where  Dante's  terrible  words  would  be  realised  to  the  full,  "  All 
hope  abandon,  ye  who  enter  here."  Does  not  the  thought  of  that  awful  "  blackness 
of  darkness  for  ever"  urge  you  to  cry  for  the  light,  to  come  to  the  light,  to  ask  God 
to  lighten  your  eyes  lest  you  sleep  the  sleep  of  death — to  walk  in  the  light  while 
you  have  the  light  ?     (H.  Maciidllan,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  And  Enoch  also,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  prophesied  of  these, 
Baying,  Behold  the  Lord  cometh. — Enoch,  the  herald  of  judgment : — The  first  thing 
to  be  considered  is,  where  or  whence  St.  Jude  obtained  this  prediction  of  Enoch — 
whether  from  immediate  revelation,  or  from  tradition,  or  from  some  book  then 
extant  in  the  Church.  There  is  indeed  an  apocryphal  book,  "  The  Book  of 
Enoch,"  which  appears  to  have  been  oi'ten  used  by  the  early  Fathers,  and  to  have 
acquired  a  great  celebrity  in  the  first  days  of  Christianity.  For  centuries  this  book 
was  supposed  to  have  been  lost,  and  our  only  knowledge  of  it  was  derived  from 
quotations  in  other  writings.  An  Ethiopic  version  was  at  length  discovered  in 
Ethiopia,  and  brought  to  England  by  the  well-known  traveller,  Bruce.  In  this  book 
there  are  passages  which  answer  very  nearly  to  the  prophecy  recorded  by  St.  Jude. 
It  has  therefore  been  a  common  supposition  that  the  apostle  derived  from  this  book 
the  prediction  which  he  ascribes  to  the  patriarch.  But  the  likelihood  is  that  the 
Book  of  Enoch  was  written  after  the  Epistle  of  St.  Jude,  so  that  Jude  could  not 
have  drawn  the  prophecy  from  the  book ;  but,  rather,  the  writer  of  the  book 
inserted  in  it  the  prophecy  that  he  might  give  to  his  forgery  the  appearance  of 
truth.  We  may  believe,  therefore,  that  in  all  probability  Jude  was  informed  of  the 
prediction  by  immediate  revelation.  .  But  whatever  the  source  whence  the  apostle 
derived  it,  we  may  be  certain  that  the  prophecy  was  actually  delivered  by  Enoch. 
The  prophecy  may  indeed  have  had  a  primary  reference  to  the  Flood ;  but  it  is 
evident,  from  the  application  of  the  prediction  by  St.  Jude,  that  Enoch  pointed  at 
events,  of  which  the  Deluge  and  its  accompaniments  were  but  feeble  types.  We  are 
expressly  informed  that  Enoch  walked  with  God  after  he  begat  Methuselah  three 
hundred  years  ;  so  that  whatever  pre-eminence  in  piety  was  denoted  by  '*  walking 
with  God,"  it  is  evident  that  Enoch  possessed  it  from  early  days,  and  retained  it  to 
the  last.  He  is  thus  an  instance  alike  of  youthful  conversion  and  uniform  con- 
sistency. Neither  was  he  content,  whilst  having  his  conversation  in  heaven,  to 
allow  the  wickedness  of  others  to  pass  unrebuked.  Here  it  is  that  his  prophetic 
character  comes  in,  and  when  you  couple  his  preaching  with  his  own  translation, 
you  may  perceive  that,  by  and  through  him,  was  information  given  to  an  ante- 
diluvian world  on  points  which  many  have  supposed  left  in  impenetrable  obscurity. 
These  points  are  those  of  a  future  life,  and  a  retributive  economy,  which  shsJI 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

decide  men's  portions  in  another  state  of  being.     Thus  was  Enoch  to  the  ante- 
diluvian world  what  Elijah  was  to  those  who  lived  beneath  the  law — a  mighty 
demonstration  of  another  state  of  being.     Who  had  a  right  to  question  that  the 
Boul  perished  not  with  the  body — nay,  that  even  the  body  was  not  to  lie  for  ever  in 
the  dust,  when  a  patriarch  had  departed  from  the  world,  yielding  not  to  death,  and 
asking  not  a  sepulchre?    Already  must  Christ  have  virtually  accomplished  the 
prophecy,  though  it  had  not  yet  been  delivered—"  Oh  I  death,  I  will  be  thy  plague; 
oh,  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction."    Already  must  He  have  "opened  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  to  believers,"  though  He  had  not  yet  suffered  their  penalty,  nor  paid  the 
price  of  their  admission.     It  seems  as  though  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  had 
been  disclosed  to  mankind  ;  yea,  presented  as  already  accomplished  in  what  befel 
Enoch.     The  original  curse  was  on  body  and  soul ;  but  when  body  and  soul  went 
up  to  glory  there  was  given  the  most  convincing  demonstration  that  the  curse  would 
be  counteracted,  or,  rather,  that  it  was  already  removed.    And  now,  if  I  would 
know  how  the  gospel  was  preached  to  man,  in  its  fulness,  before  the  Flood,  and 
would  assure  myself  that  those  who  perished  in  the  Deluge,  perished  not  without 
sufficient  notice  of  redemption,  and  sufficient  motive  to  the  practice  of  piety,  I  turn 
my  gaze  on  the  ascending  patriarch,  and  I  feel  that,  as  he  stood  upon  the  cloud 
and  mounted  heavenward,  he  proclaimed  to  the  whole  human  family  the  reward  of 
obedience  in  the  restoration  to  immortality.     And  I  need  nothing  further  to  con- 
vince me  that,  in  the  earliest  days,  as  well  as  in  later,  men  were  instructed  to 
expect  eternal  life  through  conformity  to  the  known  will  of  God.    {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  judgment: — 1.  Christ's  second  coming  is  to  judgment.     When  we  frustrate 
the  end  of  His  coming  as  a  Redeemer,  we  make  way  for  the  end  of  His  coming  as  a 
Judge.     2.  When  Christ  cometh  to  judgment,  one  great  part  of  His  work  will  be  to 
convince  sinners,  and  that  openly,  publicly.     3.  Again  observe,  when  Christ  hath 
convinced.  He  will  condemn,  and  when  He  hath  condemned.  He  will  execute.     4. 
From  that "  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds,"  &c.,  observe  that  the  process  of  the  last  day 
chiefly  lieth  against  the  ungodly.     Ungodliness   doth   chiefly  provoke ;   for  the 
chiefest  part  of  the  law  provideth  for  our  duty  to  God.     The  dignity  of   every 
command  is  known   by  the  order  of  it.    Now,  in  the  first  place,  godliness  is 
required,   and   then  righteousness,   or  a  care   of   moral  duties.    5.    Once   more 
observe,  these  ungodly  men  are  the  rather  judged  because  they  commit  sin  with  an 
ungodly  mind ;  for  so  it  is  in  the  text,  "  ungodly  deeds  ungodly  committed."    A 
child  of  God  may  fall  into  wickedness,  but  he  doth  not  commit  it  wickedly,  with  a 
full  consent ;  men  are  not  condemned  for  infirmities,  but  iniquities.     A  godly  man 
doth  not  so  much  act  sin  as  he  suffereth  by  it.     He  doth  not  pour  out  his  whole 
heart  this  way  ;  there  are  constant  dislikes  in  the  soul,  which  are  a  restraint  to 
him.     6.  From  the  next  clause,  "  and  their  hard  speeches,"  observe,  not  only  the 
deeds  of  ungodly  men,  but  their  speeches  are  brought  into  judgment.     Words  do 
not  perish  with  the  breath  with  which  they  are  uttered ;  no,  they  remain  upon 
record,  and  we  are  to  give  an  account  of  them  at  the  last  day  (Matt.  xii.  36 ; 
Jas.  ii.  12).     7.  Once  more  from  thence  observe,  that  of  all  speeches  men's  "  hard 
speeches  "  shall  be  produced  at  the  day  of  judgment.    Now,  what  are  these  hard 
speeches  ?    I  answer — Either  such  as  have  anger  in  them  (Prov.  iv.  24) ;  or  such  as 
have  pride  in  them,  or  contempt  of  others,  as  when  we  lessen  their  abilities,  insult 
over  their  miseries  (Psa.  Ixix.  26) ;  or  triumph  over  their  failings.     Again,  such 
as  have  bitterness  and  malice  in  them,  as  calumnies  and  reproaches  (Psa.  Ixiv.  3, 4). 
8.  The  next  note  is,  that  of  all  hard  speeches  those  are  the  worst  which  do  most 
directly  reflect  upon  the  honour  and  glory  of  Christ ;  for  so  it  is  in  the  text,  "  hard 
speeches  spoken  against  Him."    Now,  hard   speeches   against  Christ  are  either 
blasphemies  against  either  of  His  natures,  or  murmurings  against  His  providence  : 
"  Your  words  have  been  stout  against  Me  "  (Mai.  iii.  13).   When  we  tax  Providence, 
as  if  the  Lord  were  blind,  careless,  unjust,  or  injurious  in  His  dealings.     So  also 
when  we  speak  against  His  ways,  calling  zeal  fury,  strictness  a  foolish  preciseness, 
and  godliness  puritanism.     0  Christians  1  these  hard  speeches  will  cost  dear,  here 
or  hereafter.     (T.  Manton.) 

Ver.  16.  These  are  murmvirers,  complainers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts. — 
Church  disturbers: — 1.  Insinuators.  The  whisper,  the  shrug  of  the  shoulder,  the 
half  sentence  containing  a  surmise  of  the  other  half,  and  the  warning  of  some  awful 
revelation  to  come  respecting  the  servant  of  God  and  his  character,  mark  these  men 
in  every  age.  They  succeed  to  create  distrust  of  the  ministry,  and  dry  up  the 
fountain  of  Christian  sympathy  and  prayer.     2.  Fault-finders.     Nothing  is  done  to 


JUDE.  55 

please  them.  They  are  on  the  alert  to  find  out  mistakes.  They  turn  even  the  love 
feast  into  a  scene  of  embitterment.  3.  Libertines.  The  root  of  their  character  is 
a  love  of  sin — some  form  of  gross  immorality.  They  hate  the  truth  because  it 
exposes  their  villainy  and  shame.  4.  Pretenders.  They  are  full  of  ostentation, 
fond  of  tall  talk.  To  the  ignorant,  loud  swelling  words  sound  grandly,  but  to  the 
wise,  "  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot."  5.  Dissemblers.  They  put  on  a 
smiling  face,  and  speak  smooth  words  to  persons  of  rank,  to  secure  their  appro- 
bation and  gain  their  support.  They  subject  principles  to  appearances.  Let  the 
mantle  of  Jude  fall  on  our  ministers.     (T.  Davies,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17-19.  Remember  ye  the  words  .  .  .  spoken  before  of  the  apostles. — 
Words  to  he  remevibered  : — 1.  Great  should  be  the  care  of  the  ministers  of  Christ  to 
■warn  the  Church  of  approaching  evils,  especially  of  seducers.  2.  It  is  our  duty  to 
acknowledge  and  commend  the  gifts  and  graces  of  God  bestowed  upon  others  with 
respect.  3.  The  consent  between  the  penmen  of  Scripture  is  sweet  and  harmonious ; 
they  were  all  breathed  upon  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  breathed  forth  the  same  truth 
and  holiness.  4.  Scripture  is  the  best  preservative  against  seduction.  5.  They  who 
are  forewarned  should  be  forearmed.  (W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.)  Mockers  in  the  last 
time. — Mockers : — 1.  What  is  told  to  the  Church  in  general,  we  must  apprehend  it 
as  told  to  us.  Paul  telleth  Timothy,  and  Peter  telleth  the  distressed  strangers,  and 
Jude  saith  they  told  you.  The  Bible  is  a  message  sent  from  heaven  to  acquaint  us 
with  the  mind  of  God  ;  if  we  own  the  Divine  authority  of  it,  why  do  we  regard  it  no 
more  ?  2.  We  should  not  be  troubled  at  what  is  foretold  ;  monsters  expected  are 
not  wondered  at ;  expectation  forearmeth  the  mind  against  evil  (John  xvi.  4).  We 
are  the  better  prepared  to  entertain  evils  when  we  expect  them  before  they  come,  and 
the  evil  to  which  the  mind  is  accustomed  seemeth  the  less.  Again,  we  have  an 
experience  of  God's  truth  in  the  prediction.  Finally,  it  assureth  us  that  the  Lord 
hath  a  hand  and  a  counsel  in  all  our  troubles,  for  He  told  us  of  them  before.  3. 
The  Scriptures  speak  much  of  the  evil  of  the  latter  times  ;  there  is  more  knowledge 
and  yet  more  sin  and  error.  The  latter  days  are  as  the  bottom  and  sink  that  receive 
the  dregs  of  foregoing  ages,  and  as  the  world  groweth  old  it  is  much  given  to  dreams 
and  dotage.  4.  Among  other  sins  that  are  found  in  the  latter  times,  there  will  be 
many  scoffers,  partly  because  in  times  of  controversy  men  will  lose  all  awe — when 
truths  are  made  questionable  assent  is  weakened ;  partly  because  in  times  of  liberty 
men  will  give  vent  to  their  thoughts.  5.  Mockers  and  scoffers  are  usually  the  worst 
of  sinners.  Scorning  cometh  from  custom  in  sinning,  and  maketh  way  for  freedom 
in  sinning.  6.  Those  that  cast  off  the  awe  of  the  Lord's  coming  will  certainly  give 
up  themselves  to  brutish  lusts.  7.  It  argueth  a  state  of  wickedness  to  walk  after 
our  own  lusts ;  that  is,  when  sin  and  lust  is  our  constant  practice.  (T.  Manton.) 
Mockers : — By  scoffing  at  things  sacred,  and  ridiculing  the  notion  that  there  is  any 
harm  in  licentiousness,  or  anything  estimable  in  holiness,  they  created  a  moral 
atmosphere  in  which  men  sinned  with  a  light  heart,  because  sin  was  made  to  look 
as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  no  moment,  a  thing  to  be  indulged  in  without  anxiety  or 
remorse.  It  would  be  more  reasonable  and  less  reprehensible  to  make  a  mock  at 
carnage  or  pestilence,  and  teach  men  to  go  with  a  light  heart  into  a  desolating  war 
or  plague-stricken  neighbourhood.  In  such  cases  experience  of  the  manifest 
horrors  would  soon  cure  the  light-heartedness.  But  the  horrible  nature  of  sin  is 
not  so  manifest,  and  with  regard  to  that,  experience  teaches  its  lesson  more  slowly. 
It  is  like  a  poisoning  of  the  blood  rather  than  a  wound  in  the  flesh,  and  may  have 
done  incalculable  mischief  before  any  serious  pain  is  felt,  or  any  grave  alarm  excited. 
Hence  it  is  quite  easy  for  many  to  "  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts  "  and  at  the 
same  time  "  mock  at  sin"  and  its  consequences.     (A.  Plummer,  D.D.) 

Yet.  19.  These  be  they  who  separate  themselves. — Separatists : — They  "  separate 
themselves  "  from  sound  faith  by  following  corrupted  speculations.  They  "  separate 
themselves  "  from  good  works,  inasmuch  as  they  quit  that  faith  which  is  the  only 
genuine  source  of  these  works,  and  go  astray  after  the  miserable  delusions  of 
licentious  indulgences.  And  in  thus  abandoning  equally  the  right  belief  and  the 
right  conduct,  they  virtually  "  separate  themselves  "  from  the  true  Church.  How- 
ever they  may  still  wear  the  name  of  Christian,  they  have  no  communion  with 
Christ.  Li  a  word,  they  are  "  separatists  "  owing  to  their  being  "  sensualists." 
They  love  the  indulgence  of  evil  passions ;  and  hence  they  hate  the  sacred  influence 
that  would  restrain  them.  They  are  attached  by  habits  or  carelessness,  of  foUy,  or 
of  sordid  pursuits,  to  a  life  of  irreligion ;  and  hence  they  remain  at  a  distance  from 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

the  holy  power  that  would  cut  down  all  such  ties,  and  introduce  them  to  the  habits 
of  a  new  course.  The  faith  of  the  gospel  is  too  pure  for  them  to  adopt ;  and  therefore 
if  they  assume  the  profession  of  its  name,  they  must  hold  its  principles  under  some 
corrupted  form.  The  practice  of  the  gospel  is  too  pure  for  them  to  follow ;  and 
therefore  if  they  still  pretend  to  a  compliance  with  its  requirements,  they  comply 
under  many  abatements ;  and  in  fact  do  it  under  those  mitigations  to  the  strictness 
of  duty,  which  actually  amount  to  a  dereliction  of  the  Christian  life.  They  "  separate 
themselves  "  from  the  faith ;  because  in  practice  they  are  "  sensual."  The  root 
of  all  the  evil,  however,  is  their  "  not  having  the  Spirit."  {W.  Muir,  D.D.) 
Separation  from  the  Church  : — 1.  Separation  or  dividing  ourselves  from  the  fellow- 
ship of  God's  Church  is  sinful,  or  a  work  of  the  flesh.  The  apostle  describeth  carnal 
persons,  and  of  them  he  saith,  "  They  separate  themselves,"  and  accordingly  the 
apostle  reckoneth  "  seditions,  heresies,"  or  sect-makings  in  the  Church,  among  the 
works  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  20).  Cain  was  the  first  separatist  we  read  of.  "  He  went 
out  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  "  (Gen.  iv.  19).  God  is  everywhere :  how  from  Hia 
presence  ?  The  meaning  is,  from  the  Church,  where  is  the  presence  of  His  grace. 
2.  It  is  little  for  the  honour  of  Christ  that  His  body  is  crumbled  into  small  bits  and 
portions.  A  draft  of  wine  is  best  preserved  in  the  hogshead,  and  Christians  in  their 
societies ;  coals  lying  together  keep  in  the  heat ;  apostasy  began  in  forsaking  the 
assemblies  (Heb.  x.  23-25 ;  1  John  ii.  19).  Partly  as  to  our  outward  peace  and 
welfare:  separation  sets  others  against  us,  and  us  against  them.  Religion,  being 
the  highest  bond,  when  it  is  once  violated,  the  breach  is  the  more  irreconcilable, 
(r.  Manton.)  Having  not  the  Spirit. — Sensual  men  : — These  two  are  contrary, 
"  flesh  and  Spirit  "  (Gal.  v.  17),  and  they  that  cherish  the  one  do  necessarily  banish 
the  other,  and  as  they  enlarge  the  one  they  straiten  the  other.  The  Spirit  is  a  free 
spirit,  and  sensual  persons  are  very  slaves  ;  the  Spirit  is  a  pure  spirit,  and  they  are 
unclean  ;  the  Spirit  is  active,  and  they  are  of  a  dull  and  stupid  nature ;  the  Spirit 
worketh  intellectual  and  chaste  delights,  and  they  are  altogether  for  base  pleasures  : 
such  a  perfect  contrariety  is  there  between  them.  1.  Sensual  men  have  little  of  the 
enlightening  of  the  Spirit ;  their  palate  is  better  than  their  understanding  (Eph.  v.  18). 
In  marshy  countries  we  do  not  expect  a  clear  air ;  so  sensual  persons  have  seldom 
any  clear  thoughts  of  God  :  men  given  to  pleasures  can  taste  meats  and  drinks,  but 
not  doctrines.  2.  Sensual  men  have  little  of  the  quickenings  and  eflicacy  of  the 
Spirit ;  the  more  they  dissolve  and  melt  away  their  precious  hours  and  spirits  in 
pleasures,  the  more  do  they  grow  sapless,  dead,  and  careless,  and  lose  all  tenderness 
of  conscience  and  liveliness  of  affection ;  they  quench  the  vigour  of  nature,  much 
more  do  they  quench  the  Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  19).  3.  They  have  little  of  the  comforts 
of  the  Spirit.  The  comforts  of  the  Spirit  arise  from  meditating  on  the  works  of 
God  (Psa.  civ.  34),  or  tasting  His  love  (1  Pet.  ii.  3),  or  contemplating  our  great  hopes 
(2  Cor.  iv.  18).  Now  carnal  men  can  relish  none  of  this  ;  they  cannot  exercise  love, 
or  faith,  or  hope,  that  they  may  delight  themselves  in  God,  and  have  some  lively 
tastes  of  eternal  life.  When  the  soul  lieth  under  the  dominion  of  carnal  pleasures, 
it  is  incapable  of  thinking  upon  God  and  His  works,  or  relishing  inward  consolation ; 
love  is  preoccupied.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  20.  Building  up  youraelvea  on  your  moat  holy  faith.— The  Church  and 
taints,  as  houses,  must  be  edified  cyr  builded  daily  : — This  word  "  edify  "  signifieth 
"  to  build."  This  metaphor  is  not  improperly  applied  to  the  saints,  for  building  and 
edification  is  proper  to  houses.  Now  the  Church  and  saints  of  God  are  as  houses, 
and  therefore  may  be  said  to  be  builded  and  edified.  This  teacheth  us  two  things, 
first,  that  all  Christians  should  be  edifiers,  builders  ;  that  is,  should  make  themselves 
a  seemly  house  for  God  to  dwell  in.  We  read  what  care  David  had  to  build  a 
temple,  but  God  would  not  suffer  him ;  but  now  every  man  must  build  a  temple  for 
God,  even  his  own  soul.  We  read  what  cost  Solomon  bestowed  upon  the  temple, 
but  now  God  careth  not  for  such  temples  made  of  stone ;  He  will  have  a  temple 
made  of  lively  stones.  All  true  Christians  must  be  builders ;  but  before  they  build 
they  must  know  how  to  build,  and  the  way  to  come  to  this  knowledge  is  the 
Scripture.  No  carpenter  will  build  a  house  without  rule  and  square,  and  the  rule 
and  square  of  Christian  building  is  the  Word  of  God ;  by  it  our  hearts  and  souls  are 
squared,  and  made  fit  for  God's  house.  If  Solomon's  workmen  were  one  month  in 
Libanus  about  the  work  of  the  temple,  and  two  months  at  home  about  their  own 
business,  let  us  exceed  them,  let  us  employ  two  months  about  the  Lord's  building, 
and  but  one  about  our  own  business.  Let  us  first  seek  the  kingdom  of  God.  And 
as  we  must  edify  and  buUd  houses  for  ourselves,  so  for  our  brethren  also  ;  so  saith 


JUDE.  57 

the  apostle.  Exhort  one  another  and  edify  one  another,  but  especially  we  must 
edify  our  children  ;  a  father  should  especially  build  his  son  in  religion  and  virtue. 
Secondly,  this  teacheth  us  that  it  is  not  enough  to  begin  to  build  in  faith  and  good 
works,  but  we  must  go  on,  go  forward,  increase  in  it.  Our  progress  in  religion  is 
compared  to  building.  Houses  are  edified  from  the  foundation  to  the  walls,  from 
the  walls  to  the  roof.  (S.  Otes.)  Character  building  : — I.  Evekt  man  is  tbult 
THE  ARCHITECT  OF  HIS  OWN  CHARACTER.  It  Is  oftcu  Said  that  a  man  is  the  architect 
of  his  own  fortune.  If  a  man  build  a  fortune  he  has  to  do  it  with  his  own  hands 
and  his  own  brains.  One  thing  is  certain,  nobody  else  is  going  to  do  it  for  him. 
Just  so  every  man  is  the  builder  of  his  own  character.  Sometimes  a  fortune  may 
be  made  suddenly,  the  result  of  an  accident ;  but  never  is  this  true  of  character. 
II.  We  must  NOTICE  THE  IMPORTANT  PARTS  OF  THIS  STRUCTURE.  1.  The  foundation  is 
essential.  If  it  be  ill  laid  no  subsequent  care,  toil,  or  expense  can  avail.  Human 
nature  is  a  quicksand,  in  which  are  thrown  all  man's  efforts,  his  works,  his  wisdom, 
his  piety ;  but  all  of  them  put  together  cannot  furnish  a  sure  foundation  for 
character.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  which  is  laid,  which  *^ 
is  Christ  Jesus."  2.  This  foundation  Eock  once  secured,  we  are  to  be  careful 
to  build  upon  it — not  near  or  about  it,  but  upon  it,  and  upon  nothing  else. 
Think  of  an  architect  carefully  laying  a  foundation,  and  then  buUding  on  one  side 
of  it.  3.  The  position  of  the  superstructure  is  also  important.  This  you  are  to 
build  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Every  stone  we  lay  must  bear  a 
relation  to  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  The  centre  of  gravity  must  fall  within  the 
base.  The  great  leaning  tower  of  Pisa  is  a  wonder  to  all  who  see  it,  because  it  does 
not  fall,  for  it  leans  fifteen  feet  over  the  base.  The  centre  of  gravity  is  still  ten  feet 
within  the  base,  hence  it  cannot  fall.  There  are  some  characters  that  are  leaning 
towers ;  they  are  so  strange  and  eccentric  in  many  things,  so  far  out  of  plumb,  that 
we  wonder  why  they  do  not  fall  to  utter  destruction.  Ah,  here  is  the  grand  secret : 
the  centre  of  the  heart's  gravity  still  falls  within  Christ.  HI.  Character  building 
IS  A  PROGRESSIVE  WORK.  In  heathen  mythology  it  is  said  that  the  goddess  Minerva 
sprung  from  the  head  of  Jupiter,  at  once  full  grown  and  glorious ;  but  character, 
like  a  great  edifice,  is  of  slow  growth.  As  the  builder  lays  brick  after  brick,  stone 
after  stone,  erects  beam  after  beam,  so,  slowly  and  laboriously,  this  character  work 
advances.  There  is  not  an  act  of  our  lives,  however  small,  not  a  thought  even,  that 
does  not  add  a  stone  to  that  edifice.  IV.  The  materials  to  be  used  are  important. 
It  is  not  every  quarry  that  can  furnish  materials  for  a  cathedral.  Character  will 
stand  longer  than  even  stone,  or  gold,  or  silver.  If  a  man  is  to  build  for  the  future 
he  must  select  materials  that  will  last.  Gold,  silver,  precious  stones — love,  faith, 
hope,  self-denial,  and  patience,  these  are  the  materials  for  a  lasting  character.  V. 
We  must  build  for  eternitt.  We  must  live  in  the  house  we  build.  Character, 
not  circumstances,  makes  a  man  happy  or  miserable.  If  a  man  has  a  pure  and  holy 
character,  do  what  you  will  you  cannot  make  him  unhappy.  VI.  We  build  fob 
inspection.  How  careful  were  the  old  cathedral  builders  that  the  most  distant  work 
should  be  as  well  done  as  that  nearest  the  eye.  Why  ?  Because  they  were  built, 
not  for  man's  eye,  but  for  the  eye  of  God,  who  sees  all.  So  in  character  building 
this  should  be  our  motto.  Not  for  man,  but  for  God,  whose  eye  sees  the  most  trifling 
act  or  thought.  VII.  We  must  not  mistake  the  scaffolding  fob  the  building. 
We  meet  a  friend  and  ask.  How  is  your  business,  your  health,  your  family  ? — this 
is  all  scaffolding.  Instead,  we  should  ask.  How  is  your  character  getting  on,  the 
inner  man  ? — then  we  should  get  at  the  heart  of  the  thing.  Scaffolding  may  be 
swept  away  by  the  storm,  but  character  remains  just  as  we  form  it,  unchanged  for 
ever.  (<7.  S.  Holme,  D.I).)  The  Christian  life  ; — I.  The  Christian  growing  in 
holiness.  "  Building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  By  the  "faith  "  you 
are  to  understand  the  whole  body  of  Christian  doctrines.  And  this  faith  upon  which 
we  are  to  build  the  apostle  describes  as  a  "  most  holy  faith."  That  which  is  to  bear 
the  superstructure  of  Christian  hopes  should  be  well  proved.  The  faith  of  the 
gospel  may  well  be  called  a  "holy  faith" — holy  in  its  Author,  holy  in  its  design, 
holy  in  the  precepts  it  inculcates,  holy  in  the  rewards  it  holds  out.  Yes,  everything 
about  this  faith  is  holy.  Holy  is  the  law  its  doctrines  are  designed  to  vindicate. 
Holy  is  the  offering  provided  by  the  righteous  demands  of  God.  Holy  is  the 
conversation  required  of  those  who  should  embrace  its  promises.  Holy  is  the  Agent 
who  is  ordained  to  make  us  meet  for  the  presence  of  God.  Such,  then,  is  the  faith 
upon  which  we  are  to  build.  The  text  further  intimates  that  there  must  be  a 
•*  building  up " — that  is,  a  progressive  advancement — until  it  becomes  a  perfect 
building  of  God.     II.  The  Christian  praying  in  the  strength  of  God.    "  Praying 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

in  the  Holy  Ghost."  III.  The  Christian  watching  against  the  enemies  of  his  faith. 
"  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  IV.  The  Christian  waiting  for  his  hope. 
"  Lookiiig  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life."  (D.  Moore, 
M.A.)  Building  up  : — I.  Christian  edification.  "But  ye,  beloved,  building  up 
yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  1.  A  sure  foundation.  The  gospel  which 
they  had  received  from  faithful  witnesses  contains  the  fundamental  truths  for  soul 
building.  2.  A  wise  diUgence.  To  build  up  a  Christian  character  is  man's  noblest 
ideal.  U.  Spiritual  aid.  "  Praying  in  the  Holy  Spirit."  1.  The  Spirit  reveals 
our  wants.  2.  The  Spirit  inspires  us  with  faith.  3.  The  Spirit  blends  the  labour 
and  the  blessing.  The  building  is  advanced  by  the  twofold  energy  of  God  and  man. 
4.  The  Spirit  also  wiU  bring  in  the  final  issue.  (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  The  spiritual 
building : — I.  Before  building.  1.  Count  the  cost  (Luke  xiv.  28).  2.  Prepare  fit 
matter  (2  Chron.  ii.  8,  9  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  12).  3.  Prepare  skilful  and  faithful  builders. 
Some  build  a  wall,  but  daub  it  with  untempered  mortar,  which  the  shower  and  hail- 
stones throw  down  again  (Ezek.  xiii.  11).  Some  flattering  builders  there  be  that 
gUd  rotten  posts  and  mud  walls,  and  by  flatteries  cause  people  to  err  (Jer.  xxiii.). 
Some  that  square  their  work  by  a  false  rule ;  not  the  Word,  but  some  profounder 
school-learning.  JI.  In  building.  1.  Lay  a  good  foundation,  both  for  matter  and 
manner.  (1)  The  matter  is  Jesus  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  11).  (2)  Then  the  manner  of 
laying  this  foundation  sure  is  to  dig  deep,  as  you  know  the  foundation  of  a  great 
house  had  need  to  be.  Lay  it  in  humility  and  godly  sorrow,  called  in  Heb.  vi.  1 
the  foundation  of  repentance,  because  it  can  never  be  laid  without  a  deep  sense  of 
sorrow  for  sin,  giving  us  a  clear  sight  what  need  we  have  of  Christ.  2.  The  founda- 
tion thus  laid.  Lay  all  the  materials  skilfully  upon  the  same  foundation ;  for  building 
is  an  artificial  coupling  of  all  materials  by  square  upon  the  same  foundation.  So 
here — (1)  There  is  use  of  many  materials.  In  every  mean  house  there  must  be  some- 
what of  everything,  some  stone,  timber,  lime,  lead,  glass,  iron,  and  in  this  building 
must  be  some  degrees  of  all  graces — some  faith,  hope,  love,  knowledge,  and  the  rest. 
Paith  as  gates  of  brass,  and  door  to  let  us  in  unto  Christ  and  His  Church  for 
salvation  ;  knowledge  as  windows  to  lighten  the  house,  or  else  all  would  be  dark ; 
hope  as  the  glass  or  casements  to  look  out  unto  things  believed,  specially  the  life  to 
come  ;  love  as  the  cement  to  knit  all  together ;  patience  as  the  pillars,  bearing  all 
the  weight  of  the  house,  &c.  (2)  These  and  the  rest  of  the  graces  must  be  laid 
together  (2  Pet.  i.  5).  (3)  By  line  and  square  of  the  Word  (Exod.  xxv.  40).  (4)  All 
upon  the  same  foundation — Christ.  3.  Build  up  to  the  laying  of  the  roof  and  ridge 
tiles,  stiU  striving  to  perfection  (Heb.  vi.  1 ;  Eph.  ii.  21).  III.  After  building.  1. 
As  the  Jews,  having  built  an  house,  must  dedicate  it  to  the  Lord,  so  do  thou  thine. 
Especially  the  temple  and  tabernacle  were  solemnly  set  apart  for  His  service  and 
sacrifices.  Do  thou  also  offer  in  this  thy  house  the  daily  sacrifice  of  prayer,  praise, 
alms  which  smell  sweet  (Phil.  iv.  18).  Let  it  be  the  house  of  prayer,  a  spiritual 
house,  to  offer  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ  (1  Pet.  ii.  5). 
Tea,  offer  thy  soul  and  body  a  reasonable  sacrifice,  living  and  holy  (Kom.  xii.  1), 
which  is  the  right  dedication  of  thy  house.  2.  Furnish  thy  house  with  needful 
utensils.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  principles  and  prospects  of  a  servant  of  Christ : — 
I.  The  principles  which  are  here  suggested  to  us  as  constituting  true  religion. 
1.  True  religion  is  here  represented  as  a  building,  the  foundation  of  which  is  laid  in 
the  faith  of  Christ.  "Building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  Whether 
it  relate  to  personal  or  to  social  religion,  this  must  be  the  foundation  of  the  fabric, 
or  the  whole  will  fall.  (1)  One  lays  the  foundation  of  his  rehgion  in  what  he  calls 
reason  ;  but  which  in  fact  is  his  own  reasoning.  The  same  inspired  writer  who  in 
one  sentence  commends  "  understanding,"  in  the  next  warns  us  against "  leaning  to 
our  own  understanding  "  (Prov.  iii.  4,  5).  To  strengthen  ourselves  and  one  another 
in  this  way  is  to  build  up  ourselves  on  our  own  conceits.  (2)  Another  founds  his 
religion  on  his  good  deeds.  Good  deeds  undoubtedly  form  a  part  of  the  building, 
but  the  foundation  is  not  the  place  for  them.  They  are  not  the  cause  but  the  effects 
of  faith.  (3)  A  third  b  Ids  his  religion  on  impressions.  It  is  not  from  the  death 
of  Christ  for  sinners,  or  any  other  gospel  truth,  that  he  derives  his  comfort ;  but 
from  an  impulse  on  his  mind  that  his  sins  are  forgiven,  and  that  he  is  a  favourite  of 
God,  which  is  certainly  nowhere  revealed  in  the  Scriptures.  We  may  build  ourselves 
np  in  this  way,  but  the  building  will  fall.  (4)  A  fourth  founds  his  religion  on  faith, 
but  it  is  not  a  "  holy  faith,"  either  in  respect  of  its  nature  or  its  effects.  It  is  dead, 
being  alone,  or  without  fruit.  The  faith  on  which  the  first  Christians  built  np 
themselves  included  repentance  for  sin.  2.  That  religion  which  has  its  foundation 
in  the  faith  of  Christ  wiU  increase  by  "  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost."    We  must  not 


JUDE.  69 

live  in  the  neglect  of  prayer.    3.  We  are  given  to  understand  that  by  means  of 
building  on  our  most  holy  faith,  and  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  "keep  ourselves 
in  the  love  of  God."     The  love  of  God  is  here  to  be  understood,  not  of  His  love  to  us, 
but  of  ours  to  Him.    4.  We  are  taught,  that  when  we  have  done  all,  in  looking  for 
eternal  Ufe,  we  must  keep  our  eye  singly  and  solely  on  "  the  mercy  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."    II.  The  prospects  which  these  principles  furnish  as  to  a  blessed 
HEREAFTER.     "  Looklng  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life." 
1.  The  first  exercise  of  mercy  which  the  Scriptures  direct  us  to  look  for  on  our  leaving 
the  body  is,  an  immediate  reception  into  the  presence  of  Christ,  and  the  society  of 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.     2.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  ought  not  to 
reckon  under  this  particular  the  glorious  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  this  world. 
Why  should  we  suspect  whether  our  brethren  who  rest  from  their  labours  be  from 
hence  interested  in  this  object?    If  there  be  joy  in  heaven  among  the  angels  over 
one  sinner  that  repenteth,  why  not  among  the  glorified  saints.     3.  Another  stream 
of  mercy  for  which  we  are  directed  to  look,  will  attend  the  second  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  consist  in  the  dead  being  raised  and  the  living  changed.    By 
looking  for  this  part  of  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  be  reconciled 
to  death  even  before  we  meet  it.     4.  But  there  is  another  stream  of  mercy  beyond 
this,  to  which  we  are  directed  to  look,  and  which  pertains  to  the  last  judgment. 
{A.  Fuller.)        Well-built  Christians  : — I.  The  first  thing  is  to  secure  a  solid 
FOUNDATION.    That  foundation  is  not  to  be  created ;  it  is  already  provided — Christ 
Jesus.    AH  else  than  this  is  crumbling  clay  or  shifting  sand.     Shallow  conversions 
make  shallow  Christians.    I  trust  that  you  have  dug  deep,  and  laid  your  foundations 
weU.     The  Eddystone  lighthouse  is  not  only  built  on  a  rock,  it  is  built  with  iron 
bolts  and  clamps  into  the  rock.     So  you  must  be  built  into  Christ  by  a  living  union 
of  your  weakness  to  His  strength,  your  ignorance  to  His  omniscience,  your  poverty 
to  His  wealth  of  grace,  your  sinfulness  to  His  perfect  righteousness.     The  best  part 
of  a  true  Christian  is  the  imseen  part,  as  the  vital  part  of  a  tree  is  its  root.     So  the 
innermost  graces  that  lie,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  depths  of  a  Christian  soul  next  to 
Christ  are  the  most  precious  and  powerful  and  enduring  portion  of  the  man.    11. 
But  a  building  is  not  done  when  the  foundation  is  laid.    Regeneration  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  only  the  initial  process,  and  then  comes  the  command  to  build  np 
yourselves  on  our  most  holy  faith.     God's  quarry  is  rich  in  materials.    It  would  be 
a  good  thing  for  our  Churches  if  solid  granite  were  in  greater  demand.    Flashing 
marble  is  very  ornamental  for  lintels  and  capitals.     But  in  these  times  we  need 
more  firm  granite  of  honesty,  courage,  truthfulness,  and  self-denial.    Every  now 
and  then  a  Church  is  disfigured  by  an  ugly  crack  or  rent  in  its  walls  from  the  fact 
that  a  bit  of  friable  pumice-stone  was  put  in  there  in  the  shape  of  a  swindling  or 
frivolous  professor.    What  is  true  of  a  Church  as  God's  building  is  equally  true  of 
individual  character ;  nothing  should  go  into  a  Christian's  character  except  what  is 
taken  from  God's  quarry.      III.  Some  Christians  are  not  built  up  symmetrically. 
They  are  lopsided,  and  their  painful  deficiency  is  on  the  ethical  side  of   their 
religion.     They  can  sing  in   a  prayer-meeting,   and  pray  devoutly,  and  exhort 
fluently ;  but  outside  of  the  meeting  they  cannot  always  be  trusted.    What  they  lack 
is  a  rigid  sense  of  right  and  a  constant  adherence  to  it.    They  need  more  conscience, 
a  conscience  to  detect  sin,  and  a  granite-like  principle  to  resist  its  seductions.    The 
word  of  these  Christians  is  not  always  to  be  reUed  on  ;  in  matters  of  business  they  do 
not  always  go  by  the  air-line.    Every  wise  builder  makes  constant  use  of  his  plumb- 
line.     All  the  showy  ornamentation  that  he  can  put  on  his  edifice  amounts  to 
nothing  if  the  walls  are  not  perpendicular.     Sometimes  we  see  a  flimsy  structure 
whose  bulging  walls  are  shored  up  by  props  and  skids  to  keep  them  from  tumbling 
into  the  street.     I  am  afraid  that  there  are  thousands  of  reputations  in  commerce, 
in  politics,  and  even  in  the  Church,  that  are  shored  up  by  various  devices.     It  is  a 
mere  question  of  time  how  soon  every  character  will  fall  in  if  it  is  not  based  on  the 
rock  and  built  according  to  Jesus  Christ's  plumb-line.     It  may  go  down  in  this 
world :  it  is  sure  to  go  down  in  the  next.    We  ought  to  lay  the  plumb-line  up  against 
all  our  religious  acts  and  services,  even  against  our  prayers.    If  failing  to  use  the 
Divine  plumb-line  in  character  building  is  a  great  mistake,  it  is  another  mistake  that 
the  little  everyday  actions  are  made  of  small  account.     You  could  hardly  make  a 
worse  blunder.     Christian  influence  mainly  depends  on  what  you  may  regard  as 
little  things.    It  is  the  aggregate  of  a  good  man's  or  good  woman's  life  that  tells  for 
the  honour  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.     It  is  by  adding  the  brick  of  courage  to  the 
brick  of  faith,  and  to  this  the  brick  of  temperance  and  the  brick  of  patience,  and  the 
brick  of  brotherly  love  and  the  brick  of  honesty  and  of  benevolence,  that  a  noble 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

Christian  character  is  reared.  Nothing  is  of  small  account  that  involves  your 
influence  in  a  sharp-eyed  world.  Other  people's  eyes  are  upon  you  as  well  as  your 
Master's  eyes.  The  Athenian  architects  of  the  Parthenon  finished  the  upper  side  of 
the  matchless  frieze  as  perfectly  as  the  lower  side,  because  the  goddess  Minerva  saw 
that  side.  Every  one  of  the  five  thousand  statues  in  the  cathedral  of  Milan  la 
wrought  as  if  God's  eye  were  on  the  sculptor.  Michael  Angelo  said  that  he  "  carved 
for  eternity."  Every  true  Christian  is  a  habitation  of  God  through  His  Spirit. 
Young  friends,  build  for  eternity.  And  let  every  one  take  heed  how  he  buildeth ;  for 
the  Architect-in-Chief  will  inspect  each  one's  work  on  the  great  day  of  judgment. 
(T.  L.  Ciiyler,  D.D.)  The  buildivg  up  of  Christian  manhood  : — I,  First  op  all 
THE  FAITH.  "  Buildiug  Up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  I  might  say 
broadly,  no  splendid  man  was  ever  built  up,  no  fine  character  was  ever  formed,  but 
by  a  positive  belief — a  faith.  And  definite  belief  is  the  thing  from  which  Christian 
manhood  starts.  Now,  to  build  upon  the  "  faith  " — 1.  We  must  first  have  a  clear 
notion  of  what  the  "  faith  "  is.  (1)  That  is,  to  begin  with,  we  must  distinguish 
between  the  faith  and  accretions  to  the  faith ;  between  the  tree  and  the  parasites 
that  have  enlwined  themselves  about  the  tree;  between  the  rock  and  the  sand  which 
has  accumulated  upon  the  rock.  We  may  persuade  ourselves  that  we  are  jealous  of 
the  honour  of  the  faith,  that  we  are  its  champions,  whilst  we  are  the  champions  of 
the  very  things  that  obscure,  mar,  limit,  cripple  it.  A  very  few  years  ago  one  of  the 
noblest  cathedrals  in  England  used  to  be  habitually  spoken  of  with  contempt.  Its 
nave  columns  were  huge  masses  of  commonplace  material  overlaid  with  plaster. 
But  some  one,  one  day,  had  the  wisdom  to  dig  into  this  plaster,  and  lo  I  beneath 
were  noble  columns  of  exquisite  marble.  Nobody  said,  that  I  know  of,  that  it  would 
be  desecration  to  destroy  this  venerable  plaster,  and  very  soon  it  had  vanished ;  and 
now  you  have  the  original  columns,  an  honour  to  the  genius  that  designed  them. 
That  is  all  that  is  going  on  in  these  days.  Destruction,  do  you  say  ?  Nay,  it  is 
restoration,  not  destruction ;  it  is  the  bringing  back  of  the  temple  of  Divine  truth 
to  its  original  design  and  proportions,  the  bringing  out  again  of  the  lines  of  its 
pristine  beauty.  (2)  Then,  secondly,  we  must  grip  the  faith,  understand  the  faith, 
present  it  clearly  and  vividly  to  ourselves.  To  understand  a  thing  does  not 
necessarily  mean  to  remove  all  mystery  from  it.  You  cannot  build  upon  mist, 
you  cannot  grow  strong  on  mere  sentiment,  you  cannot  foster  Christian  manhood 
upon  vague  emotionalism.  If  your  faith  is  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  making 
of  you,  the  first  thing  is  to  state  it  clearly  and  distinctly  to  yourseK.  2.  Again  :  To 
build  upon  the  faith,  we  must  be  continually  carrying  it  further.  The  circle  of 
Christian  truth  is  a  wide  one  ;  the  applications  of  every  Christian  fact  are  endless, 
the  sweep  of  every  Christian  doctrine  is  infinite.  And  we  must  be  carrying  every 
Christian  truth  continually  further;  we  must  search  all  the  ramifications  of  it. 
This  implies  first,  that  we  must  never  cease  from  fresh,  ever  renewed,  and  expectant 
study  of  it.  I  have  heard  people  speak  of  mountain  scenery.  I  have  asked  them, 
"Do  you  know  Snowdon?"  "Oh  yes!"  "And,  pray,  how  often  have  you 
ascended  Snowdon  ?  Or  " — for  there  is  something  more  important  than  merely  to 
ascend  to  the  summit ;  it  is  quite  as  necessary  to  live  at  the  foot — "  how  long  have 
you  lived  within  sight  of  it?  "  "  Oh,  I  saw  the  mountain  once ;  spent  a  day  in  the 
neighbourhood  once.  I  ascended  it,  too.  Oh  yes,  I  know  Snowdon !  "  "  Ascended 
it  once,  saw  one  aspect  of  it,  and  you  know  it !  Why,  you  must  live  there  to  know 
it.  You  must  watch  the  mountain  in  a  hundred  moods.  You  must  see  it  when 
spring  creeps  up  its  sides,  and  when  winter  has  set  its  throne  of  snow  upon  its 
summit ;  you  must  see  it  sleeping  in  a  trance  of  summer  heat,  and  hear  the  shouts 
of  its  children  when  the  floods  are  out.  Then  you  may  say  that  you  know  it."  So 
of  the  faith.  We  cannot  sum  up  its  doctrines,  settle  them,  and  have  done  with  them. 
We  must  pitch  our  life  before  them.  We  must  live  out  every  experience  in  their 
presence.  3.  The  power  to  be  passive  is  as  requisite  as  the  power  to  be  active. 
There  are  subtle  beauties,  finer  shades  of  meaning,  in  every  gospel  truth ;  you 
cannot  force  these,  but  they  will  disclose  themselves,  if  you  can  wait  and  give  them 
time.  There  is  a  story  in  every  great  picture  which  you  cannot  master  in  a  hurry; 
you  must  lend  yourself  to  it,  give  yourself  up  to  it  in  active  passiveness.  And  so 
there  are  glories  here  which  you  must  sit  down  to  see ;  quieter  tones  in  the  voice  of 
Jesus  which  you  will  never  hear  until  you  cease  from  your  hurry  and  distraction, 
until  sometimes  you  give  up  even  your  work,  your  most  Christian  work.  II.  Thb 
SPIRITUAL  ATMOSPHERE  IN  WHICH  YOU  LIVE.  That,  in  the  ucxt  place,  determines 
your  progress  in  Christian  manhood.  "  Praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  keep  your- 
selves in  the  love  of  God."    1.  "  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."    There  are 


JUDE.  61 

many  aspects  in  which  the  love  of  God  is  looked  at  in  these  Scriptures ;  and  I  think 
this  is  as  remarkable  as  one  of  them — that  to  be  "  in  the  love  of  God,"  to  live  in  the 
constant  sense  of  it,  is  one  of  the  indispensable  conditions  of  spiritual  growth  that 
Christian  manhood  is  impossible  without.  The  world  is  full  of  analogies  of  it.  To 
begin  with,  we  make  nothing  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel ;  they  never  become  more 
than  opinions ;  they  are  never  vitaMsed,  unless  you  live  in  the  love  of  God,  and 
breathe  it  as  the  atmosphere  of  your  life.  You  delight  in  your  garden.  Cultivate 
the  taste.  You  go  and  look  at  your  plants.  You  see  that  they  have  everything  they 
need.  They  are  set  in  the  right  soil,  they  have  the  due  amount  of  moisture,  they 
have  sufiScient  heat.  But  you  forget  them  ;  you  let  the  fire  go  out,  and  you  go  in  a 
week  and  find  your  favourites  aU  dead.  Or  you  remove  them  into  a  cellar.  You  give 
them  everything,  even  heat,  but  you  shut  out  the  light  from  them,  and  you  go  and  visit 
them  by  and  by,  and  find  that  you  have  a  collection  of  ghosts — pale,  colourless  cari- 
catures of  plants.  Nay,  if  you  want  them  to  grow,  and  you  would  delight  in  their 
beauty,  you  must  give  them  warmth  and  sunlight.  And  so  of  this.  You  can  make 
very  little  of  the  Bible  unless  you  keep  yourselves  in  the  warmth  and  light  of  God's 
love.  You  take  every  rule  of  conduct  in  the  Book,  and  you  try  to  live  them  out  one 
by  one ;  you  shut  your  lips  and  determine,  exert  all  your  force  of  will,  keep  your- 
self tied  to  the  grim  angel  of  duty ;  but  you  can  make  nothing  of  them.  They 
simply  stupefy  you,  and,  dull  and  discouraged,  you  shrink  into  yourself.  Love  is  a 
necessity  to  me.  I  have  no  courage  to  try  to  live  without  it.  To  preach  law,  to  set 
clearly  before  myself  the  lines  of  duty,  is  not  enough  for  me.  I  pine  for  love.  I 
become  a  guest  at  a  house,  and  there  is  a  card  hung  up  on  your  bedroom  wall  which 
practically  says,  "  Life  is  ticketed  off  into  a  distinct  number  of  rules  in  this  house ; 
we  live  by  the  clock  here ;  meals  are  served  with  the  regularity  of  the  tides ;  the  sun 
rises  according  to  signals  which  it  receives  from  this  house "  ;  and  from  that 
moment  I  am  miserable.  Omnipotent  law,  stern  law,  grim-faced,  sublime  law ! 
But  I  am  sick  and  tired  of  hearing  of  thee.  Majestic,  beautiful,  terrible ;  if  I  were 
strong  and  heroic,  and  never  made  a  mistake,  the  gospel  concerning  thee  might  be 
pleasant  to  hear.  But  I  want  something  more  to  be  preached  to  me  to  live,  to  be 
strong  and  courageous  thereby ;  I  want  warmth,  I  want  sunshine,  I  want  the  sense 
that  God's  benediction  is  upon  me,  I  want  love.  Everything  then,  the  sternest 
command,  the  hardest  duty,  becomes  food  to  your  soul,  and  you  grow  and  become 
robust  thereby.  The  health  of  God,  the  deep  peace  of  God,  sinks  into  your  soul, 
and  there  is  nothing  in  life  that  can  beat  you.  2.  '♦  Praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Prayer  keeps  the  sense  of  God  and  heaven  alive  in  the  soul ;  it  keeps  up  the  bond  of 
connection  between  earth  and  heaven.  I  go  into  a  man's  house — this  is  not  alto-  ^ 
gether  fiction — and  he  begins  to  moan  over  the  wretched  climate  of  this  land.  The 
sun  never  appears.  Dark  and  dull  and  depressing ;  there  is  no  light  by  which  a 
man  may  do  his  work.  I  look  around  me,  and  lo,  every  window  is  dust-covered,  no 
sunlight  can  pierce  it,  and  I  say,  "My  dear  sir,  excuse  me,  but  suppose  you  begin 
there  ;  clean  these  windows  to  start  with.  The  sun  does  shine  sometimes,  even  in 
England  ;  be  ready  when  it  shines  to  receive  its  glorious  wealth  of  light."  And  so 
here.  I  am  ready  to  contend  a  great  deal  for  prayer  ;  I  am  ready  to  contend  for 
some  things  which  prayer  effects  that  once  I  was  not  very  sure  about.  But  in  any 
case,  this  I  am  sure  of — it  keeps  the  windows  of  the  soul  clean,  it  facilitates  the 
entrance  of  God  into  the  soul,  it  puts  the  soul  in  touch  with  all  spiritual  realities. 
If  there  be  a  God,  He  must  reveal  Himself  to  the  soul  that  prays ;  if  there  be  an 
eternal  world,  pray,  and  you  must  pray  yourself  into  the  midst  of  it.  Come  here. 
Stand  amid  the  wealth  of  this  glorious  revelation.  Would  you  understand  it? 
Would  you  have  the  light  of  it  fill  your  soul?  Would  you  miss  nothing  of  it? 
Would  you  have  it  irradiate  your  work  and  change  the  fashion  of  your  counte- 
nance? Then  "  pray  without  ceasing."    III.  Our  growth  depends  upon  the  soul's 

OUTLOOKS,   THE   INSPIRATIONS   THAT   LIE   FOR   US   IN   THE   FUTURE.        "  Lookiug  for   the 

mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life."  There  is  a  famous  essay  which 
I  am  never  tired  of  reading — Emerson's  "  Prospects  " — the  outlooks  of  life.  I  went 
the  other  day  to  see  a  member  of  my  congregation  who  is  a  great  sufferer — a  woman 
•who  is  half  her  life— three-fourths  of  her  life— a  prisoner.  I  condoled  with  her, 
sympathised  with  her.  "  Come  up  into  my  little  room,"  she  said.  "  There,  sit  in 
that  window.  When  the  torture  begins,  when  I  am  worried  and  weary,  when  the 
fog  gets  into  my  brain  and  the  fever  into  my  bones,  and  I  begin  to  burn  and  welter 
in  my  misery,  I  ran  away  here.  This  outlook  across  the  fields  soothes  me,  heals 
me,  and  I  am  myself  again."  I  understand.  I  like  to  do  my  work  with  a  window 
tiirough  which  I  can  now  and  then  look  out  before  me.     Then,  I  hke  to  see  the  man 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


who  insists  upon  having  mental  outlooks.  No  man's  life  need  be  utterly  material. 
Work,  but  always  work  with  outlooks  towards  the  world  of  thought,  with  windows 
towards  the  world  of  genius,  make  the  work  shine  with  the  light  that  comes  from 
the  loftiest  range  of  human  vision.  So  in  a  higher  sense  still.  Life  is  often  hard ; 
the  years  become  more  and  more  exacting ;  but  it  is  not  a  prison.  The  sorrows  are 
many,  the  strain  is  sometimes  terrible ;  but  oh,  the  prospects !  the  window  of  life 
which'  Christ  keeps  open  towards  heaven !  I  rest  there.  There  is  not  a  vista  that 
looks  in  that  direction,  but  I  am  often  there.  Rest  you  also  there  this  morning,  and 
let  some  of  iJie  aches  be  smoothed  out  of  you  as  you  rest.  Listen  to  the  murmur  of 
the  river  as  it  wanders  through  fields  whose  green  never  withers,  and  as  you  listen, 
the  beauty,  the  cahn,  the  deep  peace,  shall  pass  into  your  face.  But  now  to  close. 
1.  This  prospect  is  ours  of  God's  free  mercy  disclosed  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ.  We 
believe  in  the  Divine  mercy.  2.  This  is  the  last  word  :  as  the  years  move  on, 
thought,  anxiety,  endeavour — everything  gathers  there— to  make  sure  of  that.  Oh, 
we  have  had  our  dreams.  We  have  been  full  of  ambitions,  we  have  swept  all  earthly 
prizes  into  our  lot ;  but  they  have  become  infinitesimally  small.  I  care  for  nothing 
but  this— shall  I  attain  unto  the  "  eternal  life  "  ?  I  have  been  on  sea.  I  have  made 
more  than  one  voyage.  We  had  some  weeks  before  us,  and  we  were  full  of  plana 
when  we  started.  I  even  proposed  new  subjects  of  study  to  myself  which  were  to 
be  pursued  during  the  voyage.  But  one  day  the  cry  went  out,  "  We  are  getting 
near  land."  Instantly  there  was  a  great  bustle  of  preparation.  The  expedients 
devised  to  while  away  the  voyage ;  books  with  which  we  had  been  busy,  half 
finished — everything  was  put  away.  We  thought  of  nothing  but  to  be  ready  to  land. 
Dreams  of  wealth,  of  fame — oh  yes,  we  have  had  them.  But  they  are  nothing  to- 
day ;  I  dismiss  them  aU.  I  am  looking  out  vristf ully  for  the  shore ;  I  want  to  be 
ready  when  the  cry  comes.  Breezes  from  the  land,  laden  with  the  fragrance  of  the 
sweet  fields,  are  in  my  face.  I  strain  my  eyes.  It  is  nigh  at  hand.  Let  me  be. 
Perish  everything,  so  that  an  "  abundant  entrance  "  be  given  me  "  into  the  ever- 
lasting kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  (J.  Morlais  Jones). 
How  is  the  doctrine  of  religion  most  holy  ? — First,  in  itself,  being  without  fault  and 
error  and  having  sundry  excellences,  being  full  of  Divine  wisdom  and  truth,  and 
the  only  instrument  whereby  God's  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness  is  made  known 
unto  us.  Secondly,  in  regard  of  the  effect  and  operation,  which  is  to  make  the 
creature,  but  especially  man  holy  (John  xvii.  17).  It  sanctifieth  men  instrumentally, 
in  that  it  maketh  them  resemble  God  in  many  graces.  Thirdly,  it  is  most  holy, 
because  it  sanctifieth  all  inferior  creatures  to  the  use  of  man,  so  as  he  may  use 
them  with  good  conscience  (1  Tim.  iv.  4).     {W.  Perkins. )        The  Church  a  house  :— 

1.  The  faithful  are  the  house  of  God  (Heb.  iii.  6;  1  Tun.  iii.  15;  1  Pet.  iv.  17). 
(1)  Christ  is  the  foundation.  The  sole  foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  11).  A  strong  founda- 
tion (Matt.  vii.  25).  (2)  The  Church  is  a  house  in  respect  of  believers,  who  are  the 
stones  of  which  this  house  is  built  up  ;  and  these  stones  are  naturally — (a)  Rugged 
and  unpolished,  till  they  are  hewn,  smoothed,  and  made  fit  for  the  building  (Hos.  vi.  5). 
(b)  Of  several  sizes— some  greater,  some  less,  (c)  Though  different  in  size,  yet 
cemented  and  united  one  to  another.  (3)  The  Church  is  a  house  in  respect  of  God. 
He  dwells  in  it.  He  furnishes  it  with  all  necessaries,  yea,  ornaments  —His  ordinances, 
graces,  &c.  He  protects  it.  He  repairs  it.  He  cleanses  it.  2.  The  Word  of  God  is 
the  foundation  of  a  Christian.  It  is  a  foundation  to  bear  a  saint  out  in  all  his  duties, 
comforts,  belief  of  truths.  (W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.)  The  Holy  Trinity  .-—I.  Let  us 
consider  this  mystery  as  a  BECErran  truth  of  Chbistian  doctrinh.  "But  ye, 
beloved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  Now  the  sum  of  that 
faith,  we  are  told,  is  this,  "  that  we  worship  one  God  in  Trinity,  and  Trinity  in 
unity."  And  the  Catholic  Church  has  always  been  very  jealous  of  this  fundamental 
dogma.  She  has  never  hidden  it ;  never  shrunk  from  the  definite  statement  of  it. 
With  regard  to  the  mysteriousness  of  the  doctrine,  the  point  is  conceded.  The 
question  is,  whether  by  a  looser  theology — by  a  charitable  vagueness  of  expression, 
or  by  a  scheme  of  definitions  which  should  define  nothing — we  should  ever  be  able 
to  get  rid  of  this  mystery  ?  A  man  must  be  an  angel  to  understand  even  an  angel's 
powers;  and  he  must  be  himself  infinite  who  could  comprehend  an  infinite  existence. 
II.  Let' us  consider  this  great  mystery  as  it  throws  light  upon  the  nature  and 
MORAL  government  OF  GoD.  1.  "This  it  does  in  that  it  exhibits  God  as  sustaining 
towards  us  the  most  beneficent  personal  relations  ;  thus  removing  the  cloud  which 
had  been  spread  before  the  throne,  and  presenting  the  Godhead  under  a  form  which, 
as  Burke  well  expresses  it,  "softens  and  humanises  the  whole  'dea  of  Divinity." 

2.  But  in  relation  to  the  clearing  up  of  mystery  in  the  Divine  procedure,  we  claim  it 


JVDE.  63 

as  a  further  advantage  of  the  doctrine  we  are  considering,  that  it  is  specially 
revealed  in  conjunction  with  a  scheme  for  the  pardon  and  recovery  of  mankind. 
(D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost. — The  inspirer  of  prayer  : — Jude,  a 
brother  of  our  Lord,  speaks  of  the  prayer  which  transcends  the  normal  religious 
capacity  of  human  nature  as  one  of  the  conditions  through  the  observance  of  which 
the  believer  must  keep  himself  in  the  love  of  God  and  in  the  steadfast  expectancy 
of  consummated  redemption.  The  attachment  of  friend  to  friend  is  apt  to  be  ■- 
weakened,  if  not  destroyed,  where  communication  ceases.  When  some  member  of 
a  family  is  away  in  a  foreign  land,  the  only  antidote  to  the  chilling  effect  of  distance 
is  correspondence,  and  correspondence  which  is  free,  vivacious,  unconstrained.  If 
the  correspondence  become  stilted  and  formal  only,  it  is  about  as  hurtful  to  affection 
as  complete  silence.  The  heart  must  send  its  pulsations  through  every  available 
channel  of  intercourse  if  love  is  to  be  kept  alive.  And  that  is  true  in  the  sphere  of 
the  religious  life.  No  man  can  keep  himself  in  the  love  of  God  without  using  all  ^ 
the  lines  of  communication  God  has  opened  to  him,  and  the  prayer  with  which  we 
keep  ourselves  in  correspondence  with  God  must  be  permeated  by  supernatural  help 
and  vitaUty.  The  Spirit  of  God  helps  prayer  long  before  this  ideal  of  praying  in  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  completely  realised  in  the  daily  experience.  In  the  imperfect  prayer 
which  He  does  not  as  yet  pervade  with  this  supreme  ascendency,  He  is  present,  in 
some  degree  at  least.  The  man  who  prays  before  he  is  the  subject  of  a  new  life  is 
unconscious  of  the  Divine  presence  which  stirs  up  his  prayers  and  prompts  his  faint 
desires  after  better  things.  When  a  believer  has  learnt  to  pray  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
he  is  awake  to  the  nearness  and  active  operation  of  a  mystic  Being  who  incites  ■" 
and  energises  his  prayers  and  makes  him  inherently  well-pleasing  to  God.  In  him 
who  prays  according  to  this  evangeUcal  standard,  the  Spirit  stimulates  the  sense  of 
need.  Many  are  comparatively  prayerless  in  their  habits,  because  there  is  no  sharp 
sense  of  need  at  the  core  of  the  life.  The  age  itself  is  so  interesting,  and  fortune 
pampers  men  with  so  many  worldly  benefits  and  luxuries,  that  they  have  scarcely 
any  aspirations  which  need  to  be  fulfilled  in  supernatural  spheres.  Their  souls 
have  not  been  harrowed  with  grief  or  made  to  ache  with  want ;  and  if  they  pray  at  >• 
all,  it  is  in  imitation  of  prevailing  customs  only,  or  as  a  tribute  to  the  semi-sacred 
memories  of  childhood.  Where  men  pray  without  personal  convictions  and  in 
imitation  of  current  usage,  desires  will  press  to  the  forefront  of  their  prayers  which 
ought  not  to  be  there,  or  there  in  very  subordinate  positions  only.  "  Ye  ask  amiss, 
that  ye  may  consume  it  upon  your  lusts."  When  their  frivolous  and  shallow  wishes 
seem  to  be  gratified,  such  men  cease  to  pray,  and  when  crossed  and  baffled  they  drift 
into  moods  of  mingled  mortification  and  scepticism,  and  either  tacitly  assume  or 
openly  proclaim  the  uselessness  of  prayer.  Our  natural  desires  can  no  more  mature 
into  true  prayer  than  the  bits  of  coloured  gauze  in  the  milliner's  shop,  representing 
orange,  peach,  and  cherry  blossom,  can  set  into  fruit.  Till  the  Spirit  comes  to  us, 
we  are  shut  up  in  the  senses,  and  can  no  more  feel  the  throb  of  the  great  currents 
which  course  through  the  spiritual  world,  than  the  creatures  in  the  glass  cases  of 
an  aquarium  can  feel  the  enthusiasms  which  ebb  and  flow  in  the  veins  of  a  great 
nation.  There  can  be  no  right  and  enduring  sense  of  need  unless  through  the 
constant  inspirations  of  the  Spirit.  But  the  unspiritual  are  not  only  shut  up  in  the 
senses  and  the  things  of  the  senses,  they  have  no  keen  realisation  of  the  deepest 
needs  of  the  world.  They  assume  that  a  broad  law  of  betterment  is  at  work  in 
human  history,  and  if  there  is  any  exception  to  the  law,  every  man  is  to  blame  for 
the  drawbacks  which  stint  and  embitter  his  own  life.  The  bitter  cry  of  the  outcast 
multitude  finds  no  echo  in  their  hearts.  Human  nature  without  the  Holy  Spirit  of  v 
God  is  too  narrow  and  self-occupied  to  find  a  place  for  the  spiritual  wants  and  woes 
of  others  in  its  supplications.  Prayer  languishes  everywhere  through  this  lack  of 
desire,  not  only  for  ourselves,  but  for  others  likewise.  Like  the  ship  described  by  ^ 
the  "Ancient  Mariner,"  it  is  becalmed  in  a  sea  of  breathless  stagnation,  slime,  and 
death.  Prayer  cannot  move  without  desire.  Things  will  be  far  otherwise  whetf'the 
Spirit  comes  to  us,  and  not  only  prompts  our  prayers,  but  so  encircles  us  with  His 
presence  and  power,  that  the  world,  its  maxims,  chilling  influences,  and  sordid  tra- 
ditions of  conduct,  can  scarcely  get  near  us  or  affect  us  in  any  way.  If  we  Uve  in 
the  atmosphere  created  by  the  inspirations  of  the  Spirit,  self-knowledge  will  grow, 
and  a  more  adequate  interpretation  of  our  own  needs  wiU  arise  within  us,  and  our 
affections  will  be  so  fed  from  the  fountains  of  the  Divine  unselfishness  that  we  shall 
be  acutely  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  the  world,  and  shall  pray  agreeably  to  the 
counsels  of  Him  whose  name  is  Love.  He  whose  soul  is  permeated  by  the  T)resence 
and  teaching  of  the  Spirit  will  be  kept  from  asking  those  things  which  are  at  variance 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

with  the  counsels  of  the  Most  High.     Strange  and  sacred  restraints  are  cast  about 
the  beUever  whom  He  actuates,  and  no  petty,  foolish,  self-seeking  prayers  will  be 
likely  to  pass  the  hps.     Where  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  are  wanting,  every  kind 
of  mistake  is  possible.    Things  frivolous  and  even  hurtful  are  insatiably  desired,  and 
the  prayers  presented  bear  the  stamp  of  unregeneracy.     Wherever  the  Spirit  is 
-^  honoured  and  discerned,  He  will  prompt  us  to  ask  for  what  is  supremely  impor- 
tant, and  will  make  us  submissive  to  all  the  will  of  God.     The  nature  possessed  by 
those  right  and  acceptable  desires  which  are  instilled  into  it  by  the  Spirit  will 
instinctively  exclude  what  is  false,  foolish,  and  wrong  from  its  prayers.      Indeed, 
there  wiU  be  no  room  for  such  things  to  unfold  themselves.     The  Holy  Ghost  brings 
its  subjects  into  active  and  happy  sympathy  with  the  Divine  plans,  and  makes  that 
sympathy  to  dominate  every  temper  and  act  of  devotion.    By  such  prayer  we  shall 
keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  for  if  we  never  find  the  heavens  as  brass,  our  faith 
in  God's  tenderness  and  fidelity  cannot  deteriorate.    All  such  prayer  will  strengthen 
the  tie  uniting  us  to  God.     In  the  prayer  offered  under  those  influences  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  creates  to  compass  and  enswathe  us  in  our  access  to  God,  there  will  be 
an  answering  sense  of  the  efiicacy  of  Christ's  work.     It  is  His  special  mission  to 
glorify  Christ,  and  He  never  forgets  the  absorbing  end  for  which  He  was  sent.     He 
can  perhaps  fulfil  this  mission  more  impressively  through  those  prayers  of  the 
saints  which  He  helps  and  animates  than  by  those  accompaniments  of  conscience- 
arresting  power  vouchsafed  in  connection  with  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the 
world.     Just  as  great  winds  once  carried  to  rocky  islands  and  barren  peninsulas  the 
^    seeds  out  of  which  arose  at  last  tossing  forests  of  beauty  and  far-ranging  zones  of 
""^     sweetness  and  fragrance,  so  the  great  Spirit  brings  into  the  poor,  barren  prayers  of 
those  who  are  touched  by  His  breath  a  seed  of  new  things,  and  diffuses  there  the 
beauty  and  the  fragrance  of  Christ's  efficacious  redemptive  act.     Christ  by  taking 
away  sin  took  away  the  incompetence  of  human  prayer,  and  the  Spirit  makes  us 
steadfastly  conscious  of  the  fact.    No  being  purified  by  trust  in  that  sacrifice  can 
pray  out  of  proportion  to  the  rights  it  has  secured.     We  are  brought  into  partici- 
pation with  a  priesthood  that  cannot  be  denied.     This  secret,  undefinable  persuasion 
of  the  unknown  power  inherent  in  Christ's  sacrifice  and  mediation  is  a  mark  of 
those  who  pray  in  the  Holy  Ghost.    The  prayer  upwinging  itself  through  that  special 
^    atmosphere  with  which  the  Holy  Ghost  enwraps  the  obedient  soul  is  characterised 
by  a  sense  of  filial  confidence.     The  grace  of  assurance  it  is  His  joy  to  bring  makes 
the  widest  possible  difference  in  the  tone  and  quality  of  the  devotional  life.     The 
Spirit  cannot  come  from  the  God  of  love  to  a  contrite  soul  without  bringing  tokens, 
pledges,  intimations  of  God's  forgiving  love.    He  gives  us  access  into  an  unshadowed 
grace  in  which  we  may  stand  to  the  very  end;  and  if  we  retain  this  unfailing  witness, 
we  shall  always  be  on  speaking  terms  with  God.    Never  let  us  think  of  it  as  a 
superfluous  luxury  of  the  reUgious  life  rather  than  an  essential  privilege.    It  is  given 
to  open  for  us  constant  and  intimate  access  to  God,  and  is  vital  to  the  prevalency  of 
our  prayers.    Where  the  Spirit  of  assurance  is  lacking,  prayer  is  a  voice  in  the  outer 
>-  court  of  the  Gentiles,  rather  than  the  freedom  of  speech  accorded  to  Abraham  and 
Moses.    But  when  the  Spirit  helps  prayer,  it  is  a  cry  in  the  circle  lit  up  with  the 
benignity  of  fatherhood.    Prayer,  falling  short  of  this  standard,  is  only  a  little  above 
the  level  of  pious  mechanism,  and  cannot  nourish  the  high  affections  of  the  soul 
towards  God.    Prayer  in  the  Holy  Ghost  involves  the  mystic  interchange  and  fellow- 
ship of  love.     Where  prayer  is  presented  under  these  supernatural  conditions,  there 
will  be  a  true  apprehension  of  the  vast  resourcefulness  of  God.     The  Pentecostal 
atmosphere  is  full  of  the  Spirit's  interpretation  of  the  wisdom,  power,  generosity, 
intimate  nearness  of  the  Father;  and  prayer  necessarily  acquires  a  distinctive  tone 
from  that  atmosphere  out  of  which  it  arises.     The  fact  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  more 
sensitive  to  our  needs  than  we  who  are  the  subjects  of  them  should  satisfy  us  that 
He  has  also  measured  the  help  laid  up  for  us  in  the  deep  counsels  of  God.    As  we 
pray.  He  shows  God  to  us  in  all  His  amazing  plenitudes,  and  makes  His  strength 
<-   authoritatively  ours.     The  man  who  prays  without  these  inspirations  is  like  one 
who,  wrapped  about  with  the  ignorance  of  the  stone  age,  stands  upon  the  shore  and 
yearns  for  some  distant  world  of  which  he  has  dreamed.     The  plains  there  would 
supply  his  need  of  bread,  the  leaves  and  fruits  of  the  forest  would  heal  his  maladies, 
and  the  metals  hidden  in  the  hills  would  defend  his  life  and  give  him  the  material 
from  which  to  construct  a  better  civilisation.     But  he  is  not  dwelling  in  an  age 
charged  with  the  spirit  of  scientific  discovery  and  achievement.     He  cannot  cross  to 
this  promised  land  and  possess  its  good.     So  it  is  with  the  man  who  prays  in  the 
Holy  Ghost.    Not  only  does  the  wisdom  of  God  interpret  the  secrets  of  redemption 


JUDE.  65 

to  his  heart,  but  the  power  of  God  brings  him  into  a  new  world  in  which  all  things 
are  possible.  And  thus  does  he  keep  himself  in  that  love  of  God  which  means 
victory  over  all  seen  and  unseen  foes.  We  are  all  familiar  with  the  effect  of  atmo- 
sphere upon  the  quality  of  work,  and  the  ease  with  which  it  is  accomplished.  In  . 
some  parts  of  the  world,  malaria  and  tropical  heat  speedily  turn  healthy  and  capable  V 
colonists  into  sickly  loiterers  and  rickety  "  ne'er-do-weels."  No  race  seems  able  to 
toil  under  the  frightful  conditions  of  climate  which  prevail  on  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  some  climates  are  so  crisp  and  exhilarating  that 
the  laggard  finds  it  difficult  to  do  less  than  a  fair  day's  work.  Unknown  ingredients 
in  the  air  seem  to  accelerate  the  blood  and  spur  to  strenuous  exertion.  The  qualities 
of  the  work  done  by  poet,  painter,  musician,  may  almost  be  told  in  the  terms  of  the 
atmospheric  pressure  prevailing  at  the  time.  Genius,  just  as  much  as  the  unopened  ^ 
flower  bud,  needs  the  bright,  bracing  day  to  bring  out  its  splendour.  And  the  soul 
requires,  for  the  reaching  out  of  its  highest  powers  towards  God,  a  refined  and  weU- 
balanced  element,  which  we  can  only  describe  as  "climate"  or  "atmosphere." 
The  difference  between  praying  on  the  mere  level  of  our  natural  perceptions  and 
sympathies,  and  praying  in  a  reahn  pervaded  by  the  imfailing  inspirations  of  the 
Spirit,  is  not  unlike  the  difference  between  drudgery  on  a  tropical  swamp  and  move- 
ment on  a  glorious  tableland.  In  the  one  case  prayer  is  an  effort,  a  burden,  a  y 
vexation,  and  an  idle  penance;  in  the  other,  a  joy,  a  sunrise,  a  melodious  outrush  ~ 
of  upper  springs,  glad  spontaneity,  life  pulsating  with  the  sense  of  power  and  victory. 
Under  this  covenant  of  more  perfect  help  and  privilege,  ought  not  prayer  to  attain  a 
surpassing  prevalency?  By  praying  under  these  Pentecostal  conditions  we  may 
come  to  reach  the  apostolic  mark  of  continual  and  unceasing  prayer.  Is  not  He 
who  prompts  and  upholds  the  supplications  of  those  receiving  His  baptism  of  fire 
present  at  all  times,  and  unsleeping  in  His  subtle  ministries  as  the  providence  of  the 
great  Being  whose  attributes  He  shares  ?  If  we  dwell  in  a  circle  of  which  He  is  the 
vitalising  centre,  our  conscious  and  even  unconscious  movements  of  thought  and 
feeling  will  be  informed  by  strange  stimulations.  Acclimatised  to  these  sacred 
conditions,  the  habit  of  prayer  will  be  a  second  and  a  better  nature  to  us.  The 
stimulations  of  this  imseen  and  ever  patient  Helper  never  fail,  and  so  it  is  our 
privilege  to  "  pray  always  and  not  to  faint."  This  exhortation  seems  to  imply  the 
constancy  of  the  laws  under  which  the  Spirit  operates,  and  our  power  of  so  con- 
forming those  laws  as  to  reach  this  lofty  experience.  It  ought  to  be  no  little 
encouragement  to  us  that  this  habit  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  the  conditions  of  our 
perseverance,  and  it  must  be  therefore  just  as  practicable  for  us  to  pray  in  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  it  is  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  To  have  this  close  communion 
with  the  Most  High  is  not  a  distinction  of  pre-eminent  saintship,  but  the  privilege  '^ 
of  aU  who  abide  in  His  love.  He  who  would  thus  pray  must  cultivate  tempers  of 
daily  spirituality,  and  to  that  end  must  shut  out  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil 
in  their  manifold  disguises.  Where  the  things  which  are  adverse  to  God  are  thrust 
out  the  Spirit  of  God  will  surely  come  in.  It  is  an  axiom  in  ventilation  that  unless 
there  be  an  outflow  for  the  vitiated  air  it  is  quite  useless  having  an  inlet  for  that 
which  is  pure.  The  winds  of  God's  life-giving  Pentecost  will  steal  into  us  if  we  give  v 
free  exit  to  every  giddy  pleasure  which  makes  the  Bible  an  insipidity,  to  every  ~- 
darling  pursuit  which  conflicts  with  the  perfect  love  of  God,  to  whatever  deteriorates 
the  intellect,  the  conscience,  and  the  affections.  One  of  the  fair  cities  of  the  earth  is 
begirt  with  pine  forests,  and  has  streaks  of  silver  sea  about  it  on  every  side.  Nature 
lies  quite  close  to  its  streets  and  squares,  and  exhales  there  day  and  night  the 
sweetest  airs  and  the  most  reviving  zephyrs.  But  if  one  of  the  citizens  should  shut 
himself  in  an  air-tight  compartment  with  the  diseased,  even  in  that  fair  city  of 
health  the  result  would  be  inevitable.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  all  doors  and  windows 
be  open,  the  invisible  tides  of  mystic  sweetness  and  strength  cannot  fail  to  lave  him. 
The  Divine  breath  is  always  playing  upon  those  who  inhabit  the  true  city  of  God. 
Let  us  make  ourselves  accessible  to  it  at  every  point,  and  take  heed  that  we  do  not 
shut  ourselves  in  with  the  foul  and  deadly  contagions  of  the  world.  The  tone  of 
our  daily  speech  and  thought  and  life  will  react  upon  our  prayers.  Let  us  live  to 
keep  ourselves  ever  fit  for  this  high  intercourse  with  God,  as  the  enthusiast  in  art  or 
poetry  or  music  hves  for  his  work.  Never  grieve  the  Spirit  who  holds  in  His  hand 
your  very  power  to  pray.  He  can  sever  at  will  your  communication  with  the  throne 
of  all  grace  and  power.  (T.  G.  Selby.)  Praying  in  the  Spirit : — 1.  Without  the 
Spirit  there  is  no  praying.  2.  How  excellent  and  honourable  a  work  is  that  of 
prayer  1  The  whole  Trinity  has  a  work  in  this  holy  exercise.  3.  As  without  the 
Spirit  there  is  no  prayer,  so  without  prayer  a  man  evidently  shows  himself  to  have 

38 


</ 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

nothing  of  the  Spirit.  4.  Needs  must  the  prayers  of  the  saints  be  acceptable.  They 
are  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  5.  How  good  is  God  to  His  poor  saints!  He  not  only 
grants,  but  makes,  their  prayers.  6.  It  is  our  greatest  wisdom  to  get  and  keep  the 
Spirit.  (1)  It  is  obtained  in  the  ministry  of  the  gospel.  (2)  It  is  kept  by  following 
His  motions  and  suggestions.  7.  How  happy  are  saints  in  all  straits !  They  have 
the  Spirit  to  help  them  to  pray.  (W.  Jenkyn,  M.A.)  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love 
of  God. — The  means  of  irreserving  us  from  sin,  and  of  promoting  in  us  holiness  : — 
On  the  one  hand  we  are  taught  here  a  universal  principle  of  religious  obedience ; 
and  on  the  other  hand  we  are  taught  here  what  the  ways  are  for  procuring  and 
cherishing  it.  "  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  Do  so ;  and  undoubtedly  you 
will  have  no  similarity  of  character  with  those  men  who,  "  having  not  the  Spirit, 
are  sensualists,"  and  in  being  so  are  "  separatists  "  from  the  communion  of  true 
Christians.  But  how  shall  you  be  enabled  to  obey  this  injunction  ?  By  "  building 
yourselves  up  on  your  most  holy  faith  " — by  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost— and  "  by 
looking  for  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  unto  eternal  life.  To  have  love  to  God, 
and  to  have  this  Divine  affection  in  vigorous  exercise,  is  to  give  security  for  the 
renunciation  of  all  sin,  and  for  the  choice  and  accomplishment  of  all  duty.  It 
forms  the  very  principle  of  action,  which  is  applicable  in  every  situation,  and  during 
all  time.  Can  the  devout  affections  be  really  the  object  of  my  careful  cultivation, 
without  at  the  same  time  being  accompanied  by  the  desire  and  the  endeavour  after 
universal  holiness?  Can  I  revere  the  majesty  of  God  without  the  fear  of  offending 
against  the  dignity  of  His  authority  ?  Can  I  esteem  the  unrivalled  beauty  of  His 
moral  excellences  without  the  anxious  wish  to  resemble  Him  and  to  enjoy  His 
approbation  ?  The  view  of  what  is  the  native  tendency  of  this  Divine  affection  is 
indubitable.  To  give  diligence  that  we  may  remain  in  the  exercise  of  this  holy 
affection  is  to  give  diligence  that  we  may  weaken,  and  finally  dislodge,  every 
opposing  affection.  If  once  there  was  produced  in  us  an  entire  surrender  of  wiU 
and  power,  of  fear  and  hope,  to  His  most  blessed  direction — this  would  amount  to 
the  being  actuated  by  the  Divine  "Spirit";  and  so  the  "sensuality"  that  would 
"  separate  "  us  from  the  regard  and  obedience  of  Divine  truth  be  entirely  vanquished. 
But  how  shall  we  "  keep  ourselves  "  in  the  exercise  of  this  purest  and  most  efl&cient 
principle  ?  The  means  of  doing  so  are  here  enumerated :  1.  In  the  first  place, 
would  we  "  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  "  ? — let  us  "  build  ourselves  up  on  our 
most  holy  faith  "  ;  that  is  in  the  grace  of  faith,  and  in  its  objects,  the  doctrines  and 
promises  of  the  gospel.  The  height  of  it  indeed  we  shall  never  be  able,  through 
eternity  itself,  to  form  a  perfect  conception  of.  Let  us  heap  together  aU  those 
hright  views,  and  glorious  promises,  which  like  so  many  sums  in  our  shining 
treasure,  should  be  added,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  us  an  idea  of  the  riches  of 
the  Divine  mercy.  Let  us  become  more  deeply  acquainted  with,  and  more  intensely 
interested  in,  the  doctrines  and  the  prospects  of  "  our  most  holy  faith,"  and 
undoubtedly  we  shall  be  using  one  of  the  powerful,  even  as  it  is  the  appointed, 
means  to  "  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  2.  Would  we  succeed  in  these 
endeavours  at  laying  our  minds  open  to  the  truth,  and  to  the  efiBcacy  of  "  our  most 
holy  faith  " ;  would  we  overcome  the  aversions,  and  surmount  the  dilBculties,  that 
stand  in  the  way  of  aU  our  apprehensions,  and  that  oppose  the  exercise  of  all  our 
sensibilities,  on  its  high  spiritual  objects  ;  would  we  see  the  designs  of  Christianity, 
and  feel  them,  and  continue  under  their  influence ;  let  us  follow  the  next  admonition, 
and  "pray  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  Divine  Spirit  dictated  the  Scriptures;  and 
therefore,  when  we  pray  for  things  agreeably  to  the  tenor  of  the  revealed  will  of 
God,  we  are  said,  in  one  sense,  to  pray  under  this  influence.  Now  supposing  that 
on  Scripture  principles,  in  firm  though  humble  dependence  on  the  grace  of  God, 
and  with  constancy,  fervour,  and  spirituality,  we  are  enabled  to  cherish  the  affec- 
tions of  Christian  piety ;  do  we  not  see  that  we  are  thereby  employing  the  direct 
means  of  improving  ourselves,  both  in  acquaintance  with  the  objects  of  faith,  and 
in  the  exercise  of  the  grace  of  faith  ?  3.  In  the  third  place,  however,  the  devout 
affections  we  have  continually  to  lament,  are  with  us  so  cold,  even  at  the  warmest, 
and  so  wavering,  even  at  the  utmost  steadiness  to  which  we  can  bring  them ;  and 
in  all  the  exercises  of  our  minds,  whether  in  the  belief  or  in  the  practice  of  religious 
truth,  we  have  attained  to  so  little  that  we  can  look  back  on  with  unmingled  satis- 
faction, that  we  should  have  no  encouragement,  either  in  devotion  or  active  duty, 
were  our  hopes  of  "eternal  life"  made  to  rest  on  the  perfection  of  our  own  righteous- 
ness. Hence  our  only  relief  in  remembering  the  unworthy  past,  and  our  only 
encouragement  in  endeavouring  after  something  better  for  the  time  to  come,  depend 
on  the  privilege  granted  to  ua  of  "  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 


JUDE.  67 

Sure,  ample,  blessed  source  of  consolation  and  of  hope !  To  this  we  flee,  that  the 
multitude  of  our  sins  may  be  blotted  out,  and  thrown  into  perpetual  forgetfulness. 
To  this  we  repair,  that  the  defects  inherent  even  in  our  best  duties,  may  be  forgiven. 
Not  to  anticipate,  with  vividness,  that  future  "  life,"  in  which  devotion  shall  be 
elevated  into  the  sublimest  purities  of  spiritual  worship,  and  where  faith  shaU  have 
every  promise  and  prospect  realised — how  the  mind  would  faint  under  its  frequent 
insensibilities  and  manifold  lapses  !  But  the  assurance  that  the  difficulties  are  all 
hereafter  to  be  overcome — that  the  "  mercy  of  Christ  "  which  pardons,  will  gratui- 
tously bestow  the  "eternal  life"  which  it  has  purchased;  this  is  what  incites  to 
persevere,  and  what  will  lead  effectually  in  the  course  of  devotion  and  practical 
faith.  {W.  Muir,  D.D.)  Keeping  in  the  love  of  God  : — 1.  In  perseverance  there 
is  a  concurrence  of  our  care  and  diligence  (Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  The  main  work  is 
God's  (Phil.  i.  6),  and  the  same  Jesus  that  is  "  Author  "  is  also  "  Finisher  "  (Heb. 
xii.  2).  The  deeper  radication  of  the  habit,  the  defence  of  it,  the  growth  and 
perfection  of  it,  is  all  from  God  (1  Peter  v.  10) ;  but  yet  a  concurrence  there  is  of  our 
care  and  endeavours.  Well,  then,  let  us  not  neglect  the  means.  2.  Men  that  have 
grace  had  need  look  to  the  keeping  of  it.  (1)  We  ourselves  are  prone  to  revolt 
(Jer.  xiv.  10;  Psa.  xcv.  10).  (2)  We  are  assaulted  with  continual  temptations.  An 
importunate  suitor,  by  perseverance  in  his  suit,  may  at  length  prevail.  Long 
conversing  with  the  world  may  taint  the  spirit.  (3)  A  man  of  long  standing  is  apt 
to  grow  secure  and  negligent,  as  if  he  were  now  past  danger  (Eev.  iii.  17-19).  (4) 
The  worst  is  past,  we  have  but  a  few  years'  service  more,  and  we  shall  be  happy 
for  ever  (Kom.  xiii.  11).  A  Uttle  more  and  you  will  land  safe  at  the  expected 
haven ;  if  we  have  a  rough  passage,  it  is  a  short  one.  3.  Of  all  graces,  love 
needeth  keeping.  (1)  Because  of  all  graces  it  is  most  decaying  (Matt.  xxiv.  12 ; 
Eev.  ii.  4).  Flame  is  soon  spent,  graces  that  act  most  strongly  require  most 
influence,  as  being  most  subject  to  abatement.  (2)  Because  love  is  a  grace  that 
we  can  iU  spare ;  it  is  the  spring  and  rise  of  aU  duties  to  God  and  man.  4.  The 
next  note  is  from  the  coupling  of  these  two  :  "  The  love  of  God,"  and  "  looking  for 
the  mercy  of  Christ  unto  eternal  life."  See  the  hke  connection  (2  Thess.  iii.  5). 
(1)  Love  allayeth  fear  (1  John  iv.  18).  (2)  Love  quickeneth  desire  (2  Peter  iii.  12). 
5.  From  that  "looking  for  the  mercy,"  &c.,  observe  that  looking  earnestly  for 
eternal  life  is  a  good  means  of  perseverance.  (1)  What  this  looking  is.  It  implieth 
patience,  but  chiefly  hope,  (a)  Patience  in  waiting  God's  leisure  in  the  midst  of 
present  difficulties  (Heb.  x.  36 ;  Luke  viii.  15 ;  1  Thess.  i.  3 ;  Bom.  viii.  25).  (b) 
Hope.  This  looking  or  expectation  is  not  that  blind  hope  that  is  found  in  men 
ignorant  and  presumptuous,  that  regard  not  what  they  do.  This  hope  which  I 
press  you  to  is  a  serious  act,  arising  from  grace  aiming  at  its  own  perfection. 
Again,  this  looking  is  not  some  glances  upon  heaven,  such  as  are  found  in  worldly 
persons,  who  now  and  then  have  their  good  moods  and  sober  thoughts ;  but  alas ! 
these  sudden  motions  are  not  operative,  they  come  but  seldom,  and  leave  no 
warmth  upon  the  soul,  as  fruit  is  not  ripened  that  hath  but  a  glance  of  the  sun. 
Again,  it  is  not  a  loose  hope  or  a  probable  conjecture ;  this  hath  no  efficacy  upon 
the  soul.  Thus  negatively  I  have  shown  you  what  it  is  not,  but  now  positively  ;  it 
is  an  earnest,  well-grounded  expectation  of  blessedness  to  come.  It  bewrayeth 
itseK — (c)  By  frequent  and  serious  thoughts.  Thoughts  are  the  spies  and 
messengers  of  hope ;  it  sendeth  them  into  the  promised  land  to  bring  the  soul 
tidings  from  thence.  A  carnal  expectation  filleth  men  with  carnal  musings  and 
projects,  as  Luke  xii.  18;  James  iv.  13).  It  is  usual  with  men  to  forestall  the 
pleasure  of  their  hopes.  Now,  so  it  is  also  in  heavenly  things ;  men  that  expect 
them  will  be  entertaining  their  spirits  with  the  thoughts  of  them,  (d)  By  hearty 
longings  (Eom.  viii.  23).  As  the  decays  of  nature  do  put  them  in  mind  of  another 
world,  they  begin  to  lift  up  the  head  and  look  out  (Eom.  viii.  19).  (e)  By  Uvely 
tastes  and  feeUngs.  A  believer  hath  eternal  life  (John  xvii.  3).  Ue  beginneth  it 
here.  (2)  Let  me  show  you  the  influence  it  hath  upon  perseverance,  (a)  It  sets 
us  a- work  to  purge  out  sin  (1  John  iii.  3).  (6)  It  withdraweth  our  hearts  from 
present  things  (Phil.  iii.  20).  (c)  It  maketh  us  upright  and  sincere;  looking 
asquint  on  secular  rewards  is  the  cause  of  all  our  declinings  (Matt.  vi.  2).  (d)  It 
Bupporteth  us  under  those  difficulties  and  afflictions  which  are  wont  to  befall  us  in 
a  course  of  godliness,  (e)  It  helpeth  us  to  resist  temptations.  6.  The  next  point 
is  from  that  clause,  "  the  mercy."  The  ground  of  our  waiting  and  looking  for 
eternal  life  is  God's  mercy,  not  for  any  works  or  merits  of  ours;  we  cannot 
challenge  it  as  a  debt :  sin  and  death  are  as  work  and  wages,  but  eternal  life  is  a 
donative  (Eom.  vi.  23).    7.  This  mercy  is  called  "  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

Christ."  Thence  observe,  that  this  mercy  which  we  look  for  is  dispensed  by  Jesus 
Christ  ;  He  purchased  it,  and  He  hath  the  managing  of  it  in  the  whole  economy  of 
grace.  (1)  Get  an  interest  in  Christ,  otherwise  we  cannot  look  for  mercy  in  that 
great  day  (1  John  ii.  28).  (2)  It  maketh  for  the  comfort  of  Christ's  people  and 
members.  Our  blessed  hopes  are  founded  upon  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  in  His  hands  to  dispense  them.  From  thence  you  may  collect — (a) 
The  fulness  of  this  blessedness.  An  infinite  merit  purchased  it,  an  infinite  mercy 
bestoweth  it.  (b)  The  certainty  of  this  blessedness.  Christ  hath  the  managing  of 
it.  He  never  discovered  any  backwardness  to  thy  good  nor  inclination  to  thy 
ruin.  8.  The  last  note  is  from  that  clause  "  unto  eternal  life."  The  great  benefit 
which  we  have  by  Christ  is  eternal  life.  (1)  There  is  life ;  all  that  you  labour  for 
is  for  life,  that  which  you  prize  above  other  things  is  life.  (2)  It  is  an  excellent 
life.  The  life  of  sense,  which  is  the  beasts',  is  better  than  tnat  vegetative  life 
which  is  in  the  plants,  and  the  rational  life  which  is  in  men  is  better  than  the 
sensitive,  and  the  spiritual  exceedeth  the  rational,  and  the  glorious  life  the  spiritual. 
(3)  It  is  a  happy  life.  (4)  It  is  eternal  life.  This  life  is  but  a  flower  that  is  soon 
withered,  a  vapour  that  is  soon  blown  over ;  but  this  is  for  ever  and  ever.  Well, 
then,  let  this  press  you  to  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God  till  this  happy  estate 
come  about.  (T.  Manton.)  Self-keeping  : — "  But  ye,  beloved."  These  three 
words,  repeated  within  a  few  lines,  come  upon  the  reader  with  some  unexpectedness. 
They  tell  us,  what  we  may  have  forgotten  since  we  read  the  "  beloved  "  with  which 
the  Epistle  opens,  that  the  holy  energy  which  pulses  through  this  short  letter, 
though  sometimes  it  approaches  to  vehemence,  is  not  the  energy  of  a  character  that 
works  to  one  side  only.  They  tell  us  that  the  energy  is  one  of  sympathies,  after 
all,  and  not  of  mere  antipathies.  His  vehemence  is  to  be  traced  to  the  depth  and 
strength  of  His  love.  When  this  verse  occurs,  the  turning-point  of  the  Epistle  has 
just  been  passed.  The  thunderstorm  of  invective,  which  the  writer  has  been 
hurling  against  certain  godless  disturbers  of  the  purity  and  peace  of  the  Church, 
spends  itself  almost  abruptly  here,  and  the  Epistle  seems  to  gather  to  a  close 
among  the  quiet  sunset  hght  of  a  sky  that  has  been  clarified  by  the  storm.  These 
last  calm  sentences  are  directly  for  the  saints  whom  he  loves.  "  But  ye,"  says  he, 
"see  that  ye  make  a  contrast  to  all  this  vapid  corruption.  The  contrast  which 
already  exists  between  your  condition  and  theirs,  your  prospects  and  theirs — let  it 
be  carried  forth  into  a  contrast  between  your  conduct  and  theirs,  your  habits  and 
theirs."  I.  The  work  of  belt-keeping.  1.  To  keep  an  eye  upon  ourselves — an 
eye  that  is  clear  and  true ;  to  keep  a  hand  upon  ourselves — a  hand  that  is  steady 
and  strong ;  to  maintain  the  right  attitude  of  mind  and  heart  from  hour  to  hour. 
Is  this,  then,  a  work  for  which  a  man  himself  is  competent?  Can  a  man  keep 
himself  ?  Our  thoughts  may  easily  alight  upon  passages  which  seem  to  conflict 
with  Jude's  words  (1  Pet.  i.  5,  iv.  19 ;  John  xvii.  11,  15).  In  older  days  the 
Psalmist,  in  that  hymn  about  keeping  which  the  Christian  Church  has  taken  to  its 
heart,  seems  persistently  out  of  tune  with  the  strain  of  Jude  (Psa.  cixi.  3,  4,  5,  7). 
That,  indeed,  is  the  more  usual  language  of  Scripture  concerning  spiritual  keeping. 
But  neither  is  the  language  of  the  text  without  parallel  (Prov.  iv.  23 ;  1  John 
V.  18,  21).  The  two  sets  of  passages  make  no  discord.  It  is  only  the  familiar, 
inexpUcable  mingling  of  the  human  and  the  Divine.  It  is  only  the  working 
together — so  incomprehensible,  so  practicable,  so  blessed — of  man's  weakness  with 
God's  almightiness.  "  Keep  yourselves,"  for  it  is  God  that  keepeth  you.  2.  God's 
love  to  us  is  the  element  within  which  the  keeping  of  ourselves  becomes  real  keeping, 
safe  keeping,  happy  keeping.  That  is  the  over-arching  firmament,  with  its  infini- 
tude, within  which  our  keeping  is  kept.  We  ourselves  are  to  abide  within  our  own 
poor  keeping ;  yes,  and  our  own  poor  keeping  is  to  abide  within  God's  tender  might 
of  love.  The  flower  is  to  be  environed  by  the  frail  globe  of  glass — the  frail  globe 
is  to  be  environed  and  penetrated  by  the  sweet,  warm  sunlight  that  comes  across 
the  tracks  of  worlds  to  illumine  our  dark  atmosphere  with  safety  and  life.  (1) 
These  men  and  women,  as  being  Christians,  were  "  in  the  love  of  God  "  in  a  sense 
which  did  not  apply  to  those  who  were  not  Christians.  (2)  A  man  may  be  more, 
or  may  be  less — consciously  and  efficiently — "in  the  love  of  God."  Give  me  a 
living  assurance  that  my  God  is  caring  tenderly  for  me,  for  this  danger-haunted 
sinner  that  I  am — and  that  His  great  saving  love  is  actually  around  me  like 
shielding  sunlight,  I  shall  then  have  heart  and  motive  to  look  to  my  ways.  If  I 
am  worth  God's  watching,  I  am  worth  my  own.  I  will  watch  myself  for  Him.  I 
will  gird  up  my  loins  to  keep  myself,  just  because  God  is  keeping  me.  3.  Note 
the  harmony  subsisting  between  this  precept  and  this  qualification  of  the  precept. 


JUDE.  69 

Being  "  in  the  love  of  God  "  does  not  neutralise  an  atom  of  our  utmost  diligence  in 
the  task  of  self -keeping.  If  I  feel  that  I  am  enclosed  by  the  strong  ramparts  of  a 
fortress-home,  there  is  animating  reason  why  I  should  guard  myself  from  the 
lesser  hazards  that  may  still  encompass  me  within  that  home  ;  my  keeping  of 
myself  is  not  at  an  end,  but  is  only  reduced  to  manageable  dimensions.  If  I  be  on 
board  a  steam-liner,  which  holds  her  head  before  the  wildest  weather  with  un- 
daunted majesty,  and  only  fills  the  air  above  her  bows  with  the  smoke  of  billows 
she  is  shattering  in  the  strong  tremor  of  her  power,  I  have  still  to  care  how  I 
mount  the  companion-way,  and  pace  the  deck,  and  stow  my  valuables  in  my  cabin. 
Indeed,  it  is  only  when  I  am  secure  from  wreck  or  foundering,  that  aU  this  minor 
care  is  of  much  account.  "  Keep  yourselves — in  the  love  of  God."  II.  The 
MEANS  TO  BE  EMPLOYED  IN  SELF-KEEPiNO.  1.  It  is  significant  that  the  first  sort  of 
occupation  here  named  as  promotive  of  the  work  of  keeping  is  so  active  an 
occupation  as  that  of  "  building  up  themselves."  In  order  to  conserve,  they  must 
construct.  They  are  beset  by  forces  which  are  busy  to  disintegrate  and  destroy. 
A  Christian  character  is  not  reared  as  a  coral  structure  is — by  instinct.  It  demands 
a  sustained  effort  of  intelligent  will.  The  work  is  laboriously  slow — slow,  yet 
urgent.  There  is  need  we  should  bring  to  bear  upon  it  something  of  the  systematic 
steadiness  which  tells  so  marvellously  in  the  meaner  sphere  of  our  worldly  work — 
permitting  to  ourselves  no  half-heartedness  in  it ;  setting  upon  it  the  banded  force 
of  all  the  faculties  of  body  and  soul  and  spirit ;  pushing  it  on  in  frost  ahd  rain, 
and  by  light  of  torch  when  the  daylight  faUs  us.  And  there  is  danger,  too,  lest  the 
durable  qualities  of  our  work  should  be  imperfect.  It  would  spare  Christians  many 
a  pang  of  disappointment  and  much  rebuilding  of  what  had  been  built  in  their 
charac;er,  did  they  always  make  sure  that  they  were  building  firmly  and  strictly 
after  the  plan  of  Christ.  In  any  development  of  character  which  is  slim  and 
faulty,  there  can  be  no  real  contribution  to  the  "  keeping,"  the  staid  security, 
which  Jude  would  instruct  us  to  accomplish.  In  that  character-structure  of  ours 
there  must  be  settlement  and  stability,  mass  and  strength,  and  the  geometric 
beauty  of  symmetry ;  that  is,  there  must  be  proportions  well  balanced  upon  a 
sufficient  foundation.  And  what  is  that  sufficient  foundation  ?  A  sea-rock, 
indeed,  but  yet  a  rock — "  our  most  holy  faith."  It  is  the  truth  of  God  in  the 
gospel  of  His  Son.  2.  Prayer  is  an  occupation,  and  a  companion  one  to  that  of 
rearing  a  Christian  character.  Practically  it  is  not  very  sound  to  dissociate  the  one 
occupation  from  the  other,  for  prayer  is  not  doing  for  us  the  whole  that  it  might  do 
unless  it  is  breathing  like  an  odour  through  aU  our  changing  activities.  Yet  there 
must  be  seasons  when  prayer  is  concentrated  into  specific  labour  of  its  own  kind ; 
then  it  is  the  most  sacred  manner  of  work,  and  the  most  productive.  In  this  sense 
we  can  regard  upbuilding  and  prayer  as  twin  labourers,  fitting  to  each  other,  Uke 
rampart  and  moat,  towards  the  keeping  of  our  souls.  3.  We  are  to  pray  "  in  the 
Holy  Ghost."  The  pregnant  phrase  wraps  up  a  very  solemnity  of  privilege.  It  is 
a  great  thing  to  pray  in  the  mere  presence  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  or  under  His  loving 
glance.  It  is  a  greater  thing  to  pray  with  the  vouchsafed  assistance  of  this  Divine 
One,  as  He  moulds  and  energises  our  petitions.  It  is  a  greater  thing  stiU,  and 
enters  the  region  of  permanent  miracle,  that  we  should  pray  with  the  Eternal 
Spirit  in  us,  abiding  in  our  meagre  hearts,  identifying  Himself  with  us,  and 
mingling  His  own  intercessions  with  ours.  We,  and  our  prayer,  and  our  praying 
— all  are  to  be  within  Him — encompassed  by  His  power,  impregnated  by  His 
efficacy,  informed  by  His  light.  He  is  to  be  in  us  while  we  pray,  as  the  ocean  is 
in  the  chambers  of  the  tiny  shell  which  has  dropped  into  its  depths.     IH.  The 

ENCOURAGEMENT    TO    BE    SOUGHT    IN    SELF-KEEPING.       "  Looking    for   the    mCTCy  of    OUr 

Lord,"  &c.  Hard  work  and  brighter  hope  ;  it  is  these  together  that  make  up  the 
Christian  life  as  God  means  it.  When  the  two  are  most  sharply  set  over  against 
each  other  in  the  New  Testament,  it  is  that  they  may  be  mingled  by  us  into  one. 
God  would  not  have  His  children  to  toil  without  heart.  "  Ever  follow  that  which 
is  good.  Eejoice  evermore."  "Live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  .  .  .  looking 
for  the  happy  hope."  It  is  not  enough  to  have  rest  when  the  toil  is  over ;  there 
must  be  spirit  while  the  toil  is  going  on.  "  Building  up  yourselves,"  "  praying," 
and  so  "  keeping  yourselves."  Is  it  a  catalogue  of  labours?  Well,  there  follows 
the  complementary  duty,  as  if  he  added,  "  Cheering  yourselves."  Now,  it  is  below 
the  truth  to  say  that  while  there  may  be  other  lines  of  activity  in  the  world 
which  are  quite  as  arduous  as  that  of  the  self-keeping  of  the  Christian,  there  ia 
not  any  line  of  activity  which  bears  along  it  so  magnificent  a  contingent  ot 
inspiriting  considerations.     But  there  is  a  practical  peculiarity  in  the  case  of  the 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

Christian.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  a  man,  when  he  throws  his  energies  upon 
any  pursuit,  to  be  constantly  animating  himself  by  expectations  that  are  exagge- 
rated, and  by  data  that  are  good  only  to  disappoint  him.  The  Christian,  on  the 
contrary,  following  the  pursuit  which  God  Himself  has  set  along  the  highway  to 
all  blessed  issues,  is  constantly  underdoing  his  expectations — is  habitually  for- 
getting, or  only  half-believing,  the  splendid  certainties  by  which  his  hope  ought  to 
be  nerving  his  diligence.  Thereby  everything  suffers.  Thereby  the  reconstruction 
of  character  goes  heavily,  and  prayer  is  dull ;  the  self-custody  of  the  soul  is  slack- 
handed  and  insecure.  Hence  the  force  of  the  great  concluding  exhortation  of 
Jude :  "  There  is  your  sublime  task ;  take  thought  of  your  sublimer  prospects, 
that  you  may  hold  on  to  your  task  with  unflagging  hearts  and  unstaying  hands." 
On  what,  then,  is  it  that  our  eye  is  to  be  set  as  the  focus  of  all  our  encourage- 
ment in  the  grand  task  of  our  life?  "Looking  for — mercy."  Still  mercy — after 
all  our  hard  work,  our  God-given  work,  in  building,  praying,  keeping?  Let  ua 
thank  God  that  it  is.  Our  work — it  is  blundering  and  inconstant ;  the  worker — he 
is  weak  and  unworthy  :  here,  smiling  around  us  out' of  the  heaven  which  it  makes 
so  bright,  is  the  Divine  yet  brotherly  compassion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  No 
other  encouragement  could  be  so  complete  as  this.  It  is  the  sum  of  all  tenderest 
things ;  the  pledge  of  all  that  is  most  unimaginable  in  its  gloriousness.  {J.  A.  K. 
Bain,  M.A.)  Keeping  in  the  love  of  God  : — I.  By  building  upon  Christ.  "But 
ye,  beloved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  Christ  is  the  founda- 
tion ;  and  "  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay."  Others  may  think  lightly  of  that 
stone ;  but  to  you  it  is  the  "only  name  given  under  heaven."  You  must  go  on, 
building  upon  Christ.  And  thus  the  Holy  Spirit  tells  you  (Col.  ii.  6,  7).  All  this 
is  the  work  of  "  faith."  Faith  lays  your  soul  upon  Christ,  and  faith  keeps  it  there. 
He  terms  our  faith  "  most  holy."  It  is  so  from  its  nature,  and  from  its  tendency. 
It  has  to  do  with  a  "  holy  "  God.  It  has  to  mix  in  "  holy  "  services.  It  has  to 
prepare  us  for  a  "  holy  "  heaven.  II.  By  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  What 
believer  does  not  know  his  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  he  may  pray  aright.  How 
motionless  were  the  wheels  in  Ezekiel's  vision,  till  the  Spirit  entered  into  them  ! 
How  Ufeless  were  the  bones  in  the  valley  of  vision,  till  the  breath  from  the  four 
winds  came  upon  them !  And  how  dead  and  formal  are  our  devotions,  when  we 
neglect  to  seek  God's  Spirit  to  animate  our  frame !  III.  By  expecting  mercy 
THROUGH  Christ.  "  Looking  also  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto 
eternal  life."  We  all  need  "mercy,"  because  we  have  all  sinned.  IV.  The  effects 
OF  TRUE  SPIRITUAL  RELIGION.  "Kept  iu  the  lovc  of  God."  And  what  is  this? 
Why,  this  is  that  happiness  at  which  we  all  should  aim.  Think  how  great  a 
privilege  it  must  be  "  to  have  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  your  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghost."  How  sweet  to  go  to  Him  as  your  Father  !  to  commune  with  Him  as 
a  friend,  like  Abraham  !  to  see  the  Lord  always  before  you,  as  did  David  !  What, 
then,  do  each  of  you  know  of  this  security  ?  Are  all  of  you  shut  up  in  this  tower 
of  refuge?  (C.  Clayton,  M.A.)  A  safe  sphere — love: — I.  The  sphere  of  the 
Christian  life — "In  the  love  of  God."  The  expression  is  beautiful  and  sugges- 
tive. The  following  thoughts  amongst  others — 1.  The  primary  thought  of  redemp- 
tion— God  loves  us.  2.  The  demonstration  of  that  love — Jesus  loves  us.  3.  The 
proof  of  that  love — we  feel  it.  II.  The  expectation  of  the  Christian  life — 
"  Looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  life  eternal."  Hope  has  its 
objects  future,  and  there  are  in  the  future  of  every  believer — 1.  The  consummation 
of  the  present.  2.  The  expansion  of  the  future.  There  is  in  store  more  than  the 
present  can  supply.  (T.  Davies.)  How  to  keep  in  the  love  of  God : — I.  Con- 
sider   that    central    injunction — THE   VERY  KEYSTONE  OF  THE  ARCH  OF  A  DEVOUT 

Christian  life  — "  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  God's  love  to  us  i3 
regarded  as  a  kind  of  sphere  or  region  in  which  the  Christian  soul  lives  and  moves 
and  has  its  being.  It  is  the  sweet  home  of  our  hearts,  and  a  fortress  whereinto  we 
may  "  continually  resort,"  and  our  wisdom  and  security  is  to  keep  at  home  within 
the  strong  walls  that  defend  us,  compassed  by  the  warmth  and  protection  of  the 
love  which  God  has  towards  us.  Then  my  text  implies  that  Christian  men  may 
get  outside  of  the  love  of  God.  No  doubt  "  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His 
works."  There  are  gifts  of  the  Divine  love  which,  like  the  sunshine  in  the  heaven, 
come  equally  on  the  unfaithful  and  on  the  good.  But  all  the  best  and  noblest 
manifestations  of  that  love  cannot  come  to  men  irrespective  of  their  moral  character 
and  their  relation  to  Him.  Then  another  question  is  suggested  by  my  text.  I 
asked,  Can  a  man  get  out  of  the  love  of  God  ?  And  I  have  to  ask  now.  Can  a  man, 
fhen,  keep  always  in  it?     We  need  not  discuss,  for  the  guidance  of  our  own  lives 


JVBE.  71 

and  efforts,  whether  the  entire  realisation  of  the  ideal  is  possible  for  us  here. 
Enough  for  us  to  know  that  it  is  possible  for  Christian  people  to  make  their  lives 
one  long  abiding  in  the  love  of  God,  both  in  regard  of  the  actual  reception  of  it  and 
of  the  consciousness  of  that  reception.  The  secret  of  all  blessedness  is  to  live  in  the 
love  of  God.  Our  sorrows  and  difficulties  and  trials  will  change  their  aspect  if  we 
walk  in  the  peaceful  enjoyment  and  conscious  possession  of  His  Divine  heart.  That 
is  the  true  anfesthetic.  No  pain  is  intolerable  when  we  are  sure  that  God's  loving 
hand  is  round  about  us.     11.  Further,  notice  the  subsidiary  exhortations  which 

POINT    OUT    THE    MEANS   OF    OBEYING    THIS    CENTRAL  COMBIAND.       The  twO  claUSeS  in  my 

text  which  precede  that  main  precept  are  more  minute  directions  as  to  the  way  in 
which  it  is  to  be  observed.  We  might  almost  read,  "  By  building  yourselves  on 
your  most  holy  faith,  and  hy  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  keep  yourselves  in  the 
love  of  God."  The  first  means  of  securing  our  continual  abiding  in  the  conscious 
enjoyment  of  God's  love  to  us  is  our  continual  effort  at  building  up  a  noble 
character  on  the  foundation  of  faith.  What  would  you  say  of  a  man  that  had  dug 
his  foundations,  and  got  in  the  first  courses,  and  then  left  the  bricks  lying  on  the 
ground,  and  did  no  more?  And  that  is  what  many  people  that  call  theirxselvea 
Christians  do,  use  their  faith  only  as  a  shield  against  condemnation,  and  forget  that 
if  it  is  anything  at  all  it  works,  and  works  by  love.  Then  remember,  too,  chat  this 
building  of  a  noble,  God-pleasing  character  can  only  be  erected  on  the  foundation  of 
faith  by  constant  effort.  You  do  not  rear  the  fabric  of  a  noble  character  all  at  a 
moment.  No  man  reaches  the  extremity,  either,  of  goodness  or  baseness  by  a  leap ; 
you  must  be  content  with  bit-by-bit  work.  The  Christian  character  is  like  a  mosaic 
formed  of  tiny  squares  in  all  but  infinite  numbers,  each  one  of  them  separately  set 
and  bedded  in  its  place.  Now,  look  at  the  second  of  the  conditions  laid  down  here 
by  which  that  continual  living  within  the  charmed  circle  of  the  love  of  God  is  made 
possible.  "  Praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Who  that  has  ever  honestly  tried  to  cure 
himself  of  a  fault,  or  to  make  his  own  some  unfamiliar  virtue  opposed  to  his 
natural  temperament,  but  has  found  that  the  cry  "  0  God !  help  me  "  has  come 
instinctively  to  his  lips  ?  The  prayer  which  helps  us  to  keep  in  the  love  of  God  is 
not  the  petulant  and  passionate  utterance  of  our  own  wishes,  but  is  the  yielding  of 
our  desires  to  the  impulses  Divinely  breathed  upon  us.  Our  own  desires  may  be  hot 
and  vehement,  but  the  desires  that  run  parallel  with  the  Divine  will,  and  are 
breathed  into  us  by  God's  own  Spirit,  are  the  desires  which,  in  their  meek  sub- 
missiveness,  are  omnipotent  with  Him  whose  omnipotence  is  perfected  in  our 
weakness.  HI.  Lastly,  notice  here  the  expectation  attendant  on  the  obedience 
TO  the  central  commandment.  "  Looking  for  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
onto  eternal  life."  After  all  our  efforts,  after  all  our  prayers,  we  all  of  us  build 
much  wood,  hay,  stubble,  in  the  building  which  we  rear  on  the  true  foundation. 
And  the  best  of  us,  looking  back  over  our  past,  will  most  deeply  feel  that  it  is  all  so 
poor  and  stained  that  all  we  have  to  trust  to  is  the  forgiving  mercy  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  That  mercy  will  be  confidently  anticipated  for  all  the  future,  nearer, 
and  more  remote,  in  proportion  as  we  keep  ourselves  for  the  present  in  the  love  of 
God.  The  more  we  feel  in  our  hearts  the  experience  that  God  loves  us,  the  more 
sure  we  shall  be  that  He  will  love  us  ever.  The  sunshine  in  which  we  walk  will  be 
reflected  upon  all  the  path  before  us,  and  will  illuminate  that  else  dusky  and 
foreboding  sky  that  lies  beyond  the  dark  grave.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Keeping 
ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  ; — I.  If  we  would  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  we 

MUST    CAREFULLY   SHUN    EVERYTHING  WHICH  WOULD  BE  LIKELY  TO  DAMPEN  THE  FERVOUR 

OF  OUR  AFFECTION,  or  extinguish  this  holy  fire.  The  love  of  God  cannot  live  in  the  heart 
where  any  known  sin  is  allowed  to  enjoy  quiet  shelter.  II.  If  the  Christian  would 
keep  himself  in  the  love  of  God,  he  must  be  attentive  to  the  duties  of  prayer, 
AND  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  HoLY  SCRIPTURES.  The  ucglcct  or  the  carclcss  performance 
of  either  of  these  cannot  but  have  the  effect  of  cooling  the  ardour  of  godliness  ;  and, 
in  the  end,  of  causing  it  to  decay  and  perish.  III.  If  we  would  keep  ourselves  in 
the  love  of  God,  we  must  imitate  Him  in  deeds  of  mercy  and  loving-kindness. 
(J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  The  love  of  God  : — I.  Illustrate  the  import  and  extent 
OF  THE  PRECEPT — "  Keep  yoursclves  in  the  love  of  God."  To  form  a  right  notion 
of  this  duty,  we  must  remember  that  our  love  to  God  is  not  such  a  familiar  affec- 
tion of  the  mind  as  we  bear  towards  our  equals — such  as  one  friend  has  for 
another.  The  man  who  loves  God  will  honour  and  reverence  Him.  Like  a  dutiful 
child,  he  will  be  fearful  of  offending  the  most  tender  and  beneficent  Parent.  To 
keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  likewise  imports  the  most  ardent  and  affectionate 
desire  of  being  united  to  Him,  as  the  supreme  good  and  the  chief  happiness  of  man. 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

To  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  doth  further  imply,  that  we  prefer  His  favour 
and  service  to  everything  that  may  come  in  competition  with  Him.  In  order  to 
discover,  therefore,  whether  our  love  to  God  be  genuine,  it  will  be  necessary  for  us 
to  consider  what  are  the  genuine  effects  which  the  genuine  love  of  God  is  naturally 
calculated  to  produce  on  our  minds  and  manners.  It  will  produce  a  submission 
of  our  wills  to  the  will  of  God ;  it  will  produce  a  love  of  the  duties  of  religion ; 
it  will  produce  a  sincere  obedience  to  the  Divine  commandments  ;  it  will  produce  a 
quickness  on  our  part  in  discovering  our  own  frailties  and  imperfections  ;  and  lastly, 
it  will  produce  an  unfeigned  charity  to  all  mankind.     U.  Sdggest  some  or  those 

MOTIVES   AND    OBLIGATIONS    WE  LIE    DNDEB  TO  THE  OBSERVANCE  OF  THIS  PRECEPT.       And 

in  order  to  "  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,"  in  order  to  inflame  our  souls  with 
this  holy  and  devout  affection,  let  us  only  consider,  first,  how  glorious  a  being  God  is 
in  Himself ;  and  second,  how  good  and  gracious  He  hath  been  to  us,  His  unworthy 
creatures.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  consider  how  numerous  those  blessings  are  which 
we  have  received,  and  which  we  every  moment  receive  from  Almighty  God.  2.  Let  ua 
consider  how  much  we  stand  in  need  of  a  continual  supply  of  those  mercies  which 
we  enjoy.  3.  Let  us  reflect  how  miserable  our  lives  would  become  by  the  want  of 
those  good  things  of  which  we  are  now  possessed.  {W.  Macritchie.)  "  Keep  your- 
selves in  the  love  of  God  "  ; — I.  A  state  implied.  "  The  love  of  God  "  here  obviously 
means  God's  love  to  the  believer,  and  the  believer's  love  to  God,  for  every  true  Christian 
is  la  love  to  God,  and  in  love  from  God.  1.  God's  love  to  the  believer.  It  is  not  only 
the  complacency,  which  is  the  portion  of  angels — and  the  love  of  goodness,  which 
pervades  the  universe;  but  the  love  of  compassion,  that  pities — the  love  of 
sovereignly,  that  chooses — the  love  of  grace,  that  calls  and  renews — the  love  of 
mercy,  that  pardons  and  redeems — the  love  of  faithfulness,  that  fulfils  every 
promise,  perfects  every  grace,  and  surpasses  every  expectation — the  love  that  knows 
neither  beginning,  change,  nor  end ;  and  which,  after  having  attended  its  object 
through  earth's  pilgrimage,  will  smooth  and  Ught  his  passage  through  the  vale  of 
death,  and  conduct  him  to  a  happy  eternity.  2.  The  believer's  love  to  God.  This 
is  our  first  great  duty,  and  it  is  the  foundation  of  all  pure  and  undefiled  religion, 
and  of  all  the  moral  excellence  and  beauty  which  a  created  intelligence  can  possess. 
There  is  nothing  in  it  of  animal  passion,  but  it  is  exclusively  intellectual  and 
spiritual ;  and  though  it  subordinates  the  faculties  and  passions  of  the  mind  to  its 
own  movements,  it  is  perfectly  distinct  from  them.  It  is  the  feeling,  conviction, 
and  tendency  of  a  redeemed  created  spirit  towards  an  Infinite  and  Uncreated 
Spirit.  It  includes  admiration  of  the  natural  and  moral  perfections  of  God; 
holy  delight  in  thinking  of  Him,  communing  with  Him,  and  feeling  that  we 
are  near  to  Him ;  humble  gratitude  for  all  His  mercies ;  and  an  earnest  desire 
to  be  with  Him  in  heaven.  U.  The  means  by  which  this  spiritual  state  is 
TO  BE  JiAiNTAiNED  AND  PRESERVED.  "  Keep  yourselvcs  in  the  love  of  God.  1.  This 
spiritual  state  is  like  a  delicate  flower,  or  exotic ;  without  constant  care  and  culture, 
it  may  soon  be  injured,  and  droop  and  fade.  The  soul  of  the  believer  may  get  into 
such  a  cold,  wintry  state — be  so  pervaded  by  the  chilling  frosts  of  indifference, 
and  the  disturbing  elements  of  worldly-mindedness  and  conscious  guilt,  as  to  be 
totally  unfit  for  the  nourishment  and  growth  of  this  celestial  plant.  2.  And  the 
language  of  the  text  implies  another  thing,  and  that  is,  that  Christians  are  them- 
selves responsible  for  the  preservation,  or  decay,  of  this  spiritual  state.  Jude  says, 
"  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  It  is  true  that  in  spiritual  matters  we 
can  do  nothing  successfully  without  Divine  aid  and  influence,  but  this  is  as  true 
in  the  world  of  nature  as  it  is  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.  The  farmer  can  do 
nothing  successfully  without  Divine  aid  and  influence,  and  yet  he  would  be  thought 
very  unreasonable  to  urge  this  as  an  evidence  that  no  personal  responsibility 
rests  upon  him  for  the  state  of  his  farm  and  crops.  3.  But  hoio  are  we  to  keep 
ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  ?  (1)  By  praying  very  earnestly  to  God,  so  to  exert 
upon  us  His  mighty  power  and  grace,  as  to  keep  us  in  that  love.  (2)  By  carefully 
avoiding  anything  that  would  grieve  and  offend  Him,  and  cause  Him  to  withdraw  the 
enjoyments  of  His  love  from  us ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  doing  all  we  can 
to  please  Him,  and  to  secure  the  continuance  of  His  favour.  (3)  By  preserving 
our  love  to  Him  from  injury  and  decay,  and  by  diligently  using  all  appropriate 
means  for  its  growth  and  perfection,  (ir.  Gregory.)  Christians  keeping  them- 
selves in  the  love  of  God  : — And  there  be  many  reasons  to  move  us  to  keep  ourselves 
in  the  love  of  God.  1.  The  first  is  His  commandment  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  "  ;  and  again,  "  What  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee  but  to  fear  and 
love  Him?"      This  our  Saviour  calleth  "the  great  commandment."     The  Com- 


JUDE.  78 

mander  is  great,  the  object  is  great,  the  use  of  the  duty  is  great,  and  their  reward 
is  great  that  take  care  to  do  it.     2.  A  second  reason  to  move  us  to  keep  ourselves  in 
the  love  of  God  is  in  regard  of  equity.     For  seeing  Almighty  God  doth  love  us,  it 
is  a  matter  of  equity  that  we  should  requite  love  with  love  again.     3.  Commodity 
should  move  us  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God.    For  first,  by  this  love,  our 
faith  produceth  those  good  duties  which  we  owe  unto  God.    For  faith  is  as  one 
hand  receiving  love,  as  the  other  giving  (Gal.  v.  6).     Again,  by  the  love  of  God,  we 
may  know  what  state  we  are  in.     St.  Augustine  saith  two  loves  make  two  cities  ; 
the  love  of  God  maketh  Jerusalem,  the  love  of  the  world  Babylon ;  therefore  let 
every  man  but  examine  himself,  what  he  loves,  and  he  shall  see  in  what  state  he  is, 
and  to  what  city  he  belongs.    Again,  the  love  of  God  engenders  in  us  the  love  of 
the  godly  for  God,  for  he  that  loves  the  Father  cannot  but  love  His  children 
(1  John  iii.  14).    Again,  from  the  love  of  God  ariseth  much  grace  and  goodness,  as 
much  water  from  one  spring.     Good  works  wither  except  they  be  nourished  by  this 
love.    As  the  love  of  money  is  the  root  and  nourisher  of  all  evil,  so  the  love  of  God 
is  the  mother  and  nurse  of  all  good,  of  all  pious  offices  to  God,  and  Christian  duties 
to  man.    4.  We  ought  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  because  He  is  our 
gracious  Father,  and  "  of  His  own  good  will  begat  He  us  through  the  word  of  truth." 
Now  if  a  child  must  love  his  father,  of  whom  he  hath  received  a  part  of  his  body, 
how  much  more  ought  he  to  love  God,  of  whom  he  hath  received  his  soul,  and  unto 
whose  goodness  he  stands  obliged  both  for  soul  and  body  ?    (S.  Otes.)        Keeping 
the  heart  in  the  love  of  God  : — I.  Directions.     1.  Carefully  shun  all  those  circum- 
stances and  things  which  are  known  to  have  a  tendency  to  damp  the  fervours  of 
love,  or  to  extinguish  this  holy  fire.     Above  all,  avoid  every  sinful  indulgence. 
Fleshly  lusts.     Contention  and  strife.     Pride  and  vaingloiy.     2.  To  keep  ourselves 
in  the  love  of  God,  we  should  often  meditate  on  the  superlative  moral  excellence  of 
the  Divine  character,  as  displayed  in  His  works  and  Word.     3.  Every  habit  and 
affection  is  preserved  in  vigour  and  increased  by  frequent  exercise.    4.  The  greatest 
hindrance  to  the  exercise  and  increase  of  our  love  to  God,  is  our  blindness  of  mind 
and  unbelief.     In  order,  therefore,  to  preserve  our  souls  in  the  lively  exercise  of  the 
love  of  God,  we  must  seek  an  increase  of  that  faith  which  is  "  the  substance  of 
things  hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen  " — that  faith  which  "  sees 
Him  that  is  invisible  " — which  "  looks  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen  and  tem- 
poral, but  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen,  which  are  eternal."    II.  Motives.     1. 
By  doing  this  we  shall  best  glorify  God  upon  earth.     2.  The  next  motive  which 
should  influence  us  to  perform  faithfully  the  duty  enjoined  in  the  text,  is,  that  this 
will  be  the  most  effectual  method  of  promoting  the  welfare  and  salvation  of  our 
fellow  creatures.     3.  The  more  we  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  the  more  meet 
shall  we  be  for  the  heavenly  inheritance,  where  perfect  love  reigns  in  every  heart. 
Not  only  so,  but  the  richer  reward  will  be  possessed.     (A.  Alexander,  D.D.)        How 
to  keep  oneself  in  the  love  of  God: — Answer  1.  In  general:  one  whom  God  loves  and 
favours,  must  do  as  the  favourite  of  a  prince  useth  to  do,  to  keep  himself  in  his 
prince's  love  and  favour.     He  will  study  what  the  will  of  his  prince  is,  and  will  do 
all  that  he  can  to  please  him.     This  is  a  great  art  to  study — to  know  what  is  the 
will  and  pleasure  of  God  (Eph.  v.  17)  and  to  conform  to  it.     The  reason  whereof 
is  this — 1.  Because  the  will  of  God  is  the  sovereign  will  to  all  the  world,  therefore 
to  thine  and  mine :  there  is  no  controlling  of  it.     2.  Because  the  wiU  of  God  is  a 
holy  will ;  and  we  can  never  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  but  by  what  is  agree- 
able to  His  holiness :  and  that  is,  when  we  ourselves  are  holy  (1  Pet.  i.  15,  16). 
Answer  2.    But  now  more  particularly :  I.  He  that  will  keep  himself  in  the  love  of 
God,  must  he  himself  love  God.     For  love  deserveth  love,  and  love  begetteth  love. 
God's  love  worketh  thus  toward  us,  and  therefore  our  love  must  work  toward  God. 
n.  He  that  loves  God  loving  him,  is  drawn  to  God  by  the  attractive  be&ms  of  Divine 
love.     He  that  loves  God  loving  him,  is  inflamed  with  God's  love ;  as  it  is  in  a 
burning-glass.    HI.  He  that  wiU  keep  himself  in  the  love  of  God,  must  mind  and 
meditate  on  four  attributes  and  properties  of  God's  love,  which  will  have  great 
influence  upon  his  heart  and  love.     1.  On  the  eternity  of  God's  love  to  him.     2.  On 
the  freeness  of   God's   love  (Hos.  xiv.  4).     3.  On  the  immensity  of  God's  love 

JEph.  iii.  17-19).  4.  On  the  unehangeableness  of  God's  love  (Heb.  vi.  17,  18 ; 
'er.  xxxi.  3  ;  Kom.  viii.  39).  IV.  He  that  will  keep  himself  in  the  love  of  God, 
must  keep  himself  free  from  the  love  of  the  world.  Because  the  love  of  this  world 
is  contrary  to  the  love  of  God,  and  therefore  inconsistent  with  it  (1  John  ii.  15,  16). 
V.  He  that  will  love  God,  and  keep  himself  in  the  love  of  God,  must  not  be  a  self- 
lover.    There  is  no  greater  enemy  to  the  love  of  God  than  to  love  ourselves  (2  Tim. 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


iii.  2).  VI.  If  ye  would  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  be  very  shy  of  sin,  both 
in  the  risings  of  it,  and  as  to  the  temptations  to  it.  1.  Sin  is  "  enmity  against 
God"  in  the  abstract  (Bom.  viii.  7).  2.  Sin  is  hateful  to  God  (Prov.  vi.  16;  Psa. 
xcvi.  10).  3.  Sin  separates  from  God.  VII.  He  that  will  keep  himself  in  the  love 
of  God,  must  clear  up  his  interest  and  union  to  Jesus  Christ.  VIII.  An  eighth 
way  of  keeping  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  is  by  keeping  God's  commandments 
(John  XV.  10,  14).  IX.  The  way  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  is  to  walk 
closely  with  God  in  ways  of  strict  holiness.  This  is  a  commendation  and  character 
upon  record  of  God's  chiefest  favourites.  Thus  it  was  with  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  1)  ; 
thus  it  was  with  Enoch  (Gen.  v.  22) ;  thus  it  was  with  Noah  (Gen.  vi.  9)  :  thus  it 
was  with  Caleb  (Numb.  xiv.  24)  ;  and  thus  David  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  28).  X.  They  keep 
themselves  in  the  love  of  God  who  do  not  wave  or  abate  their  profession  and  prac- 
tice of  godliness  in  evil  times,,  and  do  not  balk  the  ways  of  God  under  severe  pro- 
vidences and  sharp  trials.  XI.  Another  means  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God 
is  to  keep  in  our  hearts  a  quick  sense  of  the  pardon  of  sin ;  of  the  wonderful  love  of 
the  Lord  to  a  poor  sinful  soul,  to  pardon  great  and  many  sins.  XII.  A  further 
means  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  is  not  only  to  love  the  Lord,  but  to  keep 
up  our  love  to  Him  to  the  height.  XIII.  If  we  will  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of 
God,  let  us  labour  to  grow  in  grace,  and  to  carry  on  the  work  of  it  in  our  souls  to 
the  highest  perfection.  XIV.  A  great  means  of  keeping  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God 
is  this,  to  "  pray  in  the  holy  Ghost."  XV.  We  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God 
when  we  declare  a  public  spirit  for  the  cause  of  God  in  His  Church  against  the 
enemies  of  it  by  being  zealous  for  His  glory  and  valiant  for  His  truth  in  our  station. 
XVI.  A  great  means  of  keeping  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God  is  to  be  sincere  and 
sound  in  the  worship  of  God.  XVII.  A  great  means  of  keeping  in  the  love  of  God 
is  keeping  up  the  communion  of  saints  in  all  the  parts  and  duties  of  it.  XVHI.  The 
last  means  I  shall  name  is  in  the  words  immediately  following  my  text  ("  Looking 
for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life  "),  which,  doubtless,  the 
Holy  Ghost  points  us  to,  as  an  effectual  means  to  "  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of 
God."  1.  Because  it  is  the  highest  act  of  God's  love  to  us — to  bestow  eternal  life 
on  us.  2.  The  Lord,  that  hath  provided  eternal  life  for  us,  will  have  us  always  to 
walk  in  expectation  of  it  (Gen.  xlix.  18 ;  Titus  ii.  13).  3.  We  have  no  ground  at 
all  to  expect  eternal  life  from  God  without  keeping  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God 
(Rom.  viii.  23,  compared  with  ver.  39).  4.  We  keep  ourselves  in  God's  love  by  being 
found  in  such  a  state  and  in  such  a  way  as  leads  to  life,  which  is  chiefly  faith  and 
obedience.  5.  Now  a  son  that  is  heir-apparent  by  adoption  in  Christ  to  such  an 
estate  of  eternal  life  in  heaven,  he  will  not  only  be  always  in  expectation  of  it,  but 
win  judge  himself  bound  to  study  all  the  ways  he  can  possibly  do  to  please  God,  to 
keep  in  His  love  and  favour,  and  withal  fear  and  take  heed  of  forfeiting  the  love  of 
God.  (W.  Cooper,  M.A.)  Keeping  in  the  love  of  God  : — Some  years  ago  I  was 
holding  a  series  of  evangelistic  meetings  in  a  certain  New  England  city,  and  was 
entertained  at  the  house  of  a  very  dear  friend.  His  accomplished  and  Christian 
wife  had  been  ill  for  many  weeks  with  rheumatic  fever,  but  was  now  convalescent. 
Her  illness  had  been  very  severe  and  long-continued.  One  distressing  result  had 
been  a  depression  of  spirits,  and  the  clouding  of  her  mind  as  to  her  Christian  hope 
and  her  acceptance  with  God.  One  day  I  found  her  seated  in  a  charming  little 
parlour,  with  a  large  bay  window  toward  the  south.  It  was  mid-winter,  and  the 
southern  sun  was  streaming  into  that  south  window,  making  the  flowers  and  plants 
beautiful  in  foliage  and  bloom,  and  filling  all  the  room  with  light  and  genial  warmth. 
My  invalid  friend  was  seated  in  the  window,  with  her  left  shoulder  lightly  covered 
with  a  gauzy  zephyr  wool  shawl,  but  otherwise  bared  to  the  rays  of  the  sun.  I  fell 
into  conversation  with  her  once  more  concerning  her  spiritual  state.  She  was  still 
in  utter  darkness  and  distress  of  mind.  I  had  quoted  this  precious  text  to  her  again 
and  again,  "  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  looking  for  the  mercy  of  Jesus 
Christ  unto  eternal  life  "  ;  but  apparently  all  to  no  purpose.  Finally,  I  thought  to 
turn  that  south  vision  to  purpose,  and  make  it  preach  a  sermon  to  her.  So  I  said, 
"  Why  do  you  come  so  often  and  sit  so  long  in  this  south  window  ?  "  *'  Why,"  she 
replied,  "  you  must  know  why  I  sit  here  every  day.  You  know  how  long  I  have 
been  ill  with  the  rheumatic  fever,  and  that  since  the  fever  has  left  me  I  have  been 
the  further  victim  of  the  sharp  and  excruciating  pain  of  inflammatory  rheumatism 
in  almost  every  part  and  joint  of  my  body  ?  But  latterly  I  have  been  delivered  from 
it,  except  in  this  left  shoulder.  So  the  doctor  told  me,  about  three  weeks  ago,  that 
he  could  do  nothin;,'  more,  but  suggested  to  me  that  I  might  come  into  this  parlour 
in  the  mornings,  when  the  sun  v.-as  at  his  strength,  and  sit  here  in  the  south  window, 


JUDE.  75 

with  my  shoulder  bared  to  its  warm  rays,  and  see  what  a  sun-bath  would  do  for  me. 
This  is  why  I  am  here."  "  Well,"  said  I,  "and  has  the  sun-bath  done  you  any 
good  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes  !  Do  you  know,  I  had  not  taken  my  daily  bath  here  for  more 
than  a  week  or  ten  days,  until  the  last  vestige  of  pain  left  me,  and  I  am  as  well, 
apparently,  as  I  ever  was,  so  far  as  that  is  concerned ;  but  it  is  so  delicious  just  to 
sit  in  this  sunshine,  and  feel  its  glad  and  genial  warmth,  that  I  come  now  every  day 
for  a  little  while,  just  for  love  of  it."  "  Ah,  my  friend,"  I  replied,  "now  you  have 
been  preaching  my  sermon.  That  is  exactly  what  the  apostle  is  exhorting  you  to 
do  when  he  says,  '  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God.'  Your  poor  soul  has  grown 
cold,  and  is  full  of  the  rheumatism  of  doubt  and  distress.  In  vain  you  have  tried 
to  expel  your  doubts  and  fears.  There  is  but  one  remedy.  Go  and  sit  in  the  south 
window  of  God's  love,  and  let  the  warm,  life-giving  rays  of  His  glad  sunshine  pour 
themselves  into  your  heart,  and  you  may  be  sure  His  love  wiU  chase  out  every  doubt 
and  fear,  thaw  away  all  coldness,  and  fill  you  with  a  joy  and  peace  that  will  be  more 
delicious  to  your  soul  than  this  material  sunshine  is  to  your  poor  body.  And, 
moreover,  after  your  doubts  and  fears  have  been  dissipated,  you  will  be  glad  of  an 
hour  every  day.  Yea,  you  will  be  glad  of  the  privilege  of  sitting,  or  standing,  or 
walking,  or  working  all  the  day  long  in  the  '  love  of  God.' "  This  thought  seemed 
to  strike  her  very  forcibly,  and  at  last  she  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  I  see  it  all  now !  How 
stupid  of  me  not  to  have  seen  it  before !  I  have  been  trying,  out  of  my  cold  and 
wicked  heart,  to  bring  forth  something  good  to  offer  to  God,  and  then  to  find  peace 
and  comfort  in  something  I  have  done  or  felt.  Just  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of 
God,"  she  went  on  in  a  kind  of  soliloquy,  "  and  let  that  fill  and  quicken  you.  How 
simple  !  How  beautiful !  How  I  might  have  saved  myself  weeks  and  months  of 
suffering,  far  worse  than  the  pains  of  illness,  if  I  had  only  known  this,  or  at  least  ^ 
acted  upon  it."  {G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  ^ 
Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life. — Looking  for  mercy : — I.  The  greatest  op  all 
SPIRITUAL  BLESSINGS.  "  The  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jcsus  Christ. "  Mercy.  1.  Deeply 
needed.  2.  Freely  offered.  3.  Experimentally  enjoyed.  4.  Bises  in  value  as 
every  other  good  declines.  Mercy  of  the  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  It  is  the  pur- 
chase of  His  agonies.  (2)  It  is  applied  to  the  heart  by  the  agency  of  His  Spirit. 
(3)  It  is  finally  bestowed  by  His  own  hand.  II.  The  most  important  of  all 
EXERCISES.  Looking.  Supposes  a  belief  in  their  reality,  an  aspiration  after  their 
enjoyment.  A  desirable  state.  1.  As  a  safeguard  against  dangerous  errors.  2.  As 
it  damps  the  false  lustre  of  the  world.  3.  As  it  is  eminently  conducive  to  holiness. 
4.  As  it  prepares  the  soul  for  heaven.  III.  The  most  glorious  of  all  results. 
"  Eternal  life."  (The  Study.)  The  believer's  hope  in  the  mercy  of  Christ : — I.  Mercy 
IS  THE  ground  on  WHICH  WE  ARE  TO  LOOK  FOR  ETERNAL  LIFE.  Mcrcy,  as  attributed  to 
God  and  Christ,  is  to  be  taken  either — 1.  For  that  attribute  whereby  He  is  inclined 
to  pity  and  help  the  miserable ;  His  loving-kindness,  grace,  compassion,^  freely 
working  to  such  as  are  in  misery.  Or — 2.  For  the  effects  and  fruits  of  this ;  His 
help  afforded ;  suitable  blessings  actually  granted.  In  this  latter  sense  it  is  to  be 
taken  here  (2  Tim,  i.  18).  II.  How  it  is  the  merct  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
1.  He  is  the  purchaser  of  it  (1  John  v.  11,  12).  2.  In  point  of  preparation  (John 
xiv.  2).  3.  In  respect  of  actual  donation  (Matt.  xxv.  34).  III.  How  well  it 
deserves  to  be  thus  emphatically  expressed,  "the  mercy."  1.  As  it  is  that 
mercy  which  saints  were  chosen  to,  and  which  God  always  had  them  in  His  eye  and 
heart  to  bring  them  to  the  possession  of.  2.  As  it  is  most  free.  This  is  the  pure 
fountain  from  which  it  springs,  "  the  gift  of  God."  3.  As  purchased  with  the  most 
invaluable  price.  Not  only  the  prayers  and  tears,  but  the  precious  blood  of  the  Son 
of  God.  4.  "  The  mercy  "  promised  as  the  crown  and  end  of  all  others.  "  This  is 
the  promise  that  He  hath  promised  us,  eternal  life"  (1  John  ii.  25),  the  grand  com- 
prehensive promise,  into  which  all  the  foregoing  mercies  run  as  streams  into  the 
ocean.  5.  "The  mercy,"  as  inconceivably  great  and  fuU,  unmixed  and  complete ; 
to  be  measured  only  by  the  infinite  perfections  of  that  God  who  is  to  be  enjoyed,  and 
the  vast  capacities  of  the  immortal  soul  to  be  filled  up.  6.  "  The  mercy,"  as  most 
seasonable,  and  therein  most  sweet,  upon  account  of  foregoing  misery.  7.  "  The 
mercy,"  as  most  suitable.  8.  "  The  mercy,"  as  reserved,  and  therein  most  sure. 
9.  "  The  mercy,"  as  peculiar  and  distinguishing :  the  inheritance  of  a  few 
(Luke  xii.  32).  10.  The  mercy,"  as  always  to  endure.  Eternal  life.  It  is  life  for 
its  excellency,  and  eternal  for  its  duration ;  a  life  free  from  all  evil,  and  in  the  full 
possession  of  all  good,  of  all  that  is  desirable,  all  that  is  delightful.  IV.  What  is 
implied  in  looking  for  it  ?  1.  That  our  minds  and  thoughts  are  much  taken  up 
about  it.     2.  It  is  keeping  faith  in  exercise  with  reference  to  it.     3.  It  is  a  setting 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

our  hearts  upon  it,  and  entertaining  earnest  desires  after  it.  4.  It  is  a  patient 
■waiting  till  you  are  called  hence  to  enter  into  that  eternal  life  the  mercy  of  Christ 
will  assuredly  bestow  (Heb.  vi.  12).  5.  Serious  diligence  in  preparing  for  it,  and 
watchfulness  that  we  do  not  come  short,  or  be  found  unready.  Application.  1.  Is 
it  mercy  that  bestows  eternal  life,  how  unreasonable  is  the  sin  of  despair?  2.  Is 
it  the  mercy  of  Christ,  how  destructive  their  folly  who  seek  it  anywhere  else? 
(D,  Wilcox.) 

Vers.  22,  23.    And  of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  difference. — Different 

degrees  of  sinners  differently  to  he  treated : — There  is  one  kind  of  argument 
necessary  to  be  used  to  men  of  evil  principle  and  debauched  lives ;  to  lovers  of 
pleasure  and  haters  of  discipline  and  wise  instruction ;  to  men  puffed  up  with 
accidental  advantages  of  this  present  world,  and  that  have  never  tasted  the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come ;  and  another  sort  proper  to  be  applied  to  those 
who  know  the  will  of  God  and  approve  the  things  that  are  more  excellent, 
being  convinced  that  the  law  is  holy,  but  through  the  strength  of  their  passions 
and  the  weakness  of  their  resolutions  they  are  frequently  seduced  by  the  deceitful- 
ness  of  sin.  There  are  some  that  ought  to  be  rebuked  sharply  (Tit.  i.  13) ;  and 
others,  whom  when  they  are  overtaken  in  a  fault,  they  which  are  spiritual  are 
directed  to  restore  them  in  the  spirit  of  meekness  (Gal.  vi.  1).  There  can  be 
no  better  direction  given  us  in  this  matter  than  in  the  words  of  the  text :  "Of 
some  have  compassion,"  &c.  For  so  God  Almighty  Himself  in  the  dispensations 
of  His  all-wise  Providence  draws  some  men  with  the  tender  mercies  of  a  com- 
passionate Father,  and  others  He  drives  with  the  terrors  of  an  incensed  Judge. 
In  the  words  we  cannot  but  observe — 1.  That  there  is  great  difference  in  the 
degrees  of  sin  and  in  the  danger  of  sinners ;  and  that,  accordingly,  there  ought 
to  be  a  proportionable  difference  in  the  manner  of  treating  them.  2.  That  the 
difference  which  ought  to  be  made  in  this  case  is  this,  that  those  who  sin 
through  infirmity  are  to  be  admonished  with  greater  tenderness  than  those  who 
Bin  presumptuously.  3.  That  presumptuous  sinners  who  transgress  habitually  and 
with  a  high  hand,  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  being  in  a  condition  near  to  desperate, 
as  being  already  in  the  fire.  4.  That  even  these  persons  we  ought  still  to  endeavour 
to  save,  by  bringing  them  even  yet  to  repentance.  Firstly,  some  men  there  are  who, 
for  want  of  early  instruction  and  good  education,  are  utterly  ignorant  of  all 
religious  matters.  Such  persons  want  the  very  first  principles  of  the  doctrine 
of  Christ.  Secondly,  others  there  are  who  deny  all  moral  difference  of  actions, 
and  take  upon  them  by  an  extraordinary  degree  of  reason  and  judgment  to  have 
gotten  above  the  fears  and  obligations  of  religion.  These  are  men  of  openly  corrupt 
principles  and  debauched  lives ;  despisers  of  true  knowledge,  and  that  cannot  bear 
reproof.  To  such  persons  we  must  demonstrate,  from  the  necessary  notion  of  a  first 
or  self-existent  Cause  and  from  the  structure  and  order  of  the  world,  that  there  is  a 
supreme  God,  who  made  and  governs  all  things ;  and  from  the  necessary  attributes 
of  such  a  supreme  and  self-existent  Cause  we  must  prove  that  God,  as  He  is  all- 
powerful  and  aU-wise,  so  He  is  also  perfectly  holy,  just,  and  good.  Thirdly,  others 
we  shall  find  who  will  profess  to  believe  the  Being  of  God  and  the  natural  obligations 
of  religion ;  yet  will  deny  the  truth  of  all  Divine  revelation  and  have  no  regard  to 
the  authority  of  the  gospel,  which  is  the  religion  appointed  for  the  reconciliation 
of  sinners.  To  such  persons  as  these  we  must  endeavour  to  show  the  necessary 
difference  between  the  natural  duty  of  innocent  creatures  and  a  religion  instituted 
for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  Fourthly,  among  those  who  have  gone  still  further 
than  the  former,  and  acknowledge  not  only  the  religion  of  nature,  but  also  the 
gospel  of  Christ ;  yet  how  many  are  there  who  have  corrupted  this  doctrine  o£ 
truth  with  numberless  vanities  and  superstitions?  Against  every  one  of  these 
are  proper  remedies  to  be  applied.  Fifthly,  even  among  those  who  maintain 
the  truth  in  speculation,  and  contend  for  no  errors  in  doctrine ;  many  there  are 
notoriously  wicked  in  practice,  and  the  truth  which  they  hold  is  in  the  most 
shameful  unrighteousness.  The  only  way  of  applying  to  this  sort  of  persons  is 
to  endeavour  to  awaken  their  stupefied  consciences  by  representing  to  them  the 
wrath  of  God,  revealed  from  heaven,  against  all  incorrigible  sinners.  Sixthly, 
others  there  are,  on  the  contrary,  who  not  only  believe  rightly,  but  also  live 
well ;  and  yet  through  indisposition  of  body  and  melancholy  imaginations  of 
mind  they  are  always  disconsolate  and  fearful  of  their  own  estate.  These  must 
be  treated  in  a  quite  contrary  method  to  the  former,  with  all  possible  tenderness  and 
compassion.    (6'.  Clarke,  D.D.)        Treating  sinners  uith  compassion  and  discretion :— 


JUDE.  77 

1.  Eeproofs  must  be  managed  with  compassion  and  holy  grief.  This  is  like  God 
(Lam.  iii.  33).  There  are  tears  in  His  eyes  when  He  hath  a  rod  in  His  hand.  It 
is  hke  Christ  (Luke  xix.  41).  There  are  three  grounds  of  this  holy  grief: — (1) 
The  dishonour  done  to  God  (Psa.  cxix.  136).  Love  will  be  affected  with  the 
wrong  of  the  party  loved.  (2)  The  harm  and  destruction  men  bring  upon 
themselves,  that  they  have  no  care  of  their  own  souls  (Jer.  xiii.  17).  (3)  The 
proneness  that  is  in  our  nature  to  the  same  sin  (Gal.  vi.  1).  Bernard's  good 
man  would  weep — he  to-day  and  I  to-morrow :  there  is  no  sin  in  their  Uves  but 
was  in  your  nature.  Well,  then,  it  checketh  them  that  speak  of  others'  sins  by  way 
of  censure,  but  with  delight  or  petulancy  of  spirit ;  many  reproofs  are  lost  because 
there  is  more  of  passion  than  compassion  in  them.  It  is  spu-itual  cruelty  when  you 
can  turn  a  finger  in  your  brother's  wound  without  grief.  2.  In  reproving  some 
must  be  handled  gently  :  but  who  are  those  that  must  be  handled  gently  ?  (1)  With 
the  most  notorious  it  is  good  to  begin  mildly,  that  they  may  see  our  goodwill  and 
desire  of  their  salvation  (2  Tim.  ii.  25).  Hasty  spirits  cannot  brook  the  least 
opposition,  and  therefore  are  all  a-fire  presently.  How  did  God  deal  with  us 
in  our  natural  condition?  with  what  mildness?  and  "spake  comfortably"  to 
us,  to  allure  us  out  of  the  devil's  snare  (Hosea  ii.  14).  (2)  The  persons  whom 
we  should  treat  with  much  compassion  are  these : — (a)  The  ignorant  and  seduced. 
Many  well-meaning  men  may  err ;  be  not  too  severe  with  them,  lest  prejudice  make 
them  obstinate,  (b)  Those  that  slip  of  infirmity.  Members  must  be  "  set  in  joint" 
tenderly  (Gal.  vi.  1).  (c)  The  afflicted  in  conscience.  We  must  not  speak  "  to  the 
grief  of  those  whom  God  hath  wounded  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  7).  (d)  If  they  err  in  smaller 
matters.  We  must  not  deal  with  motes  as  with  beams,  and  put  the  wicked  and 
the  scrupulous  in  the  same  rank,  nor  the  gross  heretic,  and  those  that  mistake  in 
point  of  church  order.  While  the  judgment  is  sound  in  fundamentals,  and  the 
practice  is  reformed,  we  should  use  meekness  till  "God  reveal  the  same  thing" 
(Phil.  iii.  15,  16).  (e)  The  tractable  and  those  of  whom  we  have  any  hopes. 
Dashing  storms  wash  away  the  seed,  whereas  gentle  showers  refresh  the  earth : 
men  left  without  hope  grow  desperate.  3.  In  all  censures  and  punishments 
there  must  be  choice  used  and  discretion.  Prudence  is  the  queen  of  graces. 
Different  tempers  require  different  remedies  (Isa.  xxviii.  27).  God  Himself 
putteth  a  difference :  some  are  brought  in  with  violence,  others  gently.  This 
Bhoweth — (1)  That  ministers  had  need  be  wise,  to  know  how  to  suit  their 
doctrines,  to  distinguish  between  persons,  actions,  circumstances.  (2)  That 
ministers  should  give  every  one  their  portion.  Terror  to  whom  terror  belongeth, 
and  comfort  to  whom  comfort  belongeth.  (3)  It  showeth  what  care  we  should  take 
to  "  know  the  state  of  our  flock  "  (Prov.  xxvii.  23),  that  we  may  know  how  to  apply 
ourselves  to  them  (Col.  iv.  8).  It  also  obligeth  private  Christians  to  consider  each 
other's  temper,  gifts,  frame  of  heart,  that  we  may  the  better  suit  ourselves  to  do 
and  receive  good  (Heb.  x.  24,  25).  (T.  Manton.)  Discrimination  in  the  exercise 
of  religious  reformation : — The  exact  nature  of  that  discrimination  in  the  exercise 
of  religious  wisdom  which  the  apostle  prescribes,  will  readily  be  seen  if  we  only 
glance  back  at  the  circumstances  of  the  persons  to  whom  he  referred.  There  were 
"  some  "  among  them  who,  through  ignorance,  through  inattention,  or  through  the 
power  of  a  commanding  example,  might  be  betrayed  into  errors  of  opinion,  and  into 
impurities  of  practice ;  and  who,  in  fact,  might  be  victims  to  the  artful  leaders  of 
the  great  heresy  which  St.  Jude  has  condemned.  There  were  the  "  others  "  how- 
ever— those  very  artful  leaders  themselves — who  were  proud  and  insolent,  over- 
bearing and  authoritative,  in  their  wickedness ;  and  for  the  sake  of  personal 
"  advantage,"  who  were  firmly  fixed  in  their  corruptions  of  faith  and  manners. 
Surely  to  have  "made  no  difference"  between  these  would  have  been  the  most 
flagrant  injustice.  Undoubtedly  it  will  be  granted  that  in  all  cases  the  attempt 
that  is  projected  for  the  conversion  of  men  ought  to  have  "compassion"  as  its 
source  and  unwearied  mainspring.  What  other  sentiments,  indeed,  can  be 
tolerated  for  leading  us  to  diffuse  the  knowledge  and  influence  of  religion? 
But,  while  observing  this,  you  will  at  the  same  time  readily  see  that  the 
two  things  contrasted  in  the  text,  "  compassion  and  fear,"  relate  to  the  instruments 
by  which  we  try  to  accomplish  the  ends  of  Christian  benevolence.  Though  the 
affection  be  one,  the  means  which  are  employed  are  varied.  On  one  side  then,  in 
making  this  difference,  some  are  to  be  treated  "  with  compassion."  Here  is  the 
"  bruised  reed,"  and  we  must  be  careful  lest  we  "  break  "  it.  Here  is  "  the  smoking 
flax,"  and  we  must  be  careful  lest  we  "  quench  "  it.  Ignorance  by  its  darkness  has 
produced  confusion ;   we  must  endeavour  to  restore  order  by  admitting  the  light 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

of  truth.  The  principles  are  distorted,  but  through  the  bias  of  false  education. 
Offences  are  committed,  but  chiefly  through  surprise  and  inadvertence.  Wrong 
habits  are  indulged,  but  they  were  contracted  not  wilfully,  and  they  are  persevered 
in  through  carelessness.  Hence  correction  must  be  administered  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness ;  reproof  be  regulated  by  time  and  circumstances ;  and  everything  be  so 
conducted  as  to  allure,  rather  than  to  terrify ;  and  to  lead,  rather  than  by  forcible 
methods  to  compel.  On  the  contrary,  however,  the  duty  of  "  making  the  difference," 
ascertains  that  "  others  are  to  be  saved  with  fear  " — that  is  by  using  fear  as  the 
means — by  employing  it  without  scruple,  or  shrinking,  or  cautious  tenderness ;  but 
employing  it  promptly,  determinately,  and  even  vehemently ;  urging  on  to  the 
person  who  is  in  jeopardy,  and  extracting  him,  as  out  of  the  very  midst  of  the 
destroying  element.  Instead  of  "the  bruised  reed"  of  a  feeble  resolution,  there  is 
now  the  hardened  heart,  which  must  be  assailed  with  many  a  blow  in  order  to 
dissolve  its  stubbornness.  Instead  of  "  the  smoking  flax  "  of  a  timid  and  fickle 
piety,  there  is  now  the  very  hatred  of  religion  flaming  out  against  truth  and  godli- 
ness, which  must  be  suppressed  and  extinguished.  Instead  of  unavoidable  ignorance 
there  is  wilful  blindness.  Instead  of  the  unfortunate  notions  of  a  false  education, 
there  are  evil  principles  adopted  by  design  and  cherished  with  obstinacy.  Instead 
of  teachableness,  there  is  contempt  of  instruction.  Instead  of  offendings  by 
inadvertence,  there  are  transgressions  of  purpose.  Instead  of  practices,  wrong 
by  oversight,  there  are  habits  pernicious  by  intention.  Instead  of  lapses  by 
surprise,  there  are  sins  by  deliberation  and  fixed  execution.  Instead  of  occasional 
failings,  there  is  perpetual  and  almost  incorrigible  guilt.  For  these  reasons  our 
subject  of  addi'ess  can  no  longer  continue  its  tone  of  mild  persuasion.  The 
awakening  language  is  now  requisite.  The  warning  and  the  rebuke  are  now 
needed ;  and  the  tearing  off  the  coverings — the  breaking  down  of  the  pretended 
excuses — the  driving  through  every  fence  and  vain  protection — and  the  sweeping 
forcibly  away  of  all  "  those  refuges  of  lies  "  which  the  unbeUeving  heart  is  wont  to 
raise  up  against  conviction.  Thus  encouragement  and  alarm,  on  the  subject  of 
religion,  have  a  reference  to  opposite  classes  of  persons.  In  preaching,  one  material 
part  of  duty  consists  of  setting  forth  and  expounding  the  blessed  promises  of 
revelation.  Without  our  "making  a  difference,"  most  assuredly  we  are  not 
"dividing  the  word  aright";  and  this  want  of  wisdom  may  prove  itself  in 
sad  effects.  The  indiscriminate  hopes  may  cause  presumption.  The  undis- 
cerning  freeness  may  produce  licentiousness.  The  premature  healing  of  the 
wound  may  hinder  for  ever  the  perfected  cure.  The  hasty  consolation  may 
stifle  conviction.  Again,  in  preaching,  another  material  part  of  duty  consists 
of  setting  forth  and  expounding  the  threatenings  of  revelation.  There  are  the 
serious  representations  of  the  Divine  government,  which  impress  us  with  the 
thought — of  a  Judge,  clothed  in  awful  authority — of  a  tribunal,  whence  the 
sentence  of  life  and  death  shall  issue.  But  indiscriminate  terrors  might  cause 
depression  when  there  should  be  hope — might  cloud  the  evidences  of  safety  where 
these  were  beginning  to  brighten,  and  oppress  with  new  darkness  the  diffident  and 
the  doubting.  While  you  thus  see  the  reasons  for  our  "making  a  difference"  in 
preaching,  you  wiU  not  fail  to  grant  that  equally  strong  reasons  press  on  you  the  same 
duty  in  hearing.  Now  inquire  whether  you  have  "  made  the  difference  "  that  must  be 
made  ere  the  receiving  of  the  promise  can  be  salutary  or  even  safe ;  or,  on  the  contrary, 
if  you  may  not  be  deceived  with  superficial  views  of  your  character.  (W.  Muir,  D.D.) 
Ministerial  discriminatio7is  : — I  need  hardly  tell  you  that,  although  it  is  only  of  one 
class  that  the  minister  is  bidden  to  "  have  compassion,"  the  meaning  cannot  be 
that  he  is  not  to  compassionate  any  other  class.  He  would  be  wanting  in  the 
sensibilities  of  a  man,  to  say  nothing  of  those  which  his  very  office  is  adapted  to 
cherish,  if  he  could  be  indifferent  to  the  condition  of  a  single  transgressor.  And 
hence  it  cannot  be  the  design  of  St.  Jude  to  divide  sinners  into  classes,  for  one  of 
which  the  minister  is  to  feel  compassion,  but  not  for  the  other :  he  must  be 
referring  to  the  difference  in  treatment,  rather  than  to  a  difference  in  sentiment. 
And  yet  whilst  there  is  a  great  sense  in  which  every  sinner  is  to  be  an  object  of 
compassion,  undoubtedly  the  characters  and  circumstances  of  some  are  more 
adapted  to  the  exciting  pity  than  those  of  others.  Behold  that  young  person 
whose  family  is  irreligious,  who,  with  perhaps  a  secret  sense  of  the  necessity  of 
providing  for  the  soul,  is  laughed  out  of  all  seriousness  by  those  who  ought  to  be 
urging  him  to  piety.  I  could  not  treat  that  young  person  sternly  ;  I  could  not  fail 
in  any  intercourse  with  him  to  bear  in  mind  his  peculiar  disadvantages.  I  could 
indeed  weep  over  one  who  had  so  much  against  him  in  the  saving  of  the  soul.    Or 


JUDE.  79 

behold,  again,  that  man  in  distressed  circumstances,  on  whom  are  pressing  the 
cares  of  a  large  family,  and  who  is  tempted  to  gain  the  means  of  subsistence 
through  practices  which  his  conscience  condemns — Sunday  trading,  for  example. 
Could  I  go  to  that  man  in  harshness  and  severity  ?  I  must  not,  indeed,  spare  his 
fault ;  I  must  not  allow  that  difficulties  are  any  excuse  for  his  oiJence  ;  but  surely 
when  I  think  on  his  peculiar  temptations,  and  hear  the  cry  of  his  young  ones  who 
are  asking  for  bread,  you  will  expect  me  to  feel  concern  for  the  man,  and  to  show 
it  in  the  manner  in  which  I  reprove  his  misdoing.  Oh  !  I  know  very  well  how 
easy  it  is  for  a  man  to  deceive  himself  in  the  beginnings  of  sin,  how  many  thirigs 
commonly  conspire  to  facilitate  the  entrance  on  an  evil  course,  and  to  hide  alike 
its  peril  and  its  wrongness.  And  whenever,  therefore,  we  see  a  man  just  venturing 
his  foot  on  a  forbidden  path,  we  would  address  him  in  the  language  of  the  text : 
language  which  would  show  that  we  make  every  allowance  for  what  may  be  called 
the  iLturalness  of  his  error,  even  as  we  would  if  we  saw  him  entering  a  field  the 
floweni  round  whose  margin  gave  him  no  warning  of  the  fatal  marsh  into  which 
he  wou^  soon  sink.  Or  once  more — and  here  you  have  the  exact  case  that  appears 
to  be  comemplated  by  St.  Jude — a  man  of  no  very  strong  intellect,  and  of  no  very 
great  reading,  is  thrown  into  the  society  of  sceptics,  men  perhaps  of  brilliant 
powers  and  of  no  inconsiderable  acquirements.  He  will  be  no  match  for  these 
apostks  of  infidelity.  Towards  a  man  thus  seduced  our  prevailing  feeling  will  be 
compassion — a  feeling  which  you  cannot  expect  to  extend  towards  those  who 
seduced  him.  So  that  if  there  be  amongst  you  the  man  or  the  woman  who  can 
only  please  God  by  displeasing  relations,  or  with  whom  close  attention  to  religion 
seems  likely  to  shut  up  the  channels  of  subsistence,  or  who  is  unavoidably 
associated  with  those  who  half  force  him  to  be  sceptical,  or  who  is  living  upon 
what  we  may  call  the  border-line  where  vice  tries  to  pass  for  virtue,  why,  we  would 
not  class  that  individual  with  the  reckless  and  the  obdurate,  who  are  sinning  with 
a  high  hand,  and  "  doing  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace."  Without  disguising  the 
nature  of  sin,  of  whatever  degree  or  complexion,  we  may  still  show  that  we  put  a 
difference  between  sinners,  just  as  the  physician  between  patients,  who  may  be  all 
sick  of  diseases  which  tend  directly  to  death,  but  who  requii-e,  nevertheless,  very 
different  remedies.  And  there  are  gentle  remedies  which  we  would  try  with  those 
cases  we  have  endeavoured  to  describe.  We  feel  for  you — ah,  that  is  little,  very 
httle.  The  Redeemer  Himself  feels  for  you.  He  knows  your  dangers  and  your 
difficulties — in  how  attractive  a  form  temptation  has  come — how  much  you  will 
have  to  give  up,  how  much  to  encounter,  if  you  come  boldly  out  and  embrace  His 
discipleship.  He  bids  me  speak  to  you  in  tenderness.  Go  not  away  and  say  that 
Christianity  is  harsh  and  repulsive.  You  shall  have  our  entreaties,  if  they  will 
move  you  to  run  no  further  risks ;  you  shall  have  our  expostulations,  our  affec- 
tionate expostulations,  if  they  will  induce  you  to  take  the  Saviour  at  His  word. 
But  it  is  time  that  we  advanced  to  the  consideration  of  the  other  part  of  the 
apostle's  directions.  There  is  to  be  stern  treatment  as  well  as  gentle.  "  Others 
save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire."  There  can  be  no  very  great  difficulty 
in  deciding  what  the  cases  are  which  St.  Jude  may  be  supposed  to  have  here  had 
in  view.  They  are  the  cases  of  hardened  and  reckless  men,  of  the  openly  dissolute 
and  profane — men  living  in  habitual  sin,  and  showing  an  unblushing  contempt 
for  the  authority  of  God.  The  apostle  refers  to  men  who  cannot  possibly  be  in  any 
doubt  as  to  the  wrongness  of  their  conduct,  who  cannot  plead  ignorance  in  excuse, 
or  the  suddenness  of  temptation,  or  the  pressure  of  circumstances,  but  who,  out  of 
a  decided  preference  for  iniquity,  a  settled  determination  to  gratify  their  passions, 
or  aggrandise  their  families,  pursue  a  course  against  which  conscience  remonstrates, 
and  of  which  they  would  not  themselves  venture  to  advance  any  justification.  How 
am  I  to  act  towards  such  men  ?  Must  I  show  them  that  I  pity  them  ?  Oh  !  yes, 
that  I  pity  them ;  for  if  ever  men  were  within  a  hair's-breadth  of  destruction,  these 
are  the  men.  But  the  pity  must  be  mixed  with  indignation.  What  mean  you  by 
thus  persisting  in  iniquity  ?  Is  the  Bible  a  forgery  ?  is  death  annihilation  ?  is  hell 
a  phantom  ?  is  heaven  a  day-dream  ?  What  mean  you,  young  persons,  with  your 
delay  ;  elder  persons,  with  your  avarice ;  men  of  pleasure,  with  your  licentious- 
ness ;  men  of  business,  with  your  underhand  transactions  ;  men  of  argument,  with 
your  sceptical  theories  ?  We  may  pity  you,  but  at  the  same  time  we  hardly  know 
how  to  keep  down  a  righteous  scorn.  There  is  no  excuse  to  be  offered  for  you,  no 
extenuation.  And  what  treatment  does  the  apostle  bid  us  try  with  such  ?  "  Others 
save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire."  Oh  !  beautiful  words,  notwithstanding 
all  their  harshness !     The  apostle  speaks,  you  see,  of  "  saving  "  these  men.     Then 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

they  may  yet  be  saved.  We  are  not  to  despair  of  any  one  amongst  you.  We  have 
yet  again  to  bring  to  you  the  message  of  pardon.  We  are  sent  to  you  once  more 
with  the  touching  words — "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  ;  for  why  will  ye  die?  "  But,  then, 
whilst  directed  to  make  every  effort  to  save  you,  and  therefore  assured  that  you 
are  not  past  recovery,  the  terms  are  very  peculiar  in  which  the  direction  is  conveyed. 
"  Save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire."  The  apostle  considers  you  as 
already  in  the  fire.  So  perilous  is  your  condition,  that  he  speaks  of  you  as  though 
yea  had  taken  the  last  step  and  plunged  into  perdition.  And  the  expression  goes 
even  beyond  this.  It  is  of  danger  to  the  man  who  seeks  to  save,  as  well  as  of 
danger  to  the  perishing  man,  that  the  apostle  would  admonish  us.  And  here  is  a 
fact  which  well  deserves  the  being  seriously  pondered.  We  may  say  generally,  that 
if  our  wish  to  convert  the  sinful  bring  us  into  intercourse  with  the  sinful,  there  is 
a  risk  of  our  learning  their  vices  whilst  labouring  to  communicate  our  principles. 
Association,  under  whatever  circumstances,  with  dissolute  men  is  full  of  peril. 
There  is  one  more  clause  of  the  text  which,  though  it  may  not  perhaps  actually 
convey  any  new  sentiment,  is  so  strong  in  its  expression  as  well  to  deserve  separate 
notice — "  Hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh."  You  would  be  very 
cautious  in  giving  assistance  to  a  man  in  the  fire,  fearing  that  you  yourselves 
might  be  burned.  You  would  be  equally  cautious  in  giving  assistance  to  a  man 
seized  with  the  plague,  fearing  that  yourselves  might  be  infected.  You  should  deal 
with  them  as  with  parties  who  cannot  be  approached  without  risk  of  contamina- 
tion ;  who  are  not  only  radically  diseased,  but  to  whom  there  can  belong  nothing 
which  may  not  be  a  vehicle  for  conveying  disease ;  their  very  dress — language 
which  is  the  dress  of  thought — manners,  which  are  often  a  fascinating  garb,  being 
not  unlikely  ultimately  to  act  as  a  conductor,  so  that  secretly  and  stealthily  you 
may  get  the  poison  into  your  own  veins.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Wise  treatment  of 
sinners  .—First,  generally  we  must  use  discretion,  and  make  difference  of  men ; 
we  must  be  like  surgeons  and  expert  physicians,  who  do  not  lay  one  plaster  to  all 
sores,  nor  minister  one  potion  to  all  patients :  this  is  that  wisdom  that  Christ 
requireth  of  His  apostles  (Matt.  x.  16).  Some  are  wild  heifers,  and  must  have  a 
yoke ;  some  are  rude  horses,  and  must  have  a  snaffie ;  some  are  dull  asses,  and 
must  have  a  whip  and  a  spur  ;  some  are  unruly,  and  must  be  admonished ;  some 
feeble,  and  must  be  comforted ;  and  towards  all  we  must  use  patience.  The  nurse, 
when  the  child  hath  a  fall,  will  first  help  it  up,  after  chide  it,  and  if  it  fall  again 
correct  it ;  so  must  the  nurse  of  souls  first  help  a  brother  out  of  the  mire  of  sin, 
then  chide  him  for  falling  into  the  ditch,  and  if  this  will  not  serve,  apply  a  sharper 
corrosive  to  his  sore ;  yet  let  all  this  be  done  with  discretion.  Well,  we  must  have 
compassion  of  some,  for  Bome  sins  are  to  be  pitied.  We  must  be  so  far  from 
hating  and  rejoicing  at  their  falls,  that  we  ought  rather  to  sorrow  and  to  be  grieved. 
What  father  is  not  grieved  with  the  hurt  of  his  children?  What  friend  is  not 
grieved  at  the  loss  of  his  friend  ?  What  shepherd  delighteth  in  the  wronging  and 
scattering  of  his  flock,  and  not  in  gathering  it  together?  The  compassionate 
Samaritan  to  the  poor  passenger  may  teach  us  to  show  mercy  unto  sinners.  It  is 
strange  to  see  how  we  pity  an  ox  or  an  ass  fallen  into  a  ditch,  but  not  a  brother 
drowned  in  sin ;  it  is  vUe  to  set  a  house  on  fire,  but  it  is  vile  also  to  pass  by  it 
and  not  to  quench  it  when  it  is  in  our  power.  Again,  as  some  men  are  to  be  pitied, 
so  other  some  are  to  be  reproved,  and  must  have  the  judgments  of  God  denounced 
against  them,  and  must  be  terrified  with  menaces.  A  Christian  must  not  be  afraid 
to  reprove  sin.  Noah  reproved  the  old  world;  Lot,  Sodom  and  Gomorrah; 
Samuel,  Saul ;  Nathan,  David  the  king.  This  also  teacheth  the  people  to  suffer 
the  word  of  exhortation;  but  flatterers  are  most  esteemed  of  them,  such  as  can 
sow  pillows  under  their  elbows  and  can  preach  pleasing  things  unto  them.  If  a 
shepherd,  after  his  whistle,  sets  his  dog  on  his  sheep,  it  is  not  to  worry  them,  but 
to  return  them  home ;  therefore  let  men  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation.  (S.  Otes.) 
Brands : — The  method  of  treating  the  three  classes  on  Christian  groimds  is  here 
laid  down,  and  is  as  applicable  to-day  as  it  then  was.  1.  The  doubters.  They  are 
to  be  treated  with  consideration  and  kindliness.  Many  who  once  were  disputera 
are  now  firm  believers  of  the  truth.  2.  Scoffers.  There  was  a  class,  not  the 
leaders  of  the  schism,  that  had  been  led  away,  to  whom  warning  must  be 
administered.  The  suggestion  is  that  the  authority  of  the  truth  be  used  ;  not 
persuasion,  but  admonition,  exhibiting  the  power  of  the  truth.  Let  the  arrow  of 
conviction  have  its  own  barb,  and  let  it  fly.  3.  The  sensualists.  They  must  be 
approached  with  fear  or  with  caution.  Tliey  were  within  the  bounds  of  conviction, 
although  very  near  the  circumference.     The  lesson  for  the  Church  to  learn  is  to 


JUDE.  81 

approach  men  according  to  their  condition.  Somebody  in  a  hurry  gave  a  tract  on 
the  sin  of  dancing  to  a  man  with  two  wooden  legs.  We  fear  that  worse  mistakes, 
if  possible,  are  committed  frequently.  (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  Making  a  difference  : — 
Legh  Eichmond  was  once  conversing  with  another  clergyman  in  the  case  of  a  poor 
man  who  had  acted  inconsistently  with  his  religious  profession.  After  some  angry 
and  severe  remarks  on  the  conduct  of  such  persons,  the  gentleman  with  whom  he 
was  discussing  the  case  concluded  by  saying,  "  I  have  no  notion  of  such  pretences ; 
I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  him."  "Nay,  brother,  let  us  be  humble  and 
moderate.  Remember  who  has  said,  '  making  a  difference  ' ;  with  opportunity  on 
the  one  hand,  and  Satan  at  the  other,  and  the  grace  of  God  at  neither,  where 
should  you  and  I  be  ?  " 

Ver.  23.  Pulling  them  out  of  the  fire. — God's  firemen : — ^By  this  text  we  are 
reminded  that  there  are  points  of  resemblance  between  sin  and  fire.  The  writer 
has  before  his  mind,  not  a  harmless  fire,  in  range  or  furnace,  for  utility  and 
comfort,  but  a  dangerous,  spreading  conflagration,  which  demands  immediate 
attention,  and  which  makes  the  energy  implied  in  the  text  both  seemly  and 
appropriate.  I.  Sin  is  like  fire,  because  it  is  mystekious.  What  is  fire?  Of 
what  are  its  consuming  properties  composed  ?  What  weight,  shape,  or  size  is  it  ? 
No  man  can  answer  these  questions.  Yet,  with  all  the  mystery,  we  have  such 
palpable  evidence  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  fire  that  no  sane  man  would  dare  to 
deny  it.  So  sin  is  a  mystery.  How  came  it  into  existence  in  a  world  made  and 
governed  by  a  Being  of  almighty  power  and  love  ?  Yet  no  man,  properly  under 
the  sway  of  reason,  can  allow  the  mystery  to  cause  him  to  ignore  or  deny  the  fact 
of  sin.  We  have  seen  the  destructive  work  it  has  wrought  in  society,  and  alas ! 
what  is  worse  than  all,  every  man  has  felt  its  scorching  in  his  own  heart.    11.  Sin 

IS  LIKE  FIBE,   because   IT  EXISTS  IN   A   TWOFOLD   STATE — LATENT   AND  ACTIVE.       Fire, 

in  its  active  state,  renders  our  homes  habitable  in  winter,  illuminates  our  cities  by 
night,  flames  out  in  the  sweeping  conflagration,  drives  our  factories  and  railways, 
I  flashes  into  the  lightning,  and  thunders  in  the  earthquake.  Fire,  in  its  latent 
state,  exists  in  every  material  object  about  us.  So  sin  exists  in  an  active  and  latent 
state.  In  its  active  state  it  flames  out  in  Sabbath  desecration,  profanity,  and 
reckless  Uving.  It  blazes  up  before  the  public  in  the  destruction  of  individual 
character;  it  flashes  out  in  deeply  laid  schemes  of  political  corruption  and  in 
gigantic  plans  of  commercial  dishonesty.  Sin,  in  its  latent  state,  is  strikingly 
symbolised  by  latent  fire.  It  slumbers  in  the  heart  of  universal  humanity;  it 
exists  in  "  every  man  that  comes  into  the  world."  The  virtue  of  some  people  is 
nothing  more  than  vice  sleeping;  all  it  wants  is  contact  with  some  tempting 
circumstance  to  awake  it  into  vigour.  As  savages  light  their  fire  by  rubbing  pieces 
of  wood  together,  so  men  stir  up  the  latent  fire  of  depravity  by  mutual  contact. 
There  is  sufficient  latent  fire  around  us  to  burn  up  the  globe ;  and  there  is  sufficient 
latent  sin  in  human  nature  to  turn  this  world  into  a  hell.  Latent  sin  in  the  heart 
of  a  child  is  somewhat  like  latent  fire  in  nature.  At  first  it  does  no  particular 
damage,  and  scarcely  indicates  its  presence.  Through  the  friction  of  temper,  the 
whispers  of  self-love,  and  the  gusts  of  provocation,  however,  it  soon  begins  its 
destructive  work,  though  the  seriousness  of  its  doings  may  not  be  even  suspected. 
Thus  it  is  that  sin  begins  its  withering,  debilitating  business  in  the  human  heart. 
Like  latent  fire  in  a  forest,  it  soon  begins  to  destroy  the  roots  and  fibres  of  the 
moral  nature.  There  are  persons  all  about  us,  the  very  fibres  and  roots  of  whose 
character  are  all  charred  and  wasted  by  this  latent  fire  of  sin,  and  they  are  ready 
to  topple  over  into  disgrace  and  ruin  as  soon  as  a  gale  of  temptation  comes  in  the 
right  direction.  III.  Sin  is  like  rniE,  because  or  its  powee  to  attract.  How 
a  child  loves  to  toy  with  fire  I  how  oblivious  to  the  possible  consequences  I 
What  multitudes  are  attracted  by  a  conflagration ;  what  haste  they  make,  and 
what  dangers  they  runl  So  there  is  a  marvellous  power  in  sin  to  lure  and 
fascinate,  especially  to  the  young  to  decoy  them  from  tiie  path  of  innocence  and 
purity  into  the  fiery  pathways  of  sin  and  death.  IV.  Sin  is  like  fire,  becausk 
it  is  remorselessly  indifferent  as  to  what  it  destroys.  The  most  splendid 
mansions,  the  most  costly  furniture,  the  most  valuable  paintings,  the  rarest 
gems  of  art,  all,  aU  are  consumed  as  ruthlessly  as  the  meagre  contents  of  the 
beggar's  hovel.  So  with  sin.  The  man  of  broadest  nature  and  noblest  parts 
is  the  most  tempting  mark  for  Satan.  No  conflagration  is  so  disastrous 
and  dreadful  as  the  burning  down  of  a  man.  I  have  seen  the  poor  wretch 
weep  and  groan  under  the  periodical  consciousness  of  the  awful  destiny  before 

39, 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

him.  I  have  watched  the  progress  of  the  fire,  and  seen  self-control  give  way, 
and  self-respect  give  way,  and  regard  for  the  good  opinion  of  others  give  way, 
and  love  of  wife  and  children  give  way,  and  hope,  the  longest  and  strongest 
rafter  in  the  structure,  give  way,  and  the  whole  man  collapse  —  a  heap  of 
ghastly,  smouldering  ruins;  a  disgrace  to  his  family,  and  a  curse  to  the  community 
where  he  lived.  V.  Sin  is  like  fike,  because  it  turns  everything  into  its  own 
ESSENCE.  Not  only  will  fire  turn  ordinary  fuel  into  fire,  but  also  princely  mansions ; 
the  most  precious  gems  and  diamonds,  when  brought  in  contact  with  fire,  are  at 
once  transformed  into  its  own  nature.  There  is  hardly  any  object  in  nature,  even 
the  hardest  granite,  that  fire  cannot  turn  into  fire.  So  it  is  with  sin.  Its  uniform 
tendency  is  to  make  everything  like  itseK  over  which  it  gains  control — that  is,  a 
curse.  When  Archimedes,  in  order  to  wreak  vengeance  upon  the  Eomans,  brought 
down  the  genial  rays  of  the  sun  by  his  magic  glass  and  burned  up  their  ships,  he 
only  dramatised  the  universal  fact  that  sin  ever  strives  to  turn  the  greatest 
blessings  of  God  into  the  greatest  curse.  VI.  Sin  is  like  fire,  because  it  can  be 
resisted  and  put  out,  and  must  be,  or  it  will  destroy  everything  within  its 
reach.  You  cannot  set  fire  to  the  forest  and  accomplish  the  desire  of  burning 
down  just  one  acre.  So  no  man  can  kindle  the  fire  of  sin  in  the  forest  of  his 
appetites  and  passions  and  forecast  correctly  the  extent  of  the  burning.  Sin  is 
like  fire,  then,  because  it  must  be  resisted  and  put  out,  or  it  will  destroy  everything 
combustible  within  its  reach.  Fire,  properly  resisted,  can  be  put  out.  So,  thank 
God,  the  fire  of  sin  can  be  put  out,  and  God  has  His  firemen  to  do  it.  (T.  Kelly.) 
The  danger  of  sinners : — A  poor,  guilty,  secure  sinner  is  like  a  drunken  man  that 
is  fallen  into  the  fire.  1.  In  point  of  security.  He  is  ready  to  be  burned,  but  he 
feeleth  it  not.  2.  In  point  of  danger.  Sinners  are  compared  to  a  "  brand  in  the 
burning"  (Zech.  iii.  2  ;  Amos  iv.  11).  They  are  in  the  suburbs  of  hell,  the  fire  is 
already  kindled.  3.  In  point  of  impotency  and  inability  to  help  themselves. 
Minister  !  art  thou  sensible  of  the  danger  of  souls  ?  Christian  !  art  thou  sensible 
of  the  danger  of  thy  carnal  neighbours?  (T.  Manton.)  Zeal  in  saving  others  : — 
There  was  a  medical  student  at  Edinburgh  who  was  half  through  his  course  of 
four  years,  and  he  worked  very  hard  and  had  lived  an  entirely  selfish  life.  One 
day  he  said,  "  Here  are  four  of  the  best  years  of  my  life,  and  I  have  never  done  a 
hand's  turn  to  make  better  or  to  help  any  other  fellow."  He  then  found  another 
medical  student  who  had  come  from  the  same  part  of  the  country  as  himself.  He 
had  gone  to  the  bad.  His  people  had  given  him  up.  He  was  drinking  himself  to 
death.  For  months  he  had  not  read  a  book.  This  first  man  had  not  seen  him 
for  months,  but  he  went  out  to  hunt  him  up.  He  found  the  man  still  drunk,  and 
said  to  him,  "  These  are  poor  lodgings  for  you.  I  want  to  take  you  to  my  rooms." 
The  other  man  said,  "  I  am  in  debt."  "  Well,  I  will  pay  your  bill,"  replied  number 
one.  They  gathered  up  the  luggage  and  number  one  led  the  way  to  his  room. 
Next  morning  number  one  said,  "Look  here,  I  have  a  little  contract.  We  will 
mess  here  together  for  the  next  few  months.  I  have  written  out  here  four  articles, 
which  we  will  both  sign.  The  first  is,  neither  of  us  to  go  out  alone.  The  second 
is,  if  either  of  us  have  to  go  out  alone,  twenty  minutes  to  be  allowed  to  go  to  the 
Commons  and  back,  overtime  to  be  accounted  for.  The  third,  one  hour  to  be  set 
aside  every  night  for  pleasure,  anything  but  study ;  and  the  fourth,  that  bygones 
shall  be  bygones."  Things  went  well  for  a  month.  One  night  number  two  threw 
down  his  Anatomy  and  said,  "  I  cannot  stand  this  any  longer.  I  want  to  have  a 
'bust.'"  "Very  well,"  replied  the  other,  "'bust'  here.  What  do  you  want?" 
"I  want  some  drink."  Number  one  got  some  drink,  and  number  two  had  his 
"  bust "  thero,  and  was  thus  tided  over  the  hour.  That  hour  comes  to  every  man 
who  is  trying  to  reform.  He  must  treat  himself  like  a  convalescent.  If  there  is  a 
man  who  is  beginning  to  live  a  better  life,  let  him  remember  for  the  next  three 
months  that  he  is  a  convalescent.  He  must  not  go  into  a  draught  or  he  will  take 
cold.  He  must  not  read  the  books  he  read  last  week.  Number  two  wanted  another 
"  bust,"  and  he  got  it,  but  he  did  not  leave  the  room.  And  so  the  months  passed. 
One  night  number  two  said  to  number  one,  "  I  notice  you  reading  a  book.  I  see 
you  read  the  Bible,  and  you  never  talk  to  me  about  religion."  Talk  about  religion  I 
What  was  the  use  of  talking  religion  when  the  man  was  living  the  life  of  Christ 
before  him?  and  living  is  the  one  thing  that  is  of  value  in  religion.  Number  one 
said,  "If  you  choose  we  will  read  together."  He  read  a  couple  of  verses,  but 
number  two  stopped  him  and  said,  *'  That  is  enough  now."  Number  one  passed 
out  after  the  two  years.  He  did  not  have  a  brilliant  record ;  he  was  only  a  fairly 
commonplace  man.    Number  two,  on  the  other  hand,  who  had  been  picked  up  out 


JUDE.  83 

of  the  gutter,  passed  out  with  special  honour.  The  last  I  heard  of  them,  number 
one  was  filling  an  appointment  in  London,  and  number  two  was  known  as  the 
"  Christian  Doctor."  Do  you  think  that  when  number  one  looks  back  upon  his 
college  course  he  will  not  see  standing  above  it  all  the  face  of  that  one  man  whom 
he   saved  ?      {Prof.   H.   Drummond.)  Self-salvation  not    the  only   concern  of 

Christians : — A  man  who  has  been  shipwrecked  with  a  thousand  others  happens 
to  get  upon  the  shore,  and  the  others  are  all  down  in  the  surf.  He  goes  up  into  a 
fisherman's  cabin  and  sits  down  to  warm  himself.  This  fisherman  says,  "  Oh, 
this  won't  do.  Come  out  and  help  me  to  get  these  others  out  of  the  surf."  "  Oh, 
nol"  says  the  man;  "it's  my  business  now  to  warm  myself."  "But,"  says  the 
fisherman,  "these  men  are  dying  ;  are  you  not  going  to  give  them  help?  "  "  Oh, 
no  !  I've  got  ashore  myself,  and  I  must  warm  myself  !  "  That  is  what  people  are 
doing  in  the  Church  to-day.  (T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  Soul-saving — a  method 
amusing  yet  effective  : — Some  of  his  methods  of  catching  men  and  bringing  them 
to  decision  were  highly  amusing.  While  he  was  conducting  revival  services  at 
Newark,  a  youth  put  his  head  inside  the  door  to  hear  what  was  going  on.  This  lad 
had  a  shock  of  curly  hair  that  arrested  Mr.  Marsden's  attention.  Presently  he 
walked  down  the  aisle  to  the  door,  and  spoke  kindly  to  the  lad,  and  invited  him  to 
come  in.  As  he  seemed  timid  and  inclined  to  run  away,  the  preacher  laid  hold  of 
a  handful  of  curls  and  held  him  fast.  Then  he  told  him  how  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  wanted  to  make  a  man  of  him,  and  the  devil  wanted  to  make  a  fool  of  him  ; 
and  urged  him  to  come  and  seek  for  mercy.  He  pleaded  with  the  lad,  and  gently 
pulled  his  curls,  tiU  the  lad  followed  his  hair  and  marched  up  the  aisle  to  the 
communion  rail.  The  preacher  held  him  by  the  hair  till  he  had  safely  deposited 
him  among  the  penitents.  The  youth  was  converted,  and  became  a  minister  in 
one  of  the  sister  churches,  and  often  tells  his  friends  that  "  Isaac  Marsden  brought 
him  to  Christ  by  the  hair  of  his  head."  (John  Taylor's  "  Reminiscences  of  Isaac 
Marsden.")  A  passion  for  the  saving  of  souls  : — But  what  we  need  most  is  a 
keener  appreciation  of  our  relationship  to  the  souls  of  those  with  whom  we  have 
to  do — a  profounder  interest  in  their  spiritual  well-being — a  stronger  anxiety  that 
men  may  be  saved.  It  is  written  of  the  sainted  Alleine,  author  of  the  "  Alarm  to 
the  Unconverted,"  that  "  he  was  infinitely  and  insatiably  greedy  of  the  conversion 
of  souls."  Bunyan  said,  "  I  could  not  be  satisfied  unless  some  fruits  did  appear 
in  my  work."  Brainerd,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  said,  "I  care  not  where  or 
how  I  hve,  or  what  hardships  I  go  through,  so  that  I  can  but  gain  souls  to  Christ." 
Doddridge,  writing  to  a  friend,  said,  "  I  long  for  the  conversion  of  souls  more 
sensibly  than  anything  besides."  Matthew  Henry  wrote,  "  I  would  think  it  a 
greater  happiness  to  gain  one  soul  to  Christ  than  mountains  of  silver  and  gold  to 
myself."  The  sainted  Fletcher  said  to  Samuel  Bradburn,  when  as  a  young  man 
he  called  to  see  him  as  the  Vicar  of  Madeley,  "  If  you  should  live  to  preach  the 
gospel  forty  years,  and  be  the  instrument  of  saving  only  one  soul,  it  wiU  be  worth 
aU  your  labours."  Whitfield  seldom  preached  without  weeping  under  the  solemn 
impression  of  the  value  of  souls.  He  said  one  day  in  his  sermon,  "  How  can  I 
help  weeping  when  you  will  not  weep  for  yourselves,  though  your  immortal  souls 
are  on  the  verge  of  destruction !  "  Dr.  Lyman  Beecher,  when  dying,  said  to  a 
minister  standing  by  his  couch,  "  The  greatest  of  aU  things  is  not  theology ;  it  is  not 
controversy ;  it  is  to  save  souls."  (J.  H.  Kitchen.)  Pulling  men  out  of  the  fire  : — 
On  one  occasion  Charles  Simeon  was  sunmfioned  to  the  dying  bed  of  a  brother. 
Entering  the  room,  his  relative  extended  his  hand  to  him,  and  with  deep  emotion 
said,  "  I  am  dying ;  and  you  never  warned  me  of  the  state  I  was  in,  and  of  the 
danger  to  which  I  was  exposed  by  neglecting  the  salvation  of  my  soul  I  "  "  Nay, 
my  brother,"  rephed  Mr.  Simeon,  "  I  took  every  reasonable  opportunity  of  bringing 
the  subject  of  religion  before  your  mind,  and  frequently  alluded  to  it  in  my  letters." 
"  Yes,"  exclaimed  the  dying  man,  *'  you  did  ;  but  that  was  not  enough.  You  never 
came  to  me,  closed  the  door,  and  took  me  by  the  coUar  of  my  coat,  and  told  me 
that  I  was  unconverted,  and  that  if  I  died  in  that  state  I  should  be  lost.  And  now 
I  am  dying ;  and  but  for  God's  grace  I  might  have  been  for  ever  undone  I "  It  is 
said  that  this  afiecting  scene  made  an  ineffaceable  impression  on  Mr.  Simeon's 
mind.  Earnest  to  save  souls : — The  traveller  who  crosses  the  Alps  by  the  St. 
Bernard,  Simplon,  or  Splugen  Pass,  finds  situated  near  the  summit  a  friendly 
hospice.  Knocking  timidly  at  the  door,  it  is  promptly  opened  by  a  good-natured 
monk,  who  bids  him  welcome ;  warming  his  half -frozen  limbs  before  the  blazing 
fire,  and  chatting  merrily  with  half  a  dozen  priests,  he  thinks  what  easy  lives 
these  men  lead.    Suddenly  the  clouds  gather,  the  wind  howls,  the  bUading  snow- 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

flakes  fall ;  and  starting  up,  calling  their  faithful  dogs  around  them,  these  brave 
fellows  go  forth  in  the  teeth  of  the  tempest.  Why  and  where  are  they  going  ?  To 
seek  and  succour  belated  travellers  who  may  be  out  in  the  storm.  Why  not  wait 
till  they  come  and  knock  at  the  door  as  I  did?  Wait,  man!  Why,  they  would 
have  to  wait  till  doomsday.  God  help  any  poor  creatures  out  on  such  a  night ! 
They  must  have  lost  their  way.  Half  buried  beneath  the  snow,  they  are  beginning 
to  sleep  the  sleep  that  knows  no  waking.  So  if  the  masses  are  to  be  aroused,  the 
perishing  rescued,  we  must  do  more  than  merely  sit  week  by  week  in  our  comfort- 
ably cushioned,  brilliantly  lit,  and  cosily  warmed  sanctuaries.  We  must  do  more 
than  merely  stand  at  the  church  doors,  waiting  to  welcome  those  who,  with  timid 
faith  and  dawning  love,  desire  to  be  admitted  to  our  fellowship.  There  are  many 
who  will  never  knock  at  the  door ;  they  are  too  far  gone  for  that.  They  are 
sleeping,  dying ;  they  need  to  be  shaken  and  roused.  And  men  are  wanted  who 
will  trudge  forth  over  snow  and  ice ;  who,  like  the  Master,  will  go  out  "  to  seek 
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  (E.  G.  Gauge.)  Hating  even  the  garment 
spotted  by  the  flesh. — Sin  to  he  carefully  shunned : — Personal  holiness,  the  con- 
cern for  which  called  forth  this  admonition,  is  uniformly  the  object  of  Christian 
doctrine  and  Christian  precept.  To  profess  faith  in  Christianity  is  to  choose  a  life 
of  purity ;  for  in  our  professing  it  we  are  said,  according  to  a  strong  figure,  "  to 
put  on  Christ  Jesus."  I.  Be  waened  against  the  influence  of  every  degree 
or  FAMiLiAKiTY  WITH  WHAT  IS  SINFUL.  To  come  SO  frequently  in  the  way  of  sin 
as  to  see  men  engaged  day  after  day,  and  thus  to  grow  familiar  with  the  view  of 
what  is  criminal,  may  indeed  easily  be  calculated  in  the  amount  of  its  evil 
influence.  The  perception  of  the  odiousness  of  iniquity  is  thereby  weakened — the 
sensibility  of  conscience  is  diminished — partial  attention,  indifference,  and  callous- 
ness to  vice  often  follow  in  quick  succession.  II.  For  the  same  important  end  it 
is  suggested  that  these  words  of  the  apostle  may  warn  you,  not  only  against  the 
vices  of  the  world  themselves,  but  likewise  against  whatever  is  allied  to  them. 
It  is,  you  win  observe,  not  the  disease  merely,  but  even  the  "  garment "  infected 
with  it,  which  you  are  to  turn  from.  That  is,  everything  that  may  prove  an 
incitement,  or  an  accessory,  or  by  remote  and  indirect  ways  an  introduction  to 
sin,  is  to  be  shunned  for  the  very  reasons  which  urge  you  to  flee  from  the  sin 
itself.  The  doing  so  is  cutting  off  the  possibiUty,  by  removing  the  occasions,  of 
guilt.  It  is  as  a  person  extinguishing  the  little  spark  which  his  taper  has  thrown 
off  among  the  combustible  materials  of  his  dwelling.  It  is  as  a  person  closing  up 
every  clunk  and  aperture  in  his  embankment  against  the  stream.  It  is  as  a  person 
not  suffering  himself  to  touch  even  a  shred  of  raiment  which  has  lain  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  plague.  The  wisdom  which  these  illustrations  recommend  does 
reflect,  it  must  be  owned,  somewhat  hardly  upon  many  of  the  indulgences  in 
common  life.  These  indulgences  are  allowed  and  entered  into,  because  you  cannot 
prove  that  there  is  anything  decidedly  sinful  in  them.  There  is  an  amusement 
which  no  law,  either  human  or  Divine,  can  be  brought  to  condemn.  And  if  there 
be  nothing  criminal  in  it,  am  I  not  free,  every  one  asks,  to  partake  of  it  ?  But  the 
person  who,  following  the  principles  of  Christianity,  is  sincerely  desirous  of 
advancing  his  moral  improvement  will  deem  it  necessary  to  ascertain  first  what  is 
its  tendency,  whither  it  leads,  what  shall  be  its  effects  on  his  pecuUar  condition  or 
temperament.  Is  it  the  forerunner,  or  the  means,  or  the  attendant  of  aught  that 
is  wrong  ?  To  say  absolutely  that  we  are  to  enter  into  no  situation  where  we  may 
dread  the  exercise  of  any  evil  influence  upon  the  principles  and  habits  of  the 
religious  character  would  certainly  be  prescribing  what  cannot  be  practised.  We 
should  have,  as  the  apostle  expresses  himself,  "  to  go  out  of  the  world."  But  still 
is  it  not  true  that  there  is  frequently  an  uncalled-for,  a  premature,  a  rash,  and 
hence  a  hazardous,  intercourse  with  the  world  ?  Are  not  situations  entered  upon 
without  due  forethought  ?  Are  not  objects  pursued  after  with  avidity,  the  utility 
or  hurtf ulness  of  which  has  never  been  seriously  considered  ?  Where  the  wonder, 
then,  that  the  garment  which  no  care  is  exerted  to  retain  pure  should,  in  the  very 
centre  of  pollution,  become  spotted  ?  III.  To  the  duty  of  shunning  evil  there  is 
another  which  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  add,  the  strong  language  of  the  text 
intimating  that  iniquity  is  to  be  thk  object  of  our  expressed  aversion.  We 
are  to  hate  it,  and  to  show  that  we  do  so.  Hence,  if  ever  there  is  made  in  our 
hearing  the  attack  against  our  blessed  religion,  whether  through  the  grave  objections 
of  philosophy  or  the  sarcasms  of  profane  wit — if  ever  those  immoral  maxims 
which,  for  the  easier  diffusion,  are  coloured  over  with  the  fallacious  names  of 
liberality  are  inculcated  in  oar  presence — if  ever  the  character  and  ordinances  of 


JUDE.  85 

our  God  and  Saviour  are  lightly  spoken  of,  or  those  works  which  His  Spirit  is  sent 
to  destroy  are  approved  and  defended  before  us,  let  us  feel  how  urgent  is  the  call 
to  make  that  "  confession  before  men,"  which  is  to  be  followed  with  the  acknow- 
ledgment of  our  fidelity  "before  the  Father  and  His  holy  angels."  In  these 
circumstances,  however,  we  cannot  make  that  confession  without  showing 
"hatred"  to  what  opposes  the  high  subject  of  our  confession.  And  "hatred," 
when  turned  against  sin  and  all  the  appearances  of  sin,  is  the  only  lawful  form 
under  which  that  passion  may  be  cherished.  Nothing  is  so  worthy  of  our  hatred. 
Ought  sin  ever  to  be  seen  by  us,  then,  without  moving  aversion  and  stirring  up  a 
holy  resentment  within  us  ?  IV.  But  here  let  us  be  admonished,  while  we  cherish 
and  on  every  fit  occasion  express  the  feeling  of  zeal  against  iniquity,  to  make  it 

EVEB   APPEAR    THAT   OUB    "  HATRED  "    IS    ALL    THE    WHILE    TO    THE    SIN,  AND    NOT    TO  THE 

SINNER.     Him  we  compassionate ;  and  we  are  not  to  leave  him  in  doubt  that  he  is 
the  object  of  our  sympathy.     And  let  us  remember  that  there  is  no  hope  of  giving 
efficacy  to  our  remonstrances  against  sin,  nor  of  recommending  the  good  cause  for 
the  support  of  which  we  offer  ourselves,  nor  of  honouring  the  name  of  Jesus  by 
our  testimony  to  His  gospel,  as  long  as  we  render  it  hard  to  separate  our  zeal  for 
religion  from  the  appearance  of  a  proud  struggle  for  our  own  superiority.     Pride, 
contempt,  and  overbearing  haughtiness  make  the  sinner  feel  that  you  are  hostile 
to  his  person.    He  is  stirred  up,  as  it  were,  to  the  defence  of  his  own  interests. 
Charity  is  the  subduing  part  of  religious  zeal.     I  repeat  it  therefore.  Let  there  be 
hatred  at  the  very  garment  spotted  by  sin.     But  show  that  you  have  none  to  the 
unhappy  person  who  weai's  it.     (IF.  Muir,  D.D.)        Abstinence  from  sin  : — In  these 
words  the  apostle  speaks  figuratively.     He  wishes  to  exhort  to  abstinence  from  all 
and  every  kind  of  sin.     And  to  make  his  exhortation  the  more  easily  remembered 
and  the  more  deeply  impressed,  he  clothes  it  in  metaphor.     The  religion  which 
preceded  Christianity  was  the  Jewish,  established  amongst  a  peculiar  people  for 
certain  wise  and  intelligible  reasons.    In  this  dispensation  God  taught  His  people 
more  by  signs  than  words,  by  ceremonies  than  by  precepts      Time  will  not  permit 
to  speak  of  all  the  figurative  instruction  of  the  Jewish  religion.     But,  in  connection 
with  our  text,  I  may  speak  of  the  figurative  distinctions  of  clean  and  unclean. 
Under    this  dispensation,   then,  there   were    many    things    considered    unclean. 
Certain  animals — as,  for  instance,  swine — came  within  this  evil  distinction  ;  and 
persons  with  certain  diseases,  such  as  leprosy  or  an  issue  of  blood,  were  prohibited 
all  intercourse  "With  their  fellows  during  the  time  the  disease  lay  upon  them  ;  and  a 
corpse  was  considered  unclean ;  and  those  who  might  happen  to  touch  it,  or  to 
come  in  contact  with  persons  already  unclean  through  disease  or  other  causes, 
were  themselves  for  a  season  unclean.     Now,  this  calling  of  some  things  clean  and 
unclean  was   designed  to  notify  unequivocally  the  broad   immutable  distinction 
between  sin  and  holiness,  their  utter,  unending  contrariety.     But  our  text  has  a 
more  especial  reference  to  the  uncleanness  of  leprosy.     Leprosy  in  the  East  was  a 
very  loathsome  disease,  and  fitly  symbolises  sin.    And  such  was  the  virulence  of 
his  malady  that  none  might  approach  or  touch  him ;  for  there  was  uncleanness, 
not  only   in  his  personal  touch,   but  in  his  garments.     The  garments  became 
"  spotted  by  the  flesh  " ;  they  partook  of  the  infection,  and  brought  beneath  a  ban 
the   unfortunate  who  might  touch   them.     There  appears  to  have  been  also  an 
mdependent   plague,   peculiarly  affecting   raiment.     Now   God   commanded  His 
priests  to  destroy  those  leprous  garments  (Lev.  xiii.  47-52).     Do  we,  then,  arrive  at 
an  understanding  of  the  apostle's  figure  ?     Does  it  not  suggest  a  Christian  precept 
of  a  like  significance,  but  written  in  plain,  unfigurative  language?     To  hate  "the 
garment  spotted  by  the  flesh  "  is  to  keep  sin  at  the  farthest  distance ;  to  avoid  those 
things  into  which  it  can  by  subtilty  infuse  its  fatal  poison ;  things  which,  though  lawful 
and  innocent,  may  prove  by  remote  possibility  the  occasion  of  falUng  to  ourselves 
and  to  others.     It  is  to  keep  far  within  the  border-line  which  separates  holiness 
from  sin ;  not  to  venture  out  among  the  outposts,  lest  there  be  a  sudden  surprise, 
but  to  remain  entrenched  within  the  citadel,  within  which  is  safety.     {R.  L.  Joyce, 
B.A.)        Purity  of  character  .•—Over  the  beauty  of  the  plum   and   the  apricot 
there  grows  a   bloom   and  beauty  more   exquisite  than  the   fruit  itself — a  soft, 
delicate  flush  that  overspreads  its  blushing  cheek.     Now,  if  you  strike  your  hand 
over  that,  and  it  is  once  gone,  it  is  gone  for  ever,  for  it  never  grows  but  once. 
The  flower  that  hangs  in  the  morning  impearled  with  dew — arrayed  as  no  queenly 
woman  ever  was  arrayed  in  jewels — once  shake  it  so  that  the  beads  roll  off,  and 
you  may  sprinkle  water  over  it  as  you  please,  yet  it  can  never  be  made  again  what 
it  was  when  the  dew  fell  silently  upon  it  from  heaven.    On  a  frosty  morning  you 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

may  see  the  panes  of  glass  covered  with  landscapes — mountains,  lakes,  and  trees 
blended  in  a  beautiful,  fantastic  picture.  Now  lay  your  hand  upon  the  glass,  and 
by  the  scratch  of  your  finger  or  by  the  warmth  of  your  palm  all  the  delicate  tracery 
will  be  obliterated.  So  there  is  in  youth  a  beauty  and  purity  of  character  which, 
when  once  touched  and  defiled,  can  never  be  restored.  Such  is  the  consequence  of 
crime.     Its  effects  cannot  be  eradicated  ;  it  can  only  be  forgiven. 

Vers.  24,  25.  Now  unto  Him  that  is  able  to  keep  you. — Judo's  doxology  : — It  is  well 
to  be  called  full  often  to  adoring  praise,  and  the  specific  statement  of  the  reason  for 
praise  is  helpful  to  fervour  of  gratitude.     Our  great  danger  is  falling  and  faultiness. 
Our  great  safety  is  Divine  ability  and  faithfulness,  by  which  we  are  kept  from 
stumbling  so  as  to  dishonour  our  Lord.     I.  Let  us  adore  Him  who  can  keep  us 
FEOM  FALLING.     1.  We  need  keeping  from  falling,  in  the  sense  of  preservation  from 
— (1)  Error  of  doctrine.     (2)   Error  of  spirit :    such  as  want  of  love,  or  want  of 
discernment,  or  unbelief,  or  credulity,  or  fanaticism,  or  conceit.    (3)   Outward  sin. 
Alas,  how  low  may  the  best  fall !     (4)  Neglect  of  duty  :  ignorance,  idleness,  want  of 
thought.    (5)  Backsliding.     2.  None  but  the  Lord  can  keep  us  from  falling.    (1)  No 
place  guarantees  security :    the  church,  the  closet,  the  communion-table — all  are 
invaded  by  temptation.  (2)  No  rules  and  regulations  will  secure  us  from  stumbling. 
Stereotyped  habits  may  only  conceal  deadly  sins.     (3)  No  experience  can  eradicate 
evil,  or  protect  us  from  it.     3.  The  Lord  can  do  it.     He  is  "  able  to  keep,"  and 
He  is  "  the   only   wise  God,  our  Saviour."     His  wisdom  is  part  of   His   ability. 
(1)  By  teaching  us  so  that  we  fall  not  into  sins  by  ignorance.     (2)  By  warning  us  : 
this  may  be  done  by  our  noting  the  falls  of  others,  or  by  inward  monitions,  or  by 
the  Word.     (3)  By  providence,  affliction,  &c.,  which  remove  occasions  of  sinning. 
(4)  By  a  bitter  sense  of  sin,  which  makes  us  dread  it  as  a  burnt  child  dreads  the 
fire.     (5)  By  His  Holy  Spirit,  renewing  in  us  desires  after  holiness.     4.  The  Lord 
will  do  it.     "  The   only   God  our   Saviour."    From  final  falls,  and  even  from 
stumblings,  His  Divine  power  can  and  will  keep  us.     II.  Let  us  adobe  Him  who 
WILL  present  us  IN  His  COURTS  FAULTLESS.     1.  Nouc  Can  Stand  in  those  courts  who 
are  covered  with  fault.     2.  None  can  deliver  us  from  former  guilt,  or  keep  us  from 
daily  faultiness  in  the  future,  but  the  Saviour  Himself.     3.  He  can  do  it  as  our 
Saviour.     4.  He  will  do  it.     III.  Let  us  adore  Him  with  highest  ascriptions  of 
PRAISE.     1.   Presenting  our  praise  through  Jesus,  who  is  Himself  our  Lord.     2. 
Wishing  Him  glory,  majesty,  dominion  and  power.     3.  Ascribing  these  to  Him  as  to 
the  past,  for  He  is  ','  before  all  time."     4.  Ascribing  them  to  Him  "  now."    5.  Ascrib- 
ing them  to  Him  "  for  ever."     6.  Adding  to  this  adoration,  and  to  the  adoration  of 
all  His  saints,  our  own  fervent  "  Amen."     {C.  H.  Spitrgeon.)        Religious  perse- 
verance : — That  we  may  persevere,  diligently  and  yet  humbly,  in  the  path  of  religious 
obedience,  it  is  requisite  that  we  look,  with  the  feelings  of  dependence  and  trust,  to 
Him  from  whose  power  and  wisdom  alone  we   can   derive   ability  to   persevere. 
I.  Then,  religious  perseverance  may  be  set  forth  under  a  twofold  view,  as  the 
continuing  free  from  all  sin,  and  advancing  to  the  perfection  of  righteousness. 
"  To  be  kept  from  falling  "  denotes  the  one,  and  "  to  be  presented  faultless  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Divine  glory  with  exceeding  joy  "  intimates  the  other.     "  Falling,"  when 
used  with  reference  to  the  Christian  course,  expresses  in  the  most  alarming  sense  of 
which  it  is  susceptible,  the  sin  of  apostasy.    It  then  describes  the  rejection  of  all  the 
evidences  which  have  been  provided,  both  in  the  history  of  the  gospel  and  in  the 
experience  of  its  efficacy,  to  satisfy  us   of  its   Divine   origin.    Apart  from  this 
extreme  instance,  however,  there  are  degrees  to  be  marked  on  the  general  subject, 
all  of  which  are  exceedingly  dangerous.     There  may  not  be  the  bold  and  unqualified 
rejection  of  Christianity.     There  may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  the  retaining  of  its 
name,  as  the  religion  which  we  profess,  and  in  which  we  believe.     And  yet  we 
have  "  fallen  "  from  its  principles,  if  we  indulge  in  any  sinful  affection,  or  persist 
in  any  vicious  habit.     Religion  is  abandoned  whenever  vice  begins.     Now  to  be 
preserved   from   these — from  the  sins  of  the  unbeliever,  of  the  insincere,  of  the 
worldly-minded,  and  of  the  careless  or  lukewarm— to  be  preserved  from  all  these  is 
implied  in  our  being  "  kept  from  falling."     Separation  from  sin,  however,  is  the 
prelude  to  advancement  in  the  excellences  of  righteousness.     Beginning  at  that 
point,  the  course  of  Christian  perseverance  is  turned  to  the  heavenly  perfection. 
But  it  is  not  on  earth  that  righteousness  shall  attain  the  destined  height  of  its 
excellence.    That  world  where  no  iniquity  has  entered,  is  in  all  these  respects  alone  the 
scene  of  perfection.     Not  only  is  every  corruption  removed,  but  the  inclination,  yea, 
the  remotest  tendency  to  evil  is  taken  away.     This  perfection  of  purity  leads  to  the 


JUDE.  87 

perfection  of  honour.  The  soul  is  introduced  to  the  "  presence  of  the  Divine  glory." 
From  these  views,  how  naturally  does  there  follow  the  conception  of  perfect 
happiness!  The  purity  which  the  "being  presented  faultless"  describes,  and  the 
honour  which  an  admission  to  the  "  presence  of  the  Divine  glory  "  implies,  must  be 
the  forerunners  and  the  accompaniments  of  "joy,"  yea,  of  "an  exceeding  joy." 
This  is  the  end  of  the  Christian  course.  This  is  the  perfection  in  righteousness  to 
which  the  earhest  separation  from  sin  was  pointing.     II.  Let  us  ask  the  question, 

ARE   WE    SUFFICIENT    OF    OUESELVES    TO   ACCOMPLISH    THIS    HIGH    END?      Have     WC     the 

wisdom  or  the  ability  to  "  keep  ourselves  from  falling,"  and  to  attain  to  the  blame- 
lessness  of  celestial  purity  ?  Does  our  experience  give  us  any  ground  to  trust  in  the 
ampleness  of  our  natural  resources  for  accomplishing  such  duties  ?  What  opportunity 
of  improvement  have  we  ever  employed,  or  what  power  have  we  ever  exercised,  in 
Buch  a  manner  as  may  encourage  self-confidence  ?  On  the  contrary,  how  many  and 
how  flagrant  the  instances  which  show  us,  that  in  the  course  prescribed  we  are  irreso- 
lute, ready  to  falter,  and  prone,  under  the  direction  of  corrupted  guides,  to  forsake  it ! 
III.  Hence,  feeling  that  we  have  not  ability  sufficient  to  secure  our  own  perseverance, 

WE  ARE  PREPARED,  HUMBLY  AND  GRATEFULLY  TO  RECEIVE  THAT  AID  WHICH  THE 

GOSPEL  UNFOLDS  TO  US.  God  "  is  able."  He  made  us.  He  knows  therefore  our 
frame.  Every  principle  of  our  constitution  he  is  ultimately  acquainted  with.  He 
has  all  channels  laid  open,  for  gaining  access  to  the  most  secret  spring  of  action 
that  is  within  us.  He  see  the  motives  that  will  best  affect  us,  and  how  and  when 
these  ought  to  be  touched.  He  is  prepared  to  act  in  all  circumstances,  and  to  suit 
his  dispensations  to  every  variety  of  state,  and  peculiarity  of  want.  God  "  is  able  "  ; 
yea,  in  the  strict  and  full  meaning  of  the  word.  He  "  alone  is  able."  But  as  power 
were  unavailing  for  any  good  purpose  without  wisdom,  the  apostle  reminds  us  that 
•'  God  is  "  also  "  wise."  Those  arrangements  which  Divine  power  carries  into  effect, 
are  the  results  of  perfect  wisdom.  The  best  means  are  turned  to  the  production  of 
the  best  end.  When  we  reflect  on  our  condition  in  this  world  of  guilt  and  suffering, 
when  we  think  how  every  day,  every  new  incident,  every  connection  we  form, 
introduces  us  into  untried  circumstances,  the  full  effects  of  which  upon  our  welfare 
we  have  no  means  of  anticipating ;  shall  we  not  see  how  great  the  privilege,  amid 
this  state  of  darkness  and  imbecility,  to  be  allowed  to  lean  for  direction  and  assist- 
ance on  Him  with  whom  is  the  foresight  of  every  evil  !  There  are  circumstances 
of  trial,  however,  from  which  it  is  not  expedient  to  deliver  us.  A  new  privilege 
therefore  is  suited  to  this  new  situation.  The  hour  of  trial  comes ;  and  with  it 
the  superintendence  and  the  aid  corresponding  to  the  emergency.  Therefore 
the  hour  of  trial  improves,  in  place  of  injuring  us ; — forms  us  to  the  exercise  of 
greater  power,  rather  than  enfeebles  us ; — prepares  us  for  new  conquests  instead 
of  overcoming  us.  We  are  "  kept  from  falling  "  ;  and  in  being  thus  preserved,  we 
receive  the  earnest  pledge  of  "  being  at  last  presented  faultless  in  the  presence  of 
the  Divine  glory  with  exceeding  joy."  Are  we  now  kept  from  falling?  Are  we 
hereafter  to  be  presented  faultless  ?  Unto  Him  who  alone  is  able— unto  Him  who  only 
is  wise — belongs  the  praise  of  our  present  steadfastness,  and  shall  belong  the  praise 
of  our  after  perfection.  {W.  Muir,  D.I).)  The  stability  and  perfection  of  true 
religion : — I.  All  the  saints  are  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God,  through  faith  unto 
SALVATION."  II.  The  saints  are,  at  death,  presented  before  the  Lord  in  never- 
ending  glory.  III.  All  the  saints  shall  be  introduced  to  their  God  in  heaven, 
IN  A  glorious  state,  HOLY  AND  WITHOUT  BLEMISH.  They  shall  be  presented  "  faultless 
before  the  presence  of  His  gl6ry  with  exceeding  joy."  1.  The  place,  in  which  the 
saints  find  final  repose,  is  heaven.  2.  The  character  of  the  saints  in  heaven  is  fault- 
less. We  shall  never  fully  understand  the  extent  of  the  evil  consequent  upon  the 
transgression  of  the  first  covenant,  until  we  are  completely  delivered  from  its  effects. 
3.  The  enjoyment  of  the  saints  in  heaven,  is  complete.  They  enter  into  the  presence 
of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy.  {A.  McLeod,  D.D.)  Christ  able  to  keep  and  save : 
— I.  We  are  in  danger  of  falling.  By  "  falling  "  he  means  sinning.  The  original 
word  signifies  stumbling,  and  may  be  applied  to  any  false  step  we  make  in  our 
Christian  course,  whatever  its  nature  and  termination.  We  are  prone  of  ourselves  to 
fall.  What  God  said  of  His  people  of  old,  "  they  love  to  wander,"  He  might  say  of  us. 
And  we  are  assailed  continually  from  without.  As  though  to  make  His  old  servants 
feel  their  danger,  almost  all  the  falls  which  God  tells  us  of  in  His  Word  are  those  of 
long  tried  men.  Noah  falls  after  six  hundred  years'  experience.  Lot  falls  when  an 
old  man.  And  David,  who  passed  so  safely  through  the  snares  of  youth,  falls  in 
mature  age.  II.  The  great  God  our  Saviour  is  able  to  keep  us.  Conceive  of  a 
vessel  with  its  planks  loose,  its  sails  rent,  and  its  pilot  ignorant  and  halt  blind  ;  and 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

then  place  it  among  shoals  and  rocks,  with  a  storm  raging — there  is  a  picture  of  the 
Christian's  condition  in  the  world.  That  wretched  vessel,  you  would  say,  is  a  doomed 
one ;  it  will  inevitably  be  lost.  But  suppose  you  are  told  that  there  is  an  invisible 
Being  watching  over  it  and  determined  to  preserve  it ;  one  who  can  turn  it  about  just 
as  He  will,  and  do  what  He  will  with  those  stormy  winds  and  foaming  billows,  make 
those  waves  roll  as  He  pleases,  or,  if  He  pleases,  not  roll  at  all — what  should  you  say 
then?  "  That  vesselis  safe."  And  what  would  you  do?  You  would  delight  in 
looking  at  it  amidst  its  perils,  for  you  would  delight  in  contemplating  the  power 
which  is  so  wonderfully  preserving  it.  So  with  the  believer.  "  He  shall  be  holden 
up,  for  God  is  able  to  make  him  stand."  God  is  magnifying  His  power  through 
that  man's  weakness,  and  that  man's  dangers  and  temptations.  Again  let  me  say, 
we  need  high  thoughts  of  God ;  high  thoughts  of  His  mercy  to  lead  us  at  first  into 
His  ways — our  sinfulness  makes  that  necessary ;  and  then  high  thoughts  of  His 
power  to  lead  us  cheerfully  on  in  His  ways — our  many  dangers  render  this  needful. 
lU.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  high  designs  concerning  us,  which  He  is  able  to 
ACCOMPLISH.  We  should  have  thought  it  a  great  thing  to  have  been  presented  to 
Christ  in  the  day  of  His  humiliation ;  to  have  sat  by  His  side  with  John,  or  at 
His  leefc  with  Mary  ;  but  He  says  here,  "  I  will  present  you  to  Myself  in  the  day  of 
My  glory.  To  do  you  honour,  I  will  welcome  you  in  all  My  splendour."  And  we 
are  to  be  faultless  before  His  glorious  presence.  A  thing  sometimes  appears  pure  and 
white,  but  bring  it  into  the  daylight  or  put  it  down  on  the  new-fallen  snow,  it 
appears  so  no  longer.  Not  so  here.  We  shall  bear  the  daylight;  our  whiteness 
shall  bear  the  snow.  Think  of  that,  when  sin  is  tormenting  you.  How  complete 
in  the  end  will  be  your  deliverance  from  it  I  Every  fragment  and  trace  of  it  will  be 
gone.  And  yet  further — Christ  will  do  this  "  with  exceeding  joy."  "  He  will  give 
us  joy,"  you  will  say,  "  as  He  does  it.  We  shall  shout  for  joy  as  He  calls  us  to 
Himself."  But  this,  I  conceive,  is  not  the  apostle's  meaning.  He  is  not  thinking 
of  our  joy,  but  of  Christ's.     Ours  will  be  nothing  to  His.     IV.  In  keeping  His  people 

AND    accomplishing    HiS    GLORIOUS   DESIGNS    CONCERNING    THEM,    GOD    MANIFESTS     HiS 

WISDOM.  "  The  only  wise  God."  Some  of  us  rarely  think  of  God's  wisdom  as 
doing  anything  now  to  keep  or  save  us.  It  planned  the  glorious  scheme  of  our 
salvation,  we  think,  and  then  retired,  leaving  mercy  and  grace  to  execute  it.  Or  if 
we  do  carry  our  thoughts  farther  than  God's  mercy  and  grace,  we  take  in  perhaps 
only  His  faithfulness.  But  all  the  perfections  of  Jehovah  are  at  work  for  us.  Not 
one  of  them  does  He  suffer  to  be  unemployed.  Our  hope  therefore  ought  to  rest  on 
aU  His  attributes.  It  would  be  a  stronger  hope  if  it  did  so.  Mercy  must  ever  be  its 
mainstay,  but  here  are  two  supports  placed  under  it  quite  unconnected  with  mercy — 
power  and  wisdom.  And  observe  how  beautifully  they  are  coupled  together.  Power 
to  keep  us  would  be  nothing  without  wisdom  to  direct  it — it  would  not  know  how  to 
help  us ;  and  wisdom  would  be  nothing  without  power — it  might  see  what  was  needed 
for  us,  but  there  it  must  stop,  it  could  not  accomplish  it.  (C.  Bradley,  31. A.)  And 
to  present  you  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy. — 
The  saints  preserved  and  presented : — I.  Preservation  implies  danger.  We  have 
no  need  to  be  reminded  that  God  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling,  if  we  are  sur- 
rounded by  no  peril.  Although  we  have  been  called  from  on  high,  although  we 
have  received  spiritual  gifts,  a  new  heart  and  a  new  motive  to  action,  we  must  not 
expect  that  the  work  is  accomplished,  and  that  we  may  resign  ourselves  to  the 
indolent  and  selfish  enjoyment  of  privilege.  We  are  in  a  state  of  probation,  and 
are,  therefore,  of  necessity,  exposed  to  adverse  influences,  and  to  numberless 
enemies  which  war  against  the  soul.  Watchfulness  must  be  exercised,  and  strength 
must  be  imparted,  in  order  to  keep  us  in  the  right  way.  Danger  to  the  believer 
may  arise  from  three  sources:  from  the  unfriendly  interposition  of  evil  spirits; 
from  the  traitorous  suggestions  of  his  own  heart ;  and  from  the  allurement,  or  the 
intimidation  of  the  outside  world.  To  whom,  then,  in  our  peril  shall  we  look  for 
help  ?  Where  dwells  the  mind  which  will  succour  us,  and  the  generosity  which  \s  ill 
wield  the  weapons  of  our  defence  ?  Shall  we  ask  among  the  ministering  hosts  who 
watch  and  adore  before  the  throne,  if  haply  some  strong  angel,  kind  in  his  hea|Venly 
strength,  mi;,'ht  undertake  our  cause?  Nay,  for  he  never  fell ;  he  knows  nothing  of 
the  plague  of  a  nature  shrunken  foully  from  its  fair  original ;  he  knows  nothing  of 
the  bitterness  of  sin.  Our  deliverer  mu.st  have  sympathy  of  condition,  and,  in 
some  sort,  of  experience.  Then  shall  we  look  among  our  fellows  for  a  companion  ? 
Shall  we  go  seeking  among  the  ages  for  a  hero  who  shall  combine  all  qualifications 
of  fitness— strength  mightier  than  of  Hercules,  beauty  more  winsome  than  of 
Apollo,  all  the  eloquence  of  the  golden  mouthed,  all  the  honeyed  philosophy  of  the 


JUDE.  89 

Bee  of  Attica,  all  the  research  that  is  most  scholarly,  and  all  the  piety  that  is 
devoutest,  and  shall  we  bid  him  do  battle  for  us,  and  guard  us  through  our  every 
life-path  with  his  tutelary  ministry  ?  Ah !  the  champion  comes  not  at  our  call. 
The  ages  have  not  found  him.  Our  champion  must  have  power  as  well  as  sym- 
pathy, invisible  and  exhaustless  resources  of  power.  We  have  a  triple  enemy — the 
world,  and  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  and  Christ  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling, 
because,  in  the  mystery  of  His  incarnate  life,  He  met  and  overcame  the  fiercest 
opposition  of  them  alL  Then  comes  another  question,  a  question  which  it  is 
important  for  us  to  ask  ourselves,  because,  perhaps,  some  of  our  hearts  may  be 
doubting.  He  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling ;  but  will  He  take  the  trouble  ?  Well, 
a  comforting  expectation  of  this  willingness  to  keep  us  from  falling  may  be  gathered 
from  His  general  character,  and  from  the  dealings  with  which  He  has  heretofore 
dealt  with  the  "  hapless  sons  of  clay."  That  kind  Master  who  was  very  tender  to 
all  His  disciples,  but  who  sent  a  special  messenger  to  Peter  about  His  resurrection, 
lest  the  poor  bruised  heart  should  be  broken  by  the  very  semblance  of  unkindness 
— He  is  not  likely  to  withhold  His  help  or  to  give  it  upbraidingly.  Thou  mayest 
trust  Him,  timid  one ;  He  will  not  always  chide !  He  knows  thy  frame,  and 
remembers  that  thou  art  dust.  11.  But  the  text  gives  us  yet  a  stbongeb  reason 
OF  encouragement,  because  it  presents  a  reason  :  it  satisfies  our  intellect  as  well 
as  warms  our  heart.  It  presents  a  reason  why  Christ  wUl  thus  keep  us  from  falling. 
Think  of  it  in  your  moments  of  bitterness;  Christ's  glory  is  involved  in  your 
preservation  from  destruction.  Cleave  to  Him ;  He  will  not  let  you  perish ;  He 
wants  you ;  you  are  necessary  to  Him  to  swell  His  retinue  in  the  great  court-day  of 
the  universe,  when  He  shall  lay  down  the  sceptre.  He  would  like  to  have  a  grand' 
pageant  then.  What !  do  you  think  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  will  be  content 
with  a  drawn  battle  ?  Do  you  think  that  the  numbers  on  either  side  shall  be  so 
nearly  equal,  that  it  will  be  a  matter  of  doubt  which  has  really  gotten  the  victory? 
Not  so :  He  shall  conquer,  and  the  universe  shaU  see  that  He  has  conquered  ;  for, 
at  His  side  there  shall  be  a  multitude  which  no  man  can  number.  Nor  do  I 
imagine  that  this  victory  is  to  be  gained  by  doubtful  means.  Some  people  teU  us 
that  as  nearly  half  the  human  race  die  in  infancy,  the  scale  will  be  turned  by  these. 
Not  so  ;  not  by  stratagem,  but  by  valour ;  in  fair  and  open  fight  shaU  He  save,  and 
conquer  His  enemies.  Christ  has  died,  and  He  shall  not  die  in  vain,  and  an 
innumerable  company  risen  to  man's  estate,  tainted  not  only  with  hereditary  but 
with  personal  transgression,  and  snatched  in  their  manliness  from  the  spoiler,  shall 
stand  with  robes  of  purity  and  palms  of  triumph,  and  by  Christ  be  presented 
spotless  unto  God,  "Unto  Him  that  is  able  to  keep  you  from  falling,  and  to  present 
you  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory."  I  want  you  to  anticipate  this  for 
yourselves.  But  even  then  many  faults  may  cleave  to  you,  the  clouded  brain,  the 
erroneous  judgment,  the  mourned  infirmity,  the  faith  overcast,  the  thousand  ways 
in  which  the  duU  material  cramps  the  nobler  soul.  But  you  are  to  be  faultless 
then ;  not  sinless  only,  but  faultless ;  nay,  get  the  great  thought  out  in  all  its 
length,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height — "  Faultless  before  the  presence  of  His 
glory."  The  light  shines  upon  the  holiest  upon  earth  only  as  a  revelation  of 
impurity ;  the  light  shines  upon  the  meanest  in  heaven  only  to  enhance  his  per- 
fection of  beauty.  (W.  M.  Punshon,  D.D.)  Presented  faultless  : — When  Christ 
presenteth  the  elect  He  will  present  them  "  faultless,"  that  is,  both  in  respect  of 
justification  and  sanctification.  This  was  intended  before  the  world  was  (Eph.  i.  4), 
but  is  not  accomplished  tiU  then.  Now  we  are  humbled  with  many  infirmities  and 
sins  (Col.  i.  22).  The  work  is  undertaken  by  Christ,  and  He  wUl  carry  it  on  tiU  it 
be  complete.  1.  The  work  must  be  begun  here ;  the  foundation  is  laid  as  soon  as 
we  are  converted  unto  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  2.  This  work  increaseth  daily  more  and 
more  (1  Thes.  v.  23,  24).  We  are  not  faultless  ;  but  Christ  will  not  rest  till  we  be 
faultless,  He  is  sanctifying  further  and  further ;  He  will  pursue  the  work  close  till 
it  be  done.  3.  It  is  so  carried  on  for  the  present  that  our  justification  and  sancti- 
fication may  help  one  another ;  the  benefit  of  justification  would  be  much  lessened 
if  our  sanctification  were  complete,  and  our  sanctification  is  carried  on  the  more 
kindly  because  the  benefit  of  justification  needeth  so  often  to  be  renewed  and 
applied  to  us  ;  if  our  inherent  righteousness  were  more  perfect,  imputed  righteous- 
ness would  be  less  set  by.  4.  At  the  last  day  all  is  fully  accomplished  (Col.  i.  22). 
Well,  then,  let  us  wait  upon  God  with  encouragement,  and  press  on  to  perfection 
upon  these  hopes.  (T.  Manton.)  God's  greatest  porver  and  praise : — I.  The 
strong  gbasp  that  is  able  to  hold  us  up.  "The  only  God."  There  is  one  in 
whom  is  strength,  to  whom  is  to  be  the  praise,  and  on  whom  ought  to  be  fastened 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

all  onr  confidence.  And  here  is  the  blessing  of  a  true  religious  trust,  that  it  does 
not  need  to  go  wandering  and  seeking  for  many  supports  and  stays,  but  can  con- 
centrate all  confidence  on  the  single  arm  which  is  able  to  sustain.  Then,  further, 
note  that  in  this  doxology  the  designation  "Saviour"  is  applied  to  God  Himself, 
teaching  us  that,  though  Christ  be  indeed  eminently  the  Saviour,  He  is  so  in  full 
harmony  with  the  Father's  will,  and  that  in  all  the  process  of  our  redemption  we 
are  not  to  think  of  Him  as  more  gracious,  or  tender,  or  full  of  saving  love  and 
power  than  the  Father,  whose  will  He  executes,  whose  image  He  is.  Then  note, 
Btill  further,  that  the  words  "from  falling"  might  be  more  accurately  rendered 
"  from  stumbling."  It  is  much  to  keep  us  from  falling ;  it  is  more  to  keep  us  from 
stumbling.  Mark  the  emphasis  of  the  language  of  my  text.  '•  He  is  able  to  keep 
you  from  falling."  There  is  no  absolute  promise  or  assurance  that  He  will,  but 
there  is  the  broad  declaration  of  the  ability.  That  is  to  say,  something  else  is 
needed  than  the  Divine  power  if  I  am  to  be  kept  from  falling.  And  what  is  that 
else  except  my  grasp  of  the  power,  my  opening  of  my  heart  to  its  entrance,  my 
clutching  His  hand  with  my  hand?  God  is  able,  but  that  the  possibility  shall 
become  an  actuality  with  us,  there  is  needed  our  faith.  H.  The  great  end  to 
WHICH  THIS  upholding  LEADS.  "  Faultlcss— before  His  presence — with  exceeding 
joy."  As  to  the  first,  it  indicates  moral  purity.  Here  the  nature  may  be  one 
field  of  black,  broken  only  by  narrow  and  short  streaks  of  contradictory  light;  but 
yonder  all  the  foulness  may  be  discharged  from  it,  and  sin  lie  behind  r.s,  an  alien 
power  that  has  nothing  in  us.  And  then,  as  the  purity  makes  the  enjoyment  of 
His  presence  possible,  so  the  purity  and  the  presence  make  the  third  thing  possible. 
"  With  exceeding  joy."  The  joy  comes  from  cleansing,  from  communion,  from 
the  leaving  behind  of  weariness  and  struggles.  Change  and  monotony,  danger 
and  fear,  sin  and  fightings,  partings  and  death,  are  all  done  with.  IH.  Thb 
eternity  of  the  praise  that  comes  from  such  an  issue.  All  His  work  is  the 
making  visible  and  the  enshrining  in  act  of  that  four-sided  glory  of  His  character. 
Glory  and  majesty,  dominion  and  power,  are  shown  in  all  that  He  has  done.  But 
this  ascription  of  these  to  God  in  the  present  connection  teaches  us  that,  upon  all 
the  rest  of  the  manifestations  of  these  perfections,  God  sets  the  shining  summit 
and  topstone  in  this — that  He  takes  men,  being  such  as  we  are,  and  by  slow 
education  and  patient  inspiration,  and  wise  providences  and  merciful  forbearance, 
moulds  and  cleanses  and  quickens,  and  lifts  at  last  to  perfect  purity,  communion, 
and  gladness.  That  is  the  greatest  thing  that  God  has  ever  done.  And,  says  my 
text,  if  in  the  process  of  redemption  God  has  especially  magnified  His  own  majestic 
nature,  and  done  a  mightier  thing  than  when  He  flung  flaming  worlds  like  sparks  oft 
an  anvil  to  revolve  with  music  in  the  heavens,  then  the  first  duty  of  all  Christian 
men  is  to  offer  to  Him  in  the  depths  of  their  grateful  hearts,  and  in  words  and 
deeds  of  seK-surrendered  and  God-blessed  lives,  the  praise  which  such  a  manifesta- 
tion demands.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  grand  final  presentation  : — I.  That 
nothing  lower  than  the  infinite  and  exhaustless  power  of  the  Redeemer,  is 

BQUAL    to    OXJB    PRESERVATION    IN    THIS    WORLD    OF    TEMPTATION    AND    SOT.      II.    ThAT 

there  is  a  certain  attitude  and  exercise  op  mind  which  may  bb  said  to  be 
indispensable  to  our  insuring  this  sustaining  and  persevering  power.  iii. 
That  the  Saviour  having  preserved  us  here  by  tee  exercise  of  His  Divine 

POWER,   WILL   WITH   PECULIAB    JOY  PRESENT    US    HEREAFTER    TO    HiS    FaTHER,    IN    THB 

possession  op  a  spotless  and  perfect  nature.    IV.  That  our  preservation  here, 

AND  OUB  presentation  HEREAFTER,  BRINGING  INTO  VIEW  THE  HIGHEST  MANIFESTA- 
TIONS OP  THE  Divine  perfections  and  conduct,  will  thus  lay  the  basis  for  thb 

MOST    SUBLIME    AND    SERAPHIC    ASCRIPTIONS    OP    PRAISE.       (R.    FergitSOJl,    LL.D.)  A 

sublime  doxology : — I.  The  danger  implied.  When  we  consider  the  number, 
power,  malice,  and  subtlety  of  his  foes,  it  is  wonderful  that  a  Christian  can  expect 
a  complete  victory.     1.  He  has  to  wrestle.     2.  He  often  has  to  walk  in  slippery 

E laces.  3.  He  is  the  subject  of  great  weakness.  4.  There  are  many  obstacles  in 
is  path.  n.  The  preservation  of  which  the  believer  is  the  subject.  1.  The 
power  of  God  is  engaged  to  keep  His  saints.  2.  The  promises  of  God  abound  with 
sacred  engagements  to  this  end.  3.  The  merit  of  the  Redeemer's  work  and  the 
virtue  of  His  intercession  avail  on  this  behalf.  4.  The  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  an  earnest  of  the  inheritance.  5.  Means  of  grace  and  dealings  of  Provi- 
dence are  subservient.  III.  The  final  presentation.  1.  The  solemnity  and 
grandeur  of  the  occasion.  2.  The  glorious  condition  of  each  of  its  objects.  3. 
The  sublime  felicity  of  which  they  shall  be  the  subjects.  4.  The  individual  interest 
they  shall  have  in  these  grand  proceedings.     {Preacher^s  Port/olio.)        God  the 


JVBE.  91 

keeper: — I  can  only  counsel  you,  it  is  God  must  keep  you.  {J.  Trapp.)  God's 
help  goes  along  with  our  oxun  effort : — Learn  a  parable  of  the  draught-horse  on 
a  broken  road ;  it  is  a  parable  my  father  taught  me  when  I  was  httle  more  than 
the  height  of  his  knee,  and  one  that  has  served  me  in  good  stead  since,  as  I 
warrant  it  will  serve  you.  As  the  horse  draws  its  load  along  the  broken  path, 
the  driver  walks  by  its  side.  When  there  is  an  ugly  deep  rut  in  the  path,  he 
gently  turns  the  horse  aside  from  it.  When  a  large  stone  has  fallen  on  the  road, 
he  removes  it  out  of  the  way  of  the  wheels.  When  there  is  a  stiff  bit  of  ascent  to 
meet,  he  pats  the  horse  and  puts  it  to  its  mettle,  but  when  the  way  is  level  and 
clear,  he  leaves  the  horse  pretty  much  to  its  own  devices.  All  that  is  useful — all 
that  is  kind — all  that  is  helpful ;  but  please  to  remember,  it  is  the  horse  itself  that 
has  always  got  to  draw  the  load  !  And  it  will  never  be  any  otherwise  with  you,  as 
you  go  through  this  world.  Parents,  teachers,  friends,  wise  counsellers  may  do 
much  to  guide  you,  may  do  much  to  help  you  over  difficulties,  or  remove  them  out 
of  your  way,  but  you  yourself  will  always  have  to  draw  the  load  ;  and  if  you  do  not 
qualify  yourself  to  do  that  aright,  then  there  is  nothing  outside  yourself  can  help 
you.  (J.  Reid  Howett.)  God's  power  in  salvation  : — Out  of  a  sinful  man  to 
make  a  saint  is  more  than  to  make  a  world  out  of  nothing ;  and  to  keep  sinful 
men  from  stumbling  is  more  than  to  keep  the  stars  in  their  courses.  There  is  a 
free  and  rebellious  will  to  be  won  and  retained  in  the  one  case,  whereas  there  is 
nothing  but  absolute  and  unresisting  obedience  in  the  other.  (A.  Plummer,  D.D.) 
Presented  faultless  : — A  criminal,  condemned  by  our  law  to  die,  can  only  be  spared 
by  the  Queen  empowering  the  Home  Secretary  to  reprieve  or  pardon.  Even  then 
to  remove  the  stain  that  must  always  rest  upon  that  person's  character  is  utterly 
beyond  the  power  of  them  both.  How  different  with  Jesus.  His  power  is  un- 
limited. He  not  only  is  able  to  forgive  sins,  but  He  can  cleanse  away  every  trace 
of  guilt,  and  present  us  faultless  unto  God.  {Hy.  Thompson.)  To  the  only  wise 
God  our  Saviour,  be  glory  and  majesty. — Praise : — 1.  Praising  God  is  a  work  very 
suitable  to  all  saints.  2.  After  all  exertions  for  obtaining  any  good,  God  must 
be  acknowledged  the  Author  of  that  good.  3.  It  is  our  duty  to  praise  God  for 
future  blessings,  for  what  we  have  in  hope  as  well  as  for  what  we  have  in  hand.  4. 
Spiritual  blessings  principally  deserve  our  praises.  5.  In  our  addresses  to  God  we 
should  have  such  apprehensions  and  use  such  expressions  concerning  Him  as  may 
most  strengthen  our  faith.  6.  Our  speeches  concerning  Christ  must  be  with  highest 
honour  and  reverence.  7.  Praise  should  conclude  that  work  which  prayer  began. 
8.  The  concluding  thanksgivings  which  are  affixed  to  writings  are  only  to  be  given 
to  God  (Rom.  xvi.  27;  2  Tim.  iv.  18;  Heb.  xiii.  21.)  (W.  Jenkyn,  BI.A.)  The 
wisdom,  glory,  and  sovereignty  of  God : — I.  In  what  sense  God  may  be  said  to  be 
"  the  only  wise  God."  For  answer  to  this,  we  may  take  notice,  that  there  are  some 
perfections  of  God  that  are  incommunicable  to  the  creature,  as  His  independency 
and  eternity — these  God  only  possesseth  ;  but  there  are  other  perfections  which  are 
communicable — as  knowledge,  and  wisdom,  and  goodness,  and  justice,  and  power, 
and  the  like ;  yet  these  the  Scriptures  do  peculiarly  attribute  to  God,  that  they  be- 
long to  God  in  such  a  peculiar  and  Divine  manner  as  doth  shut  out  the  creature 
from  any  claim  to  them,  in  that  degree  and  perfection  wherein  God  possesseth  them. 
This  being  premised  in  general,  God  may  be  said  to  be  only  wise  in  two  respects  : 
1.  God  only  is  originally  and  independently  wise.  He  derives  it  from  none,  and  aU 
derive  it  from  Him  (Rom.  xi.  33,  34).  2.  He  is  eminently  and  transcendently 
so  :  and  this  follows  from  the  former,  because  God  is  the  fountain  of  wisdom, 
therefore  it  is  most  eminently  in  Him  (Psa.  xciv.  9,  10).  II.  I  shaU  prove 
that  this  perfection  belongs  to  God.  1.  From  the  dictates  of  natural  reason. 
The  contrary  is  an  imperfection;  therefore  wisdom  belongs  to  God.  And  the 
denial  of  this  perfection  to  God  would  argue  many  other  imperfections ;  it 
would  be  a  universal  blemish  to  the  Divine  nature,  and  would  darken  all  His 
other  perfections.  2.  From  Scripture,  "He  is  wise  in  heart"  (Job  ix.  4);  "He 
is  mighty  in  strength  and  wisdom "  (xxxvi.  5) ;  "  Blessed  be  the  name  of 
God  for  ever  and  ever,  for  wisdom  and  might  are  His "  (Dan.  ii.  20).  Hither 
we  may  refer  those  texts  which  attribute  wisdom  to  God  in  a  singular  and 
peculiar  manner  (Rom.  xvi.  27)  ;  and  those  which  speak  of  God  as  the  fountain 
of  it,  who  communicates  and  bestows  it  upon  His  creatures  (Dan.  ii.  21 ;  James 
i.  5) ;  and  those  texts  which  speak  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the  creation  of 
the  world  (Psa.  civ.  24 ;  Jer.  x.  12) ;  in  the  providence  and  government  of  the 
world  (Dan.  ii.  30) ;  and  in  many  other  places  in  the  redemption  of  mankind. 
Therefore  Christ  is  called  "  the  wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24),  and  the  dispensation 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

of  the  gospel,  "  the  hidden  wisdom  of  God,  and  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  " 
(Eph.  iii.  10).  If  then  God  be  only  wise,  the  original  and  only  fountain  of  it,  from 
thence  we  learn — 1.  To  go  to  Him  for  it  (James  i.  2).  2.  If  God  be  only  wise  in 
such  an  eminent  and  transcendent  degree,  then  let  us  be  humble.  There  is  no 
cause  of  boasting,  seeing  "  we  have  nothing  but  what  we  have  received."  To  pride 
ourselves  in  our  own  wisdom,  is  the  way  to  have  our  folly  made  manifest.  3.  We 
should  labour  to  partake  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  so  far  as  it  is  communicable. 
The  greatest  wisdom  that  we  are  capable  of  is  to  distinguish  between  good  and 
evil ;  "  to  be  wise  to  that  which  is  good,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  (Rom.  xvi.  19) ;  that 
is,  to  provide  for  the  future  in  time,  to  make  provision  for  eternity,  to  think  of  our 
latter  end,  to  fear  God  and  obey  Him,  to  be  pure  and  peaceable,  to  receive  instruc- 
tion, and  to  win  souls.  4.  If  God  be  only  wise,  then  put  your  trust  and  confidence 
in  Him.  6.  Let  us  adore  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  say  with  St.  Paul  (1  Tim.  i.  17), 
"  To  the  only  wise  God,  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen  "  ;  and  with 
Daniel,  "  Blessed  be  the  name  of  God  for  ever  and  ever,  for  wisdom  and  might  are 
His."  Having  premised  thus  much  for  the  clearing  of  these  words,  I  shall  briefly 
consider,  first,  God's  glory  and  majesty,  and  then  His  dominion  and  sovereignty. 
First,  God's  glory  and  majesty.  By  majesty,  we  may  understand  the  greatness,  or 
eminent  excellency  of  the  Divine  nature,  which  results  from  His  perfections,  and 
whereby  the  Divine  nature  is  set  and  placed  infinitely  above  all  other  beings ;  I  say, 
the  eminent  excellency  of  the  Divine  nature,  which  results  from  His  perfections, 
more  especially  from  those  great  perfections,  His  goodness,  and  wisdom,  and  power, 
and  holiness.  And  His  glory  is  a  manifestation  of  this  excellency,  and  a  just  acknow- 
ledgment and  due  opinion  of  it.  Hence  it  is,  that  in  Scripture,  God  is  said  to  be 
"glorious  in  power,"  and  "  glorious  in  holiness,"  and  His  goodness  is  called  His 
glory;  and  here,  in  the  text,  glory  and  majesty  are  ascribed  to  Him  upon  the  account 
of  His  wisdom  and  goodness.  That  these  belong  to  God,  I  shall  prove — 1.  From  the 
acknowledgment  of  natural  light.  The  heathens  did  constantly  ascribe  greatness  to 
God,  and  that  as  resulting  chiefly  from  His  goodness,  as  appears  by  their  frequent 
conjunction  of  these  two  attributes,  goodness  and  greatness.  2.  From  Scripture. 
It  were  endless  to  produce  all  those  texts  wherein  greatness  and  glory  are  ascribed 
to  God.  I  shall  mention  two  or  three  :  "  The  Lord  is  a  great  God  "  (Deut.  x.  17) ; 
He  is  called  "  the  King  of  glory  "  (Psa.  xxiv.  10) ;  He  is  said  to  be  "  clothed  with 
majesty  and  honour  "  (Psa.  civ.  1).  "  The  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  Hither 
belong  all  those  doxologies  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament  wherein  greatness,  and 
glory,  and  majesty  are  ascribed  to  God.  From  all  which  we  may  learn — 1.  What 
it  is  that  makes  a  person  great  and  glorious,  and  what  is  the  way  to  majesty,  viz., 
real  worth  and  excellency,  and  particularly  that  kind  of  excellency  which  creatures 
are  capable  of  in  a  very  eminent  degree,  and  that  is  goodness ;  this  is  that  which 
advanceth  a  person,  and  gives  him  a  pre-eminence  above  all  others  ;  this  casts  a 
lustre  upon  him,  and  makes  his  face  to  shine.  2.  Let  us  give  God  the  glory  which 
is  due  to  His  name:  "Ascribe  ye  greatness  to  our  God  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  3).  "  Give 
unto  the  Lord,  0  ye  mighty,  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  power  "  (Psa.  xxix.  1). 
The  glory  and  majesty  of  God  call  for  our  esteem  and  honour,  our  fear  and 
reverence  of  Him.  Thus  we  should  glorify  God  in  our  spirits,  by  an  inward  esteem 
and  reverence  of  His  majesty.  3.  We  should  take  heed  of  robbing  God  of  His 
glory,  by  giving  it  to  any  creature,  by  ascribing  those  titles,  or  that  worship,  to 
any  creature,  which  is  due  to  God  alone.  I  come  now  to  speak  of  the  sove- 
reignty and  dominion  of  God :  in  which  I  shall  show  what  we  are  to  understand 
by  the  sovereignty  and  dominion  of  God.  By  these  we  mean  the  full  and  absolute 
right,  and  title,  and  authority  which  God  hath  to  and  over  all  His  creatures,  as  His 
creatures,  and  made  by  Him.  And  this  right  results  from  the  effects  of  that 
goodness,  and  power,  and  wisdom,  whereby  all  things  are  and  were  made ;  from 
whence  there  doth  accrue  to  God  a  sovereign  right  and  title  to  aU  His  creatures,  and 
a  full  and  absolute  authority  over  them  ;  that  is,  such  a  right  and  authority  which 
doth  not  depend  upon  any  superior,  nor  is  subject  and  accountable  to  any,  for  any- 
thing that  He  does  to  any  of  His  creatures.  I.  Wherein  it  doth  not  consist.  1. 
Not  in  a  right  to  gratify  and  delight  Himself  in  the  extreme  misery  of  innocent 
and  undeserving  creatures :  I  say,  not  in  a  right ;  for  the  right  that  God  hath  in 
His  creatures  is  founded  in  the  benefits  He  hath  conferred  upon  them,  and  the 
obligations  they  have  to  Him  upon  that  account.  2.  The  sovereignty  of  God  doth 
not  consist  in  imposing  laws  upon  His  creatures  which  are  impossible  either  to  be 
understood  or  observed  by  them.  For  this  would  not  only  be  contrary  to  the 
dignity  of  the  Divine  nature,  but  contradict  the  nature  of  a  reasonable  creature, 


JUDE.  93 

which,  in  reason,  cannot  be  obliged  by  any  power  to  impossibilities.  3.  The  sove- 
reignty of  God  doth  not  consist  in  a  liberty  to  tempt  men  to  evil,  or  by  any 
inevitable  decree  to  necessitate  them  to  sin,  or  effectually  to  procure  the  sins  of 
men,  and  to  punish  them  for  them.  For  as  this  would  be  contrary  to  the  holiness, 
and  justice,  and  goodness  of  God,  so  to  the  nature  of  a  reasonable  creature,  who 
cannot  be  guilty  or  deserve  punishment  for  what  it  cannot  help.  II.  Wherein  the 
sovereignty  of  God  doth  consist.  1.  In  a  right  to  dispose  of,  and  deal  with.  His 
creatures  in  any  way  that  doth  not  contradict  the  essential  perfections  of  God,  and 
the  natural  conditions  of  the  creature.  2.  In  a  right  to  impose  what  laws  He 
pleaseth  upon  His  creatures,  whether  natural  and  reasonable ;  or  positive,  of  trial 
of  obedience,  provided  they  contradict  not  the  nature  of  God,  or  of  the  creature. 
3.  In  a  right  to  inflict  due  and  deserved  punishment  in  a  case  of  provocation.  4. 
In  a  right  to  afflict  any  of  His  creatures,  so  the  evil  He  inflicts  be  short  of  the 
benefits  He  hath  conferred  on  them.  This  is  universally  acknowledged  by  the 
heathens,  that  God  is  "the  Lord  and  Sovereign  of  the  world,  and  of  all  crea- 
tures," and  this  the  Scripture  doth  everywhere  attribute  to  Him,  calling  Him 
"  Lord  of  all,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords " ;  to  which  we  may  refer  all 
those  doxologies  in  which  power,  and  dominion,  and  authority  are  ascribed  to 
God.  I  infer,  first,  negatively:  We  cannot,  from  the  sovereignty  of  God,  infer 
a  right  to  do  anything  that  is  unsuitable  to  the  perfection  of  His  nature ;  and 
consequently,  that  we  are  to  rest  satisfied  with  such  a  notion  of  dominion  and 
sovereignty  in  God  as  doth  not  plainly  and  directly  contradict  all  the  notions 
that  we  have  of  justice  and  goodness.  Secondly,  positively :  We  may  infer  from 
the  sovereignty  and  dominion  of  God — 1.  That  we  ought  to  own  and  acknow- 
ledge God  for  our  lord  and  sovereign,  who,  by  creating  us,  and  giving  us  all 
that  we  have,  did  create  to  Himself  a  right  in  us.  2.  That  we  owe  to  Him  the 
utmost  possibility  of  our  love,  to  "love  Him  with  all  our  heart,  and  soul,  and 
strength " ;  because  the  souls  that  we  have  He  gave  us ;  and  when  we  render 
these  to  Him,  we  do  but  give  Him  of  His  own.  3.  We  owe  to  Him  all  imaginable 
subjection,  and  observance,  and  obedience;  and  are  with  all  diligence,  to  the 
utmost  of  our  endeavours,  to  conform  ourselves  to  His  will,  and  to  those  laws 
which  He  hath  imposed  upon  us.  4.  In  case  of  offence  and  disobedience,  we  are, 
without  murmuring,  to  submit  to  what  He  shall  inflict  upon  us,  "to  accept  of 
the  punishment  of  our  iniquity,"  and  "  patiently  to  bear  the  indignation  of  the 
Lord,"  because  we  have  sinned  against  Him,  who  is  our  Lord  and  Sovereign.  (Abp. 
Tillotton.)  The  only  wise  God  our  Saviour: — 1.  Wisdom  is  ascribed  to  God. 
God's  wisdom  is  a  distinct  notion  from  His  knowledge.  He  doth  not  only  know  all 
things,  but  hath  ordered  and  disposed  them  with  much  counsel.  (1)  Much  of  His 
wisdom  is  seen  in  creation.  There  His  wisdom  is  discovered  in  the  excellent  order 
of  all  His  works  (Psa.  civ.  24;  1  Cor.  i.  21).  Their  mutual  correspondence  and 
fitness  for  the  several  ends  and  services  for  which  they  were  appointed.  (2)  God's 
wisdom  is  much  seen  in  the  sustentation  and  governing  of  all  things  (Eph.  i.  11). 
There  is  nothing  so  confused  but  if  you  look  upon  it  in  its  results  and  final  ten- 
dency, there  is  beauty  and  order  in  it ;  the  tumults  of  the  world,  the  prosperity  of 
the  wicked,  carnal  men  think  them  the  disgrace  and  blemish  of  providence,  whereaiS 
they  are  the  ornament  of  it  (Psa.  xcii.  5).  (3)  In  the  methods  of  His  grace;  so  I 
call  all  the  transactions  of  God  about  the  salvation  of  sinners  from  first  to  last ; 
the  rejection  of  the  Jews,  and  calling  of  the  Gentiles  (Bom.  xi.  33).  The  various 
dispensations  used  in  the  Church,  before  the  law,  under  the  law,  and  time  of  the 
gospel,  these  are  called  the  "manifold  wisdom  of  God  "  (Eph.  iii.  10),  the  "  hidden 
wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,"  and  "  without  controversy  a  great  mystery"  (1  Tim. 
iii.  16).  Again,  the  various  acts  of  love  whereby  God  subdueth  sinners  to  Himself. 
Once  more,  the  overruling  of  all  events  to  further  the  eternal  blessedness  of  the 
saints  (Bom.  viii.  28).  2.  God  is  "only  "  wise  (1  Tim.  i.  17  ;  Bom.  xvi.  27).  (1) 
Originally  and  independently  wise,  not  by  communication  from  another,  but  of  Him- 
self. (2)  God  is  essentially  wise,  and  so  only  wise.  The  perfections  of  the  creature 
are  like  the  gilding  which  may  be  laid  on  upon  vessels  of  wood  or  stone,  the  matter 
is  one  thing  and  the  varnish  or  ornament  is  another ;  but  the  perfections  of  God 
are  like  a  vessel  made  of  pure  beaten  gold,  where  the  matter  and  the  splendour  or 
adorning  is  the  same.  (3)  God  is  infinitely  wise,  and  so  only  wise.  As  the  candle 
giveth  no  light  when  the  sun  shineth,  our  wisdom  is  bounded  within  narrow  limits, 
and  extendeth  but  to  a  few  things,  but  God's  to  all  things.  3.  Christ  Jesus  our 
Saviour  is  worthy  to  be  accounted  the  only  wise  God.  Christ  is  wise  as  He  is  God,  and 
as  He  is  man.     (1)  As  He  is  God,  so  is  He  called  "  the  wisdom  of  the  Father"  (1  Cor. 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

i.  24),  and  represented  to  the  ancient  Church  under  this  title;  as  Prov.  i.  20.    Wisdom 
is  there  spoken  of  as  a  person,  and  the  descriptions  there  used  are  proper  to  Jesua 
Christ.     (2)  As  He  is  man.  He  received  the  habits  of  all  created  knowledge  and  wis- 
dom, as  all  other  graces,  without  measure  (John  iii.) ;  and  so  it  is  said  (Col.  ii.  3),  "  In 
Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."     Well,  then,  since  Christ 
hath  brought  down  wisdom  to  us  in  our  own  nature,  let  us  be  more  studious  to  get 
it  into  our  hearts.    As  Mediator,  He  is  fitted  to  make  us  wise  to  salvation,  and  ap- 
pointed by  God  to  be  wisdom  to  us  (1  Cor.  i.  30).     4.  Once  more  note,  from  the 
other  title  that  is  here  given  to  Christ,  "our  Saviour."     Those  that  have  had  any 
benefit  by  Christ  will  be  very  much  affected  with  His  praise.     There  is  a  double 
ground  of  exalting  Christ — a  sight  of  His  excellency,  and  a  sense  of  His  benefits ; 
and  there  is  a  double  notion  by  which  our  honouring  of  Christ  is  set  forth — praise 
and  blessing.     Praise  hath  respect  to  His  excellency,  and  blessing  to  His  benefits 
(Eph.  i.  3).     (T.  Manton.)         The  ascription  of  praise  to  God  : — 1.  Can  we  bestow 
anything  upon  God  ?  or  wish  any  real  worth  and  excellency  to  be  superadded  to 
Him  ?     I  answer — No.     The  meaning  is,  that  those  which  are  in  God  already  may 
be — (1)  More  sensibly  maniiested  (Isa.  Ixiv.  2).     It  is  a  great  satisfaction  to  God's 
people  when  anything  of  God  is  discovered  ;  they  value  it  above  their  own  benefit 
and  safety  (Psa.  cxv.  i.).     They  prefer  the  glory  of  mercy  and  truth  before  their  de- 
liverance.    (2)  More  seriously  and  frequently  acknowledged.     It  is  a  great  pleasure 
to  the  saints  to  see  others  praise  God  (Psa.  cvii.  8).     (3)  More  deeply  esteemed, 
that  God  may  be  more  in  request,  more  in  the  hearts  of  men  and  angels.     Good 
men  are  loath  to  go  to  heaven  alone,  they  would  travel  thither  by  troops  and  in 
company.     2.  But  let  us  more  particularly  take  a  view  of  this  ascription  ;  and  so 
first  what  is   ascribed,   "glory,  majesty,   dominion,   and  power."     "Glory"   is 
excellency  discovered  with  praise  and  approbation,  and  noteth  that  high  honour 
and  esteem  that  is  due  to  Christ.     "Majesty"  implieth  such  greatness  and  excel- 
lency as  maketh  one  honoured  and  preferred  above  all,  therefore  a  style  usually 
given  to  kings ;  but  to  none  so  due  as  unto  Christ,  who  is  "  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords."     "Dominion"  implieth  the  sovereignty  of  Christ  over  all  things, 
especially  over  the  people  whom  He  hath  purchased  with  His  blood.     "  Power  "  sig- 
nifieth  that  all-sufficiency  in  God  whereby  He  is  able  to  do  all  things  according  to 
the  good  pleasure  of  His  will.     (1)  A  gracious  heart  hath  such  a  sense  of  God's 
worth  and  perfection,   that  it  would   have  all   things  that  are  honourable  and 
glorious  ascribed  to  Him ;  therefore  are  divers  words  here  used.     When  we  have 
done  our  utmost  we  come  short ;  for  God's  name  is  "  exalted  above  all  blessing,  and 
above  all  praise  "  (Neh.  ix.  5).     Yet  it  is  good  to  do  as  much  as  we  can.     (2)  When 
we  think  of  God,  it  is  a  relief  to  the  soul  to   consider  of   His   glory,   majesty, 
dominion,  and  power ;  for  this  is  that  which  the  apostle  would  have  to  be  mani- 
fested, acknowledged,  and  esteemed  in  God,  as  the  gi'ound  of  our  respect  to  Him. 
It  encourageth  us  in  our  service.     We  need  not  think  shame  of  His  service,  to 
whom  glory,  and  power,  and  majesty,  and  dominion  belongeth.     It  hearteneth  us 
against  dangers.     Surely  the  great  and  glorious  God  will  bear  us  out  in  His  work. 
It  increaseth  our  awe  and  reverence.     Shall  we  serve  God  in  such  slight  fashion  as 
we  would  not  serve  the  governor?  (Mai.  i.  8).     It  inviteth  our  prayers.     To  whom 
should  we  go  in  our  necessities  but  to  Him  that  hath  dominion  over  all  things,  and 
power  to  dispose  of  them  for  the  glory  of  His  majesty  ?    It  increaseth  our  depen- 
dence.    God  is  glorious,  and  will  maintain  the  honour  of  His  name,  and  truth  of 
His  promises.     3.  The  next  consideration  in  this  ascription  is  the  duration,  "  now 
and  ever."    Thence  note :  The  saints  have  such  large  desires  for  God's  glory,  that 
they  would  have  Him  glorified  everlastingly,  and  without  ceasing.     They  desire 
the  present  age  may  not  only  glorify  God,  but  the  future.    When  they  are  dead  and 
gone  the  Lord  remaineth ;  and  they  would  not  have  Him  remain  without  honour. 
They  do  not  take  death  so  bitterly,  if  there  be  any  hopes  that  God  will  have  a 
people  to  praise  Him.     And  their  great  comfort  now  is  the  expectation  of  a  "  great 
congregation,"  gathered  from  the  four  winds,  united  to  Christ,  presented  to  God, 
that  they  may  remain  with  Him,  and  glorify  Him  for  evermore.     They  prize  their 
own  salvation  upon  this  ground,  that  they  shall  live  for  ever  to  glorify  God  for  ever 
(Eph.  iii.  21 ;  Psa.  xli.  13,  and  cvi.  48).     Now  this  they  do,  partly  from  their  love 
to  God's  glory,  which  they  prize  above  their  own  salvation  (Rom.  ix.  3) ;  partly  in 
thankfulness  to  God  for  His  everlasting  love  to  them.     4.  The  last  thing  in  this 
inscription   is  the  particle,   "amen,"  which  signifieth  a  hearty  consent  to  God's 
promise,  and  a  steady  belief  that  it  will  continue  to  all  generations.    This  word  is  often 
put  at  the  end  of  prayers  and  doxologies  in  Scripture  (Rev.  v.  13,  14 ;  Rom.  xvi. 


JUDE.  95 

27  ;  Phil.  iv.  20,  &g.)  ;  and  sometimes  it  is  doubled  for  the  greater  vehemency  (Psa. 
li.  13,  Ixxii.  19,  Ixxxix.  52) ;  and  anciently  it  was  audibly  pronounced  by  the  people 
in  public  assemblies  at  the  conclusion  of  prayers  (1  Cor.  xiv.  16),  and  since  that 
Jerome  telleth  us  that  the  amen  was  so  heartily  sounded  out  by  the  church,  that  it 
seemed  like  a  crack  of  thunder.  (1)  Certainly  it  is  good  to  conclude  holy  exercises 
with  some  vigour  and  wannth.  Natural  motion  is  swifter  in  the  end  and  close ;  so 
should  our  spiritual  affections  be  more  vehement  as  we  draw  to  a  conclusion,  and 
when  the  prayer  is  done,  put  out  the  efficacy  of  our  faith  and  holy  desires  in  a 
strong  "  Amen,"  that  it  may  be  to  you  according  to  the  requests  of  your  hearts,  and 
you  may  come  away  from  the  throne  of  grace  as  those  that  have  had  some  feeling 
of  God's  love  in  your  consciences,  and  are  persuaded  that  He  will  accept  you,  and 
do  you  good  in  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  There  should  be  an  "  amen  "  to  our  praises  as  well 
as  to  our  prayers,  that  we  may  express  our  zeal  and  affection  to  God's  glory  as  well 
as  to  our  own  profit.  Our  hallelujahs  should  sound  as  loud  as  our  supplications, 
and  we  should  as  heartily  consent  to  God's  praises  as  to  our  own  requests.  (3)  In 
desiring  the  glory  of  God  to  all  ages,  we  should  express  both  our  faith  and  love — 
faith  in  determining  that  it  shall  be,  and  love  in  desiring  that  it  may  be  so  with  all 
our  hearts.  Both  are  implied  in  the  word  "  amen  " ;  it  will  be  so  whatever  changes 
happen  in  the  world.  God  will  be  glorious.  The  scene  is  often  shifted,  and 
furnished  with  new  actors,  but  still  God  hath  those  that  praise  Him,  and  will  have 
to  aU  eternity.  Well,  then,  let  your  faith  subscribe,  and  put  to  its  seal,  "  To  the 
glory  of  God  in  Christ"  ;  and  let  earnest  love  interpose,  "Lord,  let  it  be  so  ;  yea. 
Lord,  let  it  be  so."  Heartily  desire  it,  and  with  the  whole  strength  of  your  souls ; 
set  to  your  seals  without  fear,  it  is  a  request  that  cannot  miscarry,  and  follow  it 
with  your  hearty  acclamations.    (T.  Manton.) 


1    1012  01127  8167 


Date  Due 


