piszeper mee on barnes 
Ris even Pub HDT ites 


arm agen eeeaEey 


Cockroft 


Gift of 
Sgr 


No 


L 


& 
ion 


Mr 


Access 


Date 


= 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


httos://archive.org/details/soulspureintentiO000Omeye 


THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


eine oOULS 


PURE INTENTION 


BY THE 


REV. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 


LONDON 


fc 
laf 
em f 
aor | 
| er 


fied 
Multa terricolis linguz, coelestibus tna 
4 


\A\ 
CN 


%, \ ¥ 5 rs “i Bes 2 
SECOND EDITION \ dhe 888 
YY o™ 


ee 


LONDON 


SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS LIMITED 


15 PATERNOSTER ROW 
1907 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

I. CurisTIAN Purity oF SOUL é 4 I 
II. THE PurITY OF THE SouL’s INTENTION 

ATTAINED THROUGH THE CRoss : 147 


III. Tue Purity or THE SOUL’s INTENTION 
CONSUMMATED IN THE CONSCIOUS- 
NESS OF CHRIST’s INDWELLING hee 


IV. THe Pure INTENTION OF THE SOUL 
REALISED THROUGH THE HOLY 
SPIRIT. : : : : eure 


V. Tue Purity oF THE Sout’s INTENTION 
ABOUNDING IN Joy. 4 : ee As 


VI. THE Purity or INTENTION, THE KEY 
TO OUR LorD’s LIFE AND OURS. QI 


VII. THE BLessep Steps or His Most 
Hoty Lire 4 ; : % oe Tar 


VIII. THE UNDIVIDED HEART . ; 5 233 


Vv 


19090 


vi CONTENTS 


IX. Tue Pure INTENTION OF THE SOUL 
MAINTAINED IN THE MIDST OF LIFE’S 
DRUDGERY F . ; ; : 


X. THe PurE INTENTION OF THE SOUL 
CONSISTENT WITH THE LIFE IN THE 
GREAT CiTy . : : ‘ ; 


XI. THE PuRITY OF THE SOUL’s INTENTION 
REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE . . 


PAGE 


153 


171 


189 


I 
CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 


fare sOULS PURE 
INTENTION 


I 
CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 


THE nature of man, according to the distinct 
teaching of the Apostle, must be considered 
under the three divisions of Spirit, Soul, 
and Body. “May your spirit and soul and 
body be preserved entire, without blame” 
(1 Thess. v. 23). This division is not made 
in One passage only, for in 1 Cor. ii. 13, 
14; iii, 1; vi. 19, it is the basis of a pro- 
longed argument for a transfigured character. 


The spiritual, the carnal or soulish, and the 


4 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


physical, are in turn referred to as playing 
a very distinct part in the economy of a 
holy life. 

Throughout Old and New Testament the 
soul may be taken as signifying the animal 
life, which in its lower ranges we share with 
the inferior orders of creation, but which 
in man attains to heights of reason and 
moral perception, to which these have no 
claim. Probably, therefore, we may take the 
soul as representing our individuality. It is 
the sum-total of our emotional, rational, and 
moral consciousness. The soul is the seat 
and centre of the “I,” the ego, that which 
gives each one of us our specific character. 
But when we have said all, how little we 
have said! How little we know! What 
profound depths are unexplored! We are 


as those who hold a torch over a deep, 


CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 5 


dark well—its glimmer only reaches for a 
few feet, making the abyss beyond more 
Opaque and impenetrable than ever. 

The soul opens upward to the Infinite and 
Eternal through the Sgzrz¢, with its capacity 
for God, and downward to the Finite and 
Temporal through the Body, with its capacity 
for material objects. The spirit stands for 
our heavenly aptitudes, the body for our 
earthly ones. By the one we are able to 
seek the things that are above, where Christ 
is, seated on the right hand of God; through 
the other we are apt to become entangled 
with the things that pertain to earth (Col. 
ili, I-5). 

Probably the prime reason for our having 
been sent into the world is to test the true 
quality of our souls, and to give us the 


opportunity of making the supreme choice 


6 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


as to whether we will yield to the attraction 
of the Divine, the Eternal, and the Infinite, 
which appeal to us through our spirits, or 
to the fascination of the earthly, the material, 
and the transient, which appeal to us through 
our bodies. The soul has to choose which 
it will serve, God or Baal, the voices of the 
stars or of the clods, of the zons or the 
throbbings of earth’s chronometers; and 
according to its choice will be its lot 
when it goes out from this strange experi- 
ence which we are accustomed to call “fe, 
but which is probably only the vestibule 
to life. 

From the hour of our birth into this 
material sphere, the soul for the most part 
yields itself to its environment, of which it 
is aware through its senses. It becomes 


subject to vanity, the Apostle says. It serves 


CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 7 


divers lusts’ and pleasures. It is enslaved 
to the domineering caprice of appetite, 
passion, and desire. If the fruit of the tree 
appears to be good for food, and is a delight 
to the eyes, and seems likely to make one 
wise, it is enough, the hand is reached out 
to take, and eat, and the eyes are opened 
to know good and evil. This is the life- 
story of untold myriads of human beings, 
Their souls have become enslaved to their 
senses, so that in the words of Peter’s second 
Epistle, they are the hapless bond-slaves of 
corruption. Whatever suggestion is made 
to them through the gateways of sense 
elicits from the soul a ready and immediate 
response. The kingly faculty, which should 
rule, is carried captive by its lusts. And 
surely lusts are the lawless exaggeration of 


what in our original creation was perfectly 


8 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


natural and innocent, but which by inherit- 
ance from past generations, and by our own 
wanton indulgence, has become depraved 
and tyrannical ? 

Such a life is necessarily a divided one. 
The soul is torn hither and thither. Like 
a surge of the sea it is driven by every 
wind, now in this direction and again in 
that. It is careful and troubled about many 
things. The cares of the world, and the 
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other 
things enter in and choke the word, so that 
it becomes unfruitful. A multitude of fleshly 
lusts war against the health and peace of 
the soul. The vision becomes double, and 
the soul like a country torn with faction 
and revolt. Most fitly does the Book of 
Judges precede that of the Kings, for the 


earlier state with most of us is that in 


CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 9 


which powerful impulses do what is right 
in their own eyes, not brooking other 
supremacy than their own wild will. 
Through all those experiences the soul is 
not destitute of spiritual impressions. The 
reign of sense is not absolute. At times 
the voice of God is heard calling from the 
heights, and the knock of the spiritual world 
is detected loudly at the door which opens 
out to the Infinite. Sometimes, indeed, it 
seems as though the soul were about to 
break from its bondage, and stand free and 
glad before the Throne of God and the 
Lamb. For a brief space it escapes the 
defilements of the world through the know- 
ledge of the Lord and Saviour, though, alas, 
often it is again entangled therein and over- 
come; it turns back from the holy com- 


mandment which had been delivered unto 


10 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


it, so that the last end becomes worse than 
the first. It happens according to the true 
proverb, the dog turning to his own vomit 
again, and the sow that had been washed to 
wallowing in the mire. The rent condition 
of the soul, which is at the beck and call 
of every imperious desire, aroused by some 
outward and earthly solicitation, is well de- 
picted in the vehement ejaculations of another 
Apostle: Whence come wars and whence 
come fightings among you? Come they not 
hence, even of your pleasures, that war in 
your members? Ye lust and have not: ye 
kill and covet and cannot obtain: ye fight 
and war. Ye adulteresses, know ye not 
that the friendship of the world is enmity 
with God? 

What purity, what peace, what concentra- 


tion of soul, are possible under such condi- 


CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 11 


tions! The inner kingdom is divided against 
itself, and cannot stand. The soul’s vain 
attempt to serve two masters is a bitter 
failure. Now it loves the one and then 
the other. Love and hatred, attraction and 
repulsion, the tendency toward God and 
toward evil, alternately assert themselves, 
and the harassed soul cries in its tem- 
pestuous inner dialogue: I delight in the law 
of God after the inward man: but I see a 
different law in my members, warring against 
the law of my mind, and bringing me into 
captivity under the law of sin which is in 
my members. O wretched man that I am! 
who shall deliver me out of this body of 
death ! 

It is often after such an experience, when 
the soul anguish has been more acute than 


usual, that we are delivered. The soul, 


12 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


sickened with its long and bitter experi- 
ences, and conscious of the gracious wooing 
of its Immortal Lover, turns towards the 
spiritual side of its nature, throws open the 
door to the breath of Eternity, and un- 
curtains its windows to the Eastern sky, 
flushed with the first touch of dawn. So it 
stands there with wistful, lingering, longing 
gaze fixed on God, crying, Umzte my heart 
to fear Thy name. The Divine Master comes 
in sight, majestic, radiant, fairer than the 
sons of men. Instantly the soul recognises 
its affinity, moves towards its Lover and 
Friend, saying— 


“Jesu, Lover of my soul, 
Let me to Thy bosom fly.” 


From that moment it enters into Peace that 
passeth understanding. When it yields itself 


to Christ, its supreme Master, surrenders to 


CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 13 
Him all the keys of the inner kingdom, 


confesses its desire that He should hence- 
forth be _ its Over - Lord, and bids Him 
welcome to the throne, a voice as of angels 
harping on their harps and singing is heard 
through the soul, saying, Now is come Sal- 
vation and the Kingdom of our God: these 
inner kingdoms are become the Kingdom of 
God and of His Christ: Worthy is the Lamb 
that was slain to receive Power: Hallelujah, 
for the Lord God, the Omnipotent reigneth. 
Then as the King Emmanuel enters the 
city of Mansoul its light becomes that of 
the crystal, and its happy populations crowd 
around Him, crying, Rejoice greatly, the 
King cometh, having salvation! And as the 
advent of the King supersedes that of the 
former despotic passions which had wrought 


their wild will, there comes to the soul a 


14 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


blessed Unity, a oneness of aim and purpose 
which gathers up the entire being into a 
well-ordered and harmonious whole. 

The most striking image of this trans- 
formation is suggested by the figure of the 
Temple, used originally by our Lord and 
afterwards by His great Apostle. In the 
Temple there were three parts: the Holy 
of Holies, the Holy Place, and the Outer 
Court, corresponding respectively to the 
Spirit, Soul, and Body. As the Soul is 
central in our nature, so the Holy Place, 
with its candelabra, its incense-altar, and its 
shew-bread table, stood between the Most 
Holy Place on the one hand and the Outer 
Court on the other. In the Most Holy 
Place, answering to the human spirit, the 
Shechinah glory shone as once in the Burn- 


ing Bush of the Desert and the Beacon- 


CHRISTIAN PURITY OF SOUL 15 
cloud of the Wilderness March; but too 


often the heavy veil which hung between the 
Most Holy and the Holy Place obliterated 
from the mind of Israel that radiant splen- 
dour, and the people lived as though: the 
Outer Court were all, with its sacrifices of 
bulls and calves, and the ashes of an heifer 
sprinkling the unclean. 

But when Jesus died on the Cross, the 
veil of the Temple was rent in twain from 
top to bottom, the sacred inner shrine stood 
revealed, the light that had never shone on 
sea or shore was unveiled, and if it were 
shining there at that hour, it was set free 
to flood the Holy Place and the exterior 
Court. So, when the soul awakens to its 
true destiny, and resolves that the old man— 
ze. the former habit of life—shall be sur- 


rendered to the Cross, the veil which had 


16 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


hidden the Inner Light is torn in twain, the 
soul and spirit, like the Holy and Most Holy 
Place, are thrown into one, and the Light 
of the Eternal flows through the whole 
nature from its Divine Fountains, irradiating 
first the spirit, then the soul, and finally 
the physical body, until the whole nature 
becomes one in expectancy, in faith, in 
desire, in impulse. Then Glory is rendered 
to God in the Highest, and in the Heart 
there is Peace. The government is placed 
on the shoulders of Emmanuel, who is Christ 
the Lord, and of the increase of His govern- 


ment and of Peace, there is no end, 


II 


THE PURITY OF THE SOUL'S IN- 
TENTION ATTAINED THROUGH 
THE CROSS 


II 


‘THE PURITY OF THE SOUL'S IN- 
TENTION ATTAINED THROUGH 
THE CROSS 


WE have already touched on the soul’s 
anguish when it is torn between the attrac- 
tions of the spiritual on the one hand, and 
of the sensuous and physical on the other. 
That anguish may be described as soul- 
sickness, and the nobler the constitution of 
the soul the more agonising its conscious- 
ness of failure. 

Let us recite one or two _ confessions, 
which set forth the bitterness of this soul- 


sickness. 


20 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


“JT will say nothing,” wrote the great Ger- 
man philosopher, Goethe, in 1824, “against 
the course of my existence. But at the 
bottom it has been nothing but pain and 
burden, and I can affirm that, during the 
whole of my seventy-five years, I have not 
had four weeks of genuine well-being.” 

Bunyan describes his feelings before con- 
version thus: “I was sorry that God had 
made me a man. The birds, beasts, fishes, 
&c., I blessed their condition, for they had 
not a sinful nature; they were not obnoxious 
to the wrath of God; they were not to go 
to hell-fire after death. I could, therefore, 
have rejoiced, had my condition been as any 
of theirs. How I blessed the condition of 
the dog or horse, for I knew they had no 
soul to perish under the everlasting weight 


of sin or hell, as mine was like to do! 


ATTAINED THROUGH THE CROSS 21 
Nay, and though I saw this, felt this, and 


was broken to pieces with it, yet that which 
added to my sorrow was, that I could not 
find in my soul that I desired deliverance. 
My heart was exceedingly hard. If I would 
have given a thousand pounds for a tear, 
I could not shed one; no, nor sometimes 
scarce desire to shed one.” 

Henry Alline was a devoted evangelist, 
who worked in Nova Scotia a hundred years 
ago, and he thus vividly describes his soul- 
sickness and sorrow: “Everything I saw 
seemed to be a burden to me; the earth 
seemed accursed for my sake; all trees, 
plants, rocks, hills, and vales seemed to be 
dressed in mourning, and groaning under the 
weight of that curse; and everything around 
me seemed to be conspiring for my ruin.” 


Outside Christian circles, this same misery 


22 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
is felt. I notice that Count Tolstoi tells his 


own story under the veil of an Eastern 
parable, which I heard when in the East. 
He says: “Seeking to save himself from 
a wild beast, a traveller jumped into a well 
with no water in it; but at the bottom of 
the well he espied, to his horror, a dragon 
waiting with open mouth to devour him. 
So the unhappy man, not daring to go out 
lest he should be the prey of the wild beast, 
and not daring to jump to the bottom lest 
he should be devoured of the dragon, clings 
to the branches of a wild bush, which grows 
out of the cracks of the well. His hands 
weaken, and he feels that he must soon give 
way to a certain fate; but still he clings, 
and finally sees two mice, one white (the 
days), the other black (the nights), evenly 


moving round the bush where he clings, and 


ATTAINED THROUGH THE CROSS 23 


gnawing off its roots. The traveller sees 
this, and knows that he must inevitably 
perish; but while thus hanging, he looks 
about him, and finds on the leaves of the 
bush some drops of honey. These he 
reaches with his tongue, and licks them off 
with rapture. Thus,” continues Tolstoi, “I 
hang upon the boughs of life, knowing that 
the inevitable dragon of death is waiting to 
tear me, and I cannot comprehend why I 
am thus made a martyr. I try to suck the 
honey which formerly consoled me, but the 
honey pleases me no longer, and day and 
night the white mouse and the black mouse 
gnaw the branch to which I cling. I can 
see but one thing: the inevitable dragon and 
the mice—I cannot turn my gaze away from 
them. This is no fable, but the literal, in- 
contestable truth. What will be the out- 


24 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


come of my life? Why should I live? Why 
should I do anything ?” 

These extracts remind us of some older 
words still: “What profit hath a man of all 
his labour which he taketh under the sun? 
I looked on all the works that my hands had 
wrought, and, behold, all was vanity and 
vexation of spirit.” 

From every quarter, then, comes the same 
complaint, that sin is sickness, and that the 
sickness is hard to bear. You may not have 
felt like this because you have never caught 
a glimpse of what God means the soul to 
enjoy; but if your eyes were opened to see 
the possibilities of soul-health, you would 
also come to know that you are poor 
and miserable, blind and naked—that the 
whole soul is sick, and the whole heart faint. 


The cure of this condition, as already in- 


ATTAINED THROUGH THE CROSS 25 


dicated, comes through the Cross. It was 
when Jesus ded that the veil, which divided 
between the Most Holy Place and the Holy, 
was rent in twain, and the two apartments 
became one; and it is when the soul enters 
into the inner meaning of the Cross that 
it becomes united and single, its eye single, 
and its being flooded with the ray of a holy 
light, which is its pure intention. 

In other words, Calvary has two aspects, 
the one towards pardon and the other towards 
peace. This for justification, and that for 
sanctification. /%vst, we come to the Cross, 
and see in it the consummation of God’s 
self-giving love, that in the Person of Christ 
He took upon Himself our nature with its 
failure and sin, bore our sins in His own 
Body on the tree, reconciled us unto Him- 


self, and did away sin with such absolute 


PA 


26 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


oblivion that infinite space is the only em- 
blem that can set forth the distance of its 
removal. ‘The Blood of Jesus Christ, God’s 
Son, cleanseth from all sin;” “In Him we 
have redemption through His Blood, the 
forgiveness of sins;” “Their sins and ini- 
quities I will remember no more.” Behold- 
ing the Cross, like Bunyan’s Pilgrim, we 
give three leaps for joy, the burden rolls 
from our back into the sepulchre, and is lost 
for ever in its depths. 

But there is a second view of the Cross, 
which is quite as important, though it is too 
often lost sight of. Approaching it “tora 
second time, the soul discovers itself in the 
Person of the dying Lord, it realises that it 
was crucified with Him, it becomes conscious 
that through the nails and spear, the anguish 


of death, and the crucifixion of the Saviour’s 


ATTAINED THROUGH THE CROSS 27 


Body, it was freed from the dominion of the 
old nature, and that it is now wedded to 
Him who was raised from the dead. As 
soon as this fact is accepted, we cry with 
the Apostle, “I have been crucified with 
Christ; yet I live: and yet no longer I, but 
Christ liveth in me: and that life which I 
now live in the flesh I live in faith, the faith 
which is in the Son of God, who loved me, 
and gave Himself up for me” (Gal. ii. 20, 
R.V.), or, appropriating other words from the 
same Epistle, we recognise that “They that 
are of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh 
with the passions and the lusts thereof” 
(v. 24). Thus it becomes clear that what 
was ours in the purpose of God when our 
Lord died, becomes ours in actual experience 
by the appropriating act of faith. 


The Cross is thus not simply a dogma or 


28 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


doctrine, but an experience. It is the bridge 
by which we pass from the prison of misery, 
which we have described, into the palace of 
Delight; it is the instrument by which we 
are delivered from the power of our selfish 
nature and transferred into the glorious 
liberty of the sons of God. Whenever the 
strong passions of our lower nature, working 
through the physical appetites, assert them- 
selves, we turn to the Cross, realise that the 
“old man” has been crucified with Him, that 
the power of sin might be rendered inopera- 
tive, and we claim that the Holy Spirit should 
enable us to mortify the deeds of the body, so 
that we may live the life of the sons of God. 
We cannot too distinctly emphasise the 
process of experience through which the soul 
passes on its way to complete emancipation. 


Take one who has been dominated by pas- 


ATTAINED THROUGH THE CROSS 29 


sionate desire, by furious outbreaks of evil 
appetite, by jealousy, envy, anger. Let such 
an one, when the storm begins to rise, repair 
instantly to the Cross, and realise that there 
in the purpose of God the old nature was 
crucified, that there a break was made _ be- 
tween the dominion of bodily appetite and 
the rule of the Divine Spirit; let this be 
affirmed and repeated, accentuated and ap- 
propriated; let the soul dare to stand by 
the act of the Redeemer as being final and 
irrevocable; and immediately an amazing 
and incredible revolution will take place, the 
rising storm will be quelled, and a voice will 
be heard from the tossing bark, hushing the 
waves, and causing a great calm of peace 
and blessedness. In that calm the Holy 
Spirit will continue His blessed ministry of 


perfecting the life of the indwelling Christ 


30 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


which is the loftiest realisation of the pure 


intention of the soul. 


Here is an account of how the need of 
one penitent was met: ‘Oh, help me, help 
me!’ cried I, ‘Thou Redeemer of souls, and 
save me, or I] am gone for ever; Thou canst 
this night, if Thou pleasest, with one drop of 
Thy blood, atone for my sins, and appease 
the wrath of an angry God.’ At that instant 
of time, when I gave up all to Him to do 
with me as He pleased, and when I became 
willing that God should rule over me at His 
pleasure, redeeming love broke into my soul 
with such power that my whole being seemed 
to be melted down with love; the burden of 
guilt and condemnation was gone, darkness 
was expelled, my heart filled with gratitude, 


and my whole soul, that was a few minutes 


ATTAINED THROUGH THE CROSS 31 


ago groaning under mountains of death, and 
crying to an unknown God for help, was 
now filled with immortal love, soaring on 
the wings of faith, and crying out, ‘My Lord, 
O my God!’” 

The late marvellous work of God in Wales 
has been a wonderful tribute to the power 
of the Cross in human lives, The one char- 
acteristic of that work has been focussed and 
expressed in the words so often on the lips of 
Evan Roberts, “Bend to God.” The people 
have bent before the will of God; as the love 
of the Crucified has been made known to 
them, they have wept to see the awful chasm 
_ between the spirit of their lives and of His, 
and in the energy of the Holy Spirit, they have 
yielded themselves to be crucified with Him, 

In a recent article, written by one who 


has entered deeply into the heart of the 


32 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


movement, we have been told that “Its 
heart has been the unveiling of the Cruci- 
fied.” As one has travelled through the 
Principality during these wonderful months, 
one has heard, on the mountains and in 
the valleys, in the coal-mines and the trains, 


the same quaint old chorus— 


“O the Lamb, the gentle Lamb, 
The Lamb of Calvary.” 


And it is this spirit which has revived the 
religious life of the community. 

We must not be content with viewing 
the death of the cross as a substitute for 
ourselves, or a way of escape from suffer- 
ing even unto death. We must enter into 
the sufferings of our Lord, must be crucified 
with Him, must be baptized into His death, 
in the utter renunciation of self-will, that 


we may rise to the newness of His life. 


II] 


THE PURITY OF THE SOUL'S IN- 
TENTION CONSUMMATED IN 
THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF 
CHRIST’S INDWELLING 


Ill 


THE PURITY OF THE SOUL’S IN- 
TENTION CONSUMMATED IN 
THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF 
CHRIST’S INDWELLING 


IT is a mistake to dwell always on the ele- 
mentary truths of pardon for the past, of 
ever-present help for the present, and of 
the imitation of Jesus Christ for all time to 
come. It is also a mistake to be always 
dwelling upon sin, and looking in upon our- 
selves to discern how far we have been 
cleansed from it. No physician of eminence 
would be foolish enough to turn the thought 


of his patients inwards on their symptoms 
35 


36 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


and ailments. If he be a wise man, he will 
speak hopefully and brightly to those who 
visit his consulting-room, and fill their minds 
with suggestions of speedy recovery. So 
with the life of the soul. The more we can 
turn people’s thoughts away ‘from their 
emotions, or the rapid changes of tempera- 
ment and experience, to the unchanging 
Christ, the more likely we are to help them 
into a bright and holy walk with God. 

We all of us need more of an overwhelming 
consciousness of our Lord’s indwelling to de- 
liver us from our self-consciousness, to free 
us from the fascination of evil, so that He 
may be more literally present to us than 
our dearest and closest companions. 

It is pleasant to read that incident told of 
the Rev. George Bowen of Bombay. One 


of his class-mates relates that he was pre- 


aoe 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 37 


sent when that man of God was praying 
with a few of his friends. Suddenly the 
lights went out, but Bowen startled them by 
saying: “Fellows, do you know I have got 
a more real sense of the presence of Christ 
with me in this room this evening than I 
have of the presence of any of you!” 

It has been truly said that the presence of 
Jesus Christ will blast out of life a thousand 
things that it cannot abide, and the man 
who wishes to enjoy it must make choice 
between the things of Christ and the things 
that are not tolerable to Him. When once 
Jesus Christ has become Lord of all the 
consciousness of our lives, a thousand temp- 
tations die away because they find no re- 
sponse; there may be a susceptibility, but 
there is no desire, no kindling of the soul, 


no going forth of passion. 


38 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


The indwelling of Christ was forepromised. 
—In John xiv. 23 the Master said, uniting 
Himself in one pronoun with the Eternal 
Father: “ We will come unto him, and make 
Our abode with him”; and it is interesting 
to know that the Greek word there trans- 
lated abode is the same as occurs in xiv. 2, 
where it denotes the mansion He has gone 
to prepare. He promises us a mansion in 
glory, and then tells us that He will make 
His mansion within the heart that loves 
Him. 

In His High-Priestly prayer, it was our 
Lord’s reiterated request that His disciples 
should share the mystery of His own inner 
life; that as the Father was in Him, and He 
in the Father, so He should be in each dis- 
ciple, and the disciple in Him, 


Anything short of this is to miss the es- 


aesssgm 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 39 


sence of our holy religion. It is not primarily 
a system of doctrines, however orthodox; 
it is not a set of maxims of morality, how- 
ever elevated; it is not an energising power 
enabling us to realise the ethics of our Lord. 
Christianity, as our Saviour sketched it be- 
fore He went back to the Father, must be 
a “fe. No other religion allies itself, as 
Christ’s religion does, to a human Person 
eternal and Divine. It was this which He 
promised; it is this that He is prepared to 
fulfil. If you have not realised it, ask Him 
that not one good thing may fail of all that 
He has promised, but that in your experi- 
ence also His anticipations may be fact. 
The indwelling of Christ ts by the Holy 
Spirit—The Lord Jesus is at the right hand 
of the Father, but He indwells the human 
heart through the Divine Spirit, just as the 


40 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


sun which is located in | the heavens 
sparkles in the eye of the child, and on the 
crest of the wave, by means of the far- 
travelled beam that leaps the abyss and 
threads the vault of night. 

In Ephesians iii. 17, we learn from the 
Apostle’s prayer, that it is only as we are 
strengthened with power through His Spirit 
in the inner man that Christ can dwell in 
our hearts by faith; and from Romans viii, 
g-11, the parallelism between the verses 
teaches us that Christ in us is equivalent to 
the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from 
the dead. | 

Hence we are wont to say that they who 
have most of Christ have most of the Holy 
Spirit; and certainly one symptom of having 
received and being infilled by the seven- 


fold grace of the blessed Paraclete is a very 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 41 


deep, definite, and blessed consciousness of 
the indwelling Christ. 

The indwelling of Christ was one of Paul's 
two secrets—He accounted himself the trus- 
tee of the mysteries of God, and that in a 
particular sense. He was entrusted with the 
sacred charge of two of them. The first he 
Otten. a B pitsinus dil Casta’ he Gen 
tiles should enter the Church, the Bride of 
Christ, on an equality with the chosen 
people; that they should be fellow-heirs and 
fellow-members of the Body, and _ fellow- 
partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus. 
Secondly, in Colossians i. 27, he explains 
that God has been pleased to make known 
to him “the riches of the glory of this mys- 
tery among the Gentiles” —Christ within, 
the hope of glory. 

As Ezra entrusted the holy vessels to the 


42 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


priests and Levites, bidding them carry them 
untarnished across the desert, so the Apostle 
held that he had been commissioned by 
Christ to carry these two great truths, until, 
in the hour of death, he should pass on the 
holy charge to Timothy, and others whom 
he had trained. 

The indwelling of Christ does not imply any 
extinction of Personality.—The soul is the 
seat of that personality. There the attri- 
butes and qualities gather, which make any 
one of us distinct from all others, so that 
Isaiah is Isaiah, and Ezekiel Ezekiel; and 
each of the evangelists is marked with his 
particular and characteristic style. When 
the presence of Christ takes possession of 
our inner life, it no more obliterates our 
personal traits than does the entrance of 


light alter the furniture of the rooms into 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 43 


which it pours. There is a change in the 
pivot, in the impulse and inspiration, in the 
axis around which the personality revolves; 
but there is no obliteration of what is 
characteristic. 

By his original nature man was made to 
depend on God. His soul, as we have 
seen, was central—on its upper side open- 
ing through its spirit to the unseen and 
eternal; on its under side opening through 
the body to the earthly and material. It 
was evidently the Divine intention that man 
should hearken only to those bells that ring 
in his soul from above, and be oblivious to 
those that ring from below. Alas for man! 
he refused the upper and chose the under; 
he turned from the Divine and the eternal 
to make himself as God; he substituted the 


human pivot and centre for the Divine, 


44 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


This was the Fall; and the reversal of this 
fatal choice is Redemption. When God 
once more becomes all in all, the enthroned 
King of the inner life, though there is a 
change in the ruling power, all the charac- 
teristic life of the soul continues—the same 
crowds throng the inner thoroughfares and 
market-places,—there is the old stir of life, 
though all is now under the domination 
and control of the Eternal Spirit. 

The indwelling of Christ ts a mystery.— 
The word mystery is Greek, and means a 
secret which cannot be understood by the 
reason of the natural man. Just as the 
_miraculous birth of our Lord was a mys- 
tery to the mother that bare Him, so the 
miraculous indwelling of Christ by the 
Spirit eludes the prying eye of intellect, 
though it can be apprehended by the child- 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 45 
like heart. Christ hidden in the soul—here 


is a mystery {indeed ; and in this sense every 
Christian is a mystic; though every mystic 
is not a Christian. Only let us be thankful 
for the revelation of the mystery which 
hath been kept in silence through times 
eternal, but now is manifested, and made 
known unto all the nations, according to 
the commandment of the Eternal God 
(Rom. xvi. 25, 26). 

The conception of this wonderful indwell- 
ing of Christ seems less mysterious when 
we remember that we are not primarily 
bodies, but souls in bodies, that the body 
at the most is only the implement and 
weapon of the spirit, the dial-plate on 
which it registers its decisions. 

The indwelling of Christ ts independent of our 


consciousness. —In 2 Corinthians xiii. 5 the 


46 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


Apostle goes so far as to say that if Jesus 
Christ is not in us we are reprobates ; and 
his teaching is corroborated by such graphic 
similitudes as the comparison of the vine, 
of the human body, and of the close affinity 
between husband and wife. 

Oh, dare to believe that Jesus Christ gives 
not His gifts, but Himself; that He is 
within, not because of any merit on our 
part, but because nothing else will satisfy 
His heart of love! When the fire of 
emotion burns low, and faith gets dim, do 
not wait to be overtaken by the emotion of 
Christ’s indwelling, but dare to affirm again 
and again, “He is in me; I do not realise 
His indwelling as I would; my soul does 
not respond to it as I desire; but nothing 
can ever alter the blessed fact that He 


whom the Heaven of heavens cannot con- 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 47 


tain, has stooped to become the denizen of 
those depths of my nature which lie be- 
neath the surface, as the great deep of the 
ocean beneath the surge of the waves.” 

As the Shechinah indwelt the Most Holy 
Place, even when the curtain prevented the 
priests from catching the rays of its super- 
natural splendour, so we must believe that 
deeper than consciousness, often veiled 
from our view in the shrine of our deepest 
being, the Son of God literally indwells and 
reigns. 

The indwelling of Christ ts made known by 
a distinct revelation—Galatians i. 16 seems 
to place this beyond doubt, for this passage 
can hardly refer to the Apostle’s conversion 
when he was stricken to the ground by the 
supernatural glory “of that light.” Its 


more obvious reference is to some sub- 


48 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


sequent disclosure of the Divine purpose. 
Perhaps as he was kneeling in the temple, 
the revelation of Christ being within his 
soul burst upon his view, and the Apostle 
knew that his body was indeed the precinct 
of the Temple of the Holy One. 

Is there not something similar to that in 
our experience? It is when we enter into 
the deepest meaning of His Cross, when 
we, too, say, “Not our will, but Thine be 
done”; when we are prepared to go all 
lengths with the Lord, that the veil which 
hangs between us and Him is rent, and we 
see Him, the inspiration of whose indwell- 
ing had often filled our souls, but whom 
we had not beheld. 

There are many symptoms of this indwell- 
ing.— John vi. 55 tells us that it is pro- 


ductive of a great hunger, so that the soul 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 49 


which is most conscious of Christ within 
feeds eagerly on His Body, which is bread 
indeed, and His Blood, which is wine in- 
deed. 1 John iti. 24 tells us that the soul 
which He indwells is an obedient one; 
1 John iv. 15, that it falters not in its con- 
fessions; 1 John iv. 16, that it faints not in 
its love. “My soul,” says the Psalmist, 
“follows hard after Thee, and Thy right 
hand sustains me.” How often we have 
found ourselves in the company of those 
who have been unable to pronounce our 
shibboleth as we do! But as we have 
marked the indications of the soul’s close 
following of God, we have felt the out- 
flowing of a Divine love. 

The knowledge of this mighty mystery 
breaks in glory —The Apostle expatiates on 


the glory of the mystery. As the mystery 
D 


50 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


of light breaks in the glory of the rainbow, 
as the mystery of the hidden root breaks 
in the glory of the flower, as the mystery 
of love in the maiden’s heart breaks in the 
radiance with which she greets her lover, 
so when the soul apprehends that it is 
really one with Christ, there is a lightsome- 
ness, an elasticity, a blessedness which tell 
of the glory which has come in full tide. 
The glorious fact of Christ's indwelling 
enriches the soul—The Apostle speaks of the 
riches of the glory of the mystery (Col. 1. 7). 
The indwelling Saviour does not rob us of 
any of those natural gifts and graces with 
which we are endowed, but surrounds them 
with an atmosphere in which they become 
most vigorous. Just as the common plants 
of our northern climate burst out with new 


profusion when transplanted to southern 


CHRIST’S INDWELLING 51 


climates, so a very ordinary intellect, ima- 
gination, and emotion will obtain an alto- 
gether new potency and beauty as soon as 
this truth is apprehended. 

Gradually the light of this glory will 
possess us. In the early morning the sun- 
rays strike upon the side of a deep well, 
ilumining it for only a few yards from 
the earth’s surface, but as every hour ad- 
vances, and the sun rises in the heavens, 
the beams strike lower down the well-side, 
revealing more and more of it, until when 
the sun stands in mid-heaven the beams 
strike perpendicularly downward, and the 
whole well to the bottom is illuminated. So 
it is with this blessed consciousness. It 
may be faint and feeble to-day, but, if you 
yield yourself to it, it will grow and deepen 


until the whole being responds to it, and 


52 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


all its inferior kingdoms become the king- 
doms of our God and of His Christ. Then 
the prayer of the Mediator shall be realised : 
“] in them, and Thou in Me, that they 
may be perfected in one.” 

It is in the undivided and pure heart that 
the Saviour finds His home. If we subor= 
dinate all desires and hopes, all aims and 
ambitions, to His government and for His 
glory, He will assuredly come to abide. 
If we confess that other Lords beside Him 
have had dominion over us, but that by 
Him we desire to make mention of His 
name alone, our whole body shall be sud- 


denly filled with the light of His indwelling. 


IV 


THE PURE INTENTION OF THE 
SOUL REALISED THROUGH THE 
HIOLY ‘SPIRIT 


IV 


THE PURE INTENTION OF THE 
SOUL REALISED THROUGH THE 
HOLY SPIRIF 


IN Paul’s greatest epistle, that to the Romans, 
there is a paragraph which speaks of the 
three-fold groaning of Creation, of the 
Saints, and of the Spirit. In each case 
the groans are not unto death but unto 
life, they indicate the throes of birth. And 
we learn also that the groans of the Spirit 
are in harmony with the mind and will of 
God. ‘He that searcheth the hearts knoweth 
what is the mind of the Spirit, because He 
maketh intercession for the saints according 


to the will of God” (Rom. viii. 27). 
55 


56 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


In this marvellous passage, the depths of 
which pass human understanding, we have 
to notice first, that it announces and ac- 
centuates the literal Presence with us of the 
Comforter. If one were asked to indicate 
in a word the difference between the Church 
of to-day and the Church of the first age, 
surely it might be summed up thus—that 
the early Christians believed, as we do not, 
in the literal Presence with them of the 
Holy Spirit. 

Every age has been inclined to think that 
there was more of God in previous ages 
than in itself. Thus, when Jesus Christ 
was pursuing His ministry in Galilee and 
Jerusalem, teaching as none ever taught, 
working miracles on the leper and the dead, 
and showing forth in His character and 


life the very splendour of the nature of 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 57 


God, His contemporaries were constantly 
referring to the ancient past, when God 
gave His people deliverance from Egypt, 
made a way through the Red Sea, rained 
manna out of heaven, and led them into 
the promised land. It seemed to them that 
there was more of God in the age of the 
Exodus, than in the Life which was being 
enacted before their eyes. 

It may be that the Church of to-day is 
making the same mistake. She looks back 
upon the first preaching of the evangel, as 
having been the unique time of God's resi- 
dence amongst men, a residence which has 
been withdrawn and can never be replaced ; 
whereas, if we look at the matter in the 
light of our Master’s teaching on the eve 
of His death, we shall discover that, as 


distinct as Christ’s Advent was the Advent 


58 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


of the Spirit; and as distinct as His work 
was for thirty-three years, is the work of 
the Holy Spirit in the Church. Would 
that, instead of straining our eyes into the 
remote past or into the dim future, to 
detect the presence of God, we dared to 
believe that the Holy Spirit zs come, that 
He zs here, that the only thing which 
keeps Him from manifesting Himself in His 
glorious might is our unbelief, our hardness 
of heart, our occupation with our dead 
selves! If once the Church of God be- 
lieved that, she would go forth “fair as 
the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible 
as an army with banners.” 

It seems as if there are four different 
groups of people in regard to this matter. 
The first group are little else than admirers 


of Christ. They have heard Him speak, 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 59 


look upon Him as the Divine Teacher, in 
some sense view Him as the Saviour of 
the world, but they have never gone as 
far as Calvary. They look upon the Spirit 
of God merely as a breath or influence, 
and have never appreciated His Divine 
Present Power. 

There is a second group, who have gone 
a step further. These know that Jesus 
Christ is more than the Divine Teacher— 
that He died upon the Cross, and by His 
precious death made propitiation for sin; 
but they never get beyond that Cross. 
Beholding only the Blood, they have no 
idea that there is anything more, by which 
the glorious benefits of our Saviour’s death 
can become efficacious. 

There is a ¢htvd group of people. These 


are always in that upper room, always 


60 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
engaged in agonising prayer, always en- 
treating that the Spirit of God may come, 
not realising that He has come, that the 
rushing sound of wind has been heard, the 
fire has burnt, the footfall of His Advent 
has been recognised. Ah! happy are they 
who have passed into the fourth group, 
who look back on Pentecost as a definite 
moment, when the third Person of the 
Blessed Trinity came to reside in the 
Church, so that as Jesus incarnated Himself 
in the body born of the Virgin, so the 
Holy Spirit has definitely incarnated Him- 
self in the hearts and lives of those who 
believe. 

THE HOLY SPpIRIT’s LITERAL PERSON- 
ALITY.—On the eve of His betrayal our 
Lord said that “Another” should come. 


Now is it at all possible that He would 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 61 


have been content that His successor should 
be an influence or a breath? Does not the 
fact that he spoke of Axother, as coming to 
take His place indicate that in His judgment 
and forethought that Other was to be as 
distinct a Personality as Himself, leading, 
searching, guiding, encouraging, witnessing, 
and inspiring. 

Let us pass from those days to the early 
Acts of the Apostles. We find the Spirit of 
God in the Church so personally, that when 
Ananias and Sapphira conspired together, 
Peter warned them that they were deceiving 
the Holy Ghost. You cannot deceive an 
influence. We remember also, that in the 
case of Peter and Cornelius, it was the 
Holy Spirit who sent the message which 
brought these two men together for the 


new great departure of the Church in 


62 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, ‘The 


Spirit said unto him.” Afterwards it was 
He who said, “Separate Me Barnabas and 
Saul for the work whereunto / have called 
them’; and, lastly, in the great council of 
the Church, the Apostles said: “It seemed 
good to the Holy Ghost and to us.” He 
was as real a Person as they were. All 
through the Gospels, especially in the 
closing scenes, and markedly in the Acts 
of the Apostles, the Holy Spirit is spoken 
of as being the representative of Christ, the 
one Divine Person who is in the very heart 
of the Church. 

For one crowning proof let us look again 
into this marvellous verse quoted in our 
opening paragraph. It makes a distinct 
reference to the Personality of God the 


Father, and as distinct a reference to the 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 63 
Personality of the Holy Ghost. “He that 


searcheth the heart” —who can this be but 
the Omniscient God who searches all things, 
the First Person of the Holy Trinity? It 
is He who searches the heart, and knows 
what is the mind of the Spirit. The Spirit 
has a mind. Evidently, then, there is as 
true a distinction between the personality 
of the Father and the personality of the 
Spirit, as there was of old in the Incarnation 
between the personality of the Father and 
the personality of the Son. 

It has been asserted that the Spirit of 
God is only another name for our own 
energy; but notice how clear a discrimina- 
tion the Apostle makes between the Spirit 
of God, God who searches the heart, and 
the heart of man. God, who searches the 


human heart, knows what is the mznd of the 


64 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


Spirit, who is resident in che heart. Here 
we have God who is searching our hearts, 
and the Spirit of God immanent in the heart 
as its guest, and the heart which is yielded 
voluntarily to welcome Him. As Jesus inter- 
cedes in heaven, so does the Holy Spirit 
intercede in the heart of every believer, 
and in the heart of the Church. There is 
the distinct voice raised by the Mediator 
on the Throne, and a distinct response 
raised by the Paraclete on earth, and these 
two are one. The Son in the glory and 
the Spirit in the heart intercede in unison. 
li there tweres 0 .other based in the 
whole Bible, these words not only open up 
the mystery of the Eternal Trinity, Father, 
Son, and Spirit, but make clear that the 
Spirit of God has His residence, not in 


illimitable space, nor yet wholly on the 


PAasOUGH THE: HOLY: SPIRIT-_65 
throne of God. As the Second Person of 


the Trinity condescended to be born of a 
virgin, so the Blessed Spirit of God has 
condescended to our hearts and lives to 
reproduce in us the image of Jesus Christ. 
Oh, soul of man or woman, dost thou 
understand, perceive, and realise, that if thou 
art regenerate, if believing and penitent, the 
Holy Spirit of God is actually resident 
within thee? He may have been grieved, 
quenched, but He is still there. Let every- 
thing which limits the Holy Spirit be 
removed, so that His presence may be 
allowed free scope; and let every whit of 
the inner Temple say, Glory (Ps. xxix. 9). 
“THE MIND OF THE SPIRIT.”—Every per- 
sonality has a mind, a thought, a distinct 
intention; and we who have received the 


Spirit into our hearts must believe that He 
E 


66 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


has come for a purpose. Below the veil 
of superficial thought and emotion in the 
subconscious depths of our soul-life, the 
Spirit of God is most certainly brooding, 
as once He moved on chaos, producing 
order out of confusion, light out of darkness. 
Each is a universe; in each nature an 
abyss; in each the Spirit works. And that 
is our hope; for if it were not so we could 
never become saints. Our one hope is 
that the Spirit of God is literally within; 
and that He is there with a mind, ze. with 
a fixed thought, purpose, and intention. 

So far as we understand it, the Divine 
intention in the creation of the universe 
was that God might realise and reproduce 
Himself in His works. For this purpose 
He began with the inorganic, and pursued 


His way upwards to the organic; next, 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 67 


there was the marvellous in-breathing of 
the breath of life. Afterwards, the un- 
folding purpose of God climbed, like a 
spiral staircase, until the lower creation was 
finished, and a platform was provided upon 
which His consummate art should have full 
scope. Next, man was made, and a great 
step forward was taken for the fuller reali- 
sation of God in His creation, Through long 
ages the human mind was conscious of the 
Divine strivings within it, but the progress 
was small and slow, until in the person of 
Jesus, He realised Himself perfectly, and in 
an ecstasy the Divine voice resounded from 
Heaven, saying, “This is My beloved Son in 
Whom I am well pleased.” In Jesus Christ 
the Divine Ideal was realised perfectly. That 
was the moment for which the ages had been 


travailing, for which the Jewish race had been 


68 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


separated from other races, and for which 
the long discipline of the Old Testament 
religion had been preparatory. 

Throughout the earthly life of our Lord 
the Spirit dominated and moulded His 
human nature, He rested on Him “ without 
measure,” and this inevitably exposed Him 
to hatred and death; but, through death 
He passed up into the glory, and the 
fulness of God more and more _ indwelt 
and glorified His human body. He is 
the “Man Christ Jesus,” and also “God 
manifest in the flesh.” It has pleased the 
Father that in Him all fulness should dwell. 

But that is not all. It was not enough 
for God to realise Himself in one lily flower. 
Pentecost signifies that this glorified human 
nature is to be repeated through all the ages 


in those whom He has made His own. 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 69 


That is “the manifestation of the sons of 
God.” God could not be content to realise 
Himself in Jesus Christ alone, by the Spirit 
He desires to repeat Himself in each of His 
people. We are but infants in swaddling 
clothes, the work has only just begun. We 
are mumbling but the inarticulate utterances 
of babyhood, but the Spirit of God has 
entered our hearts with a sublime purpose, 
an intention to consummate the likeness of 
Christ, which cannot be disappointed. This 
is His mind. Often we say, “I have made 
up my mind what to do,” or “This is my 
mind, I will go through with it”; so the 
Holy Ghost has come into our hearts with 
His mind made up, and, if we will let Him, 
He is resolved to reproduce Jesus Christ in 
us, so that we may be conformed to the 


image of God’s Son. 


70 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


Do you understand this? Do you know 
that some day you are going to satisfy God? 
Do you realise that somehow, somewhere, 
sometime, God is set on making in you a 
counterpart of Jesus, on which He will look 
and say: “I am satisfied!” 

THE EXPRESSION OF THE SPiRIT’S PUR- 
POSE. “With gvroanings that cannot be 
uttered.’— They are too deep for speech. 
There is agony in a groan; and there is 
agony with the Spirit of God at our earth- 
liness, at our sensuality, at our repeated 
plunges into the sea of ink, at our return 
like the dog to its vomit. It is keen pain 
to Him each time we permit an outbreak 
of sin; there is suffering when we know 
the better and deliberately choose the worst, 
There is the groan, like that of Christ at the 


grave of Lazarus, or His tears over Jerusalem. 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 71 


What is the remorse that we experience, but 
our response to these groanings of the Spirit ? 

A groan not only expresses agony at 
sin and failure, but is inarticulate. ‘That 
cannot be uttered,” indicates that the Spirit 
of God has yearnings which cannot be 
expressed in our humanity as it is now. 
There is no musician who has not groaned 
at his inarticulate expression of the perfect 
song; he has heard harmonies which he 
cannot beat out in any notes that he can 
obtain from an earthly orchestra — songs 
without words. Does not every writer get 
glimpses of truths for which he has no 
language? Does not expression fail us when 
in love? We say over and over again, 
“T love you! I love you!” Love surpasses 
all our speech; it is illimitable. 


When the Spirit enters the human heart, 


72 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


He is so restrained, so compressed. He 
fills the stellar spaces, and when He is 
crowded into one little soul, it stifles Him. 
He wants so much for us. He is so eager, 
so passionate, so intense, His groanings for 
and over us cannot be put into human 
speech, and God who is searching ihe heart 
hears the groans of His own Spirit, grieving 
at our lethargy, our tardiness to respond, 
our relapses——- groanings which, if only we 
had given Him better heed, might have 
been saved. God knows all about this, and 
how He makes intercession in us and for 
us according to His will. 

What are we to do? First, be very 
thankful that the Holy Spirit is within. Let 
us never doubt it, but hold to it as our 
anchor. Second, we must let Him have 


His way. Do not thwart, do not grieve, 


THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT 73 


do not quench, Then as the marble chips, 
the image will grow; and there will be a 
fifth gospel added to those according to 
Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, the gospel in 
our lives of the gradual reproduction of the 
image and nature of our Lord. 

There is no uncertainty that this result 
will be achieved, perhaps not to-day nor 
to-morrow, but at last. The groans of the 
Holy Spirit guarantee that it shall be so, be- 
cause throughout this magnificent paragraph 
they are evidently the groans of birth not 
death, of hope not despair. ‘The creature 
groaneth and ¢ravazleth in pain... .” 

We have no hope in ourselves. So fickle, 
so unstable, so changeable are we, that we 
dare not reckon on any vows we swear or 
resolutions we forge. As likely as not we 


shall fall away within an hour. We have 


74 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


proved the brittleness of our heroic hours 
to carry us through great crises of the 
soul; but everything is altered, so soon as 
we learn that we are the subjects of the 
anxious heed of the Spirit of God. 

When He puts His hand to the plough 
He never looks back. There are no un- 
finished pictures or torsos in His workshop. 
He has made, and He will bear; He has 
begun, and He will perfect; He has created 
desires and ideals, which He will gratify, 
We are the children of His love, and He 
can withhold from us no good thing. If 
we resist and grieve, so much. the worse 
for us, so much more acute our pain, but 
to yield to Him is to hasten the fulfilment 
of His eternal purpose of bringing many 
sons unto glory, and conforming them to 


the image of the Son, 


V 


THE PURITY OF THE SOUL'S IN- 
TENTION ABOUNDING IN JOY 


V 


giala PURITY OF THE sOUL'S IN- 
TENTION ABOUNDING IN JOY 


THE sacred writers are not oblivious of the 
stern and sorrowful realities of human life. 
They have their hand on the fluttering pulse 
of humanity; they are keenly alive to human 
hopes and fears, the yearnings and dis- 
appointments, the crescendo and diminuendo 
passages, which climb to ecstasy and de- 
scend to despair. No eolian harp is so 
sensitive to the breath of the air as the 
Bible to the infinite pathos and dread of 
men’s innermost thoughts. But to open it 


as at hazard, is to come, almost certainly, 
77 


“8 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
on some passage which is as joy-making as 
Milton’s “L’Allegro,” and more. 

No lover of our great English speech can 
afford to be ignorant of the contrasted beauties 
of the “Il Penseroso” and “ L’Allegro.” For 
the young student of the language in which 
Addison wrote, Burke harangued, and Milton 
sang, there is no better exercise than to 
contrast these two poems, comparing them 
line by line, and noticing how the same 
natural or architectural objects produce dif- 
ferent emotional effects, according to the 
standpoint from which they are viewed. 
The morning light or the evening glow will 
make ali the difference between gaiety and 
pensiveness, the light heart or the sad one. 
And is not this the secret of “rejoicing 
always.’ The main features of our life may 


be dark and sombre, its daily round mono- 


ABOUNDING IN JOY 79 


tonous, its upward clamber difficult, its pro- 
gress a hand-to-hand fight—it may seem 
impossible to rejoice in any one of these, 
considered in itself. But the aspect of 
everything is altered when we bring “the 
Lord” into it. We cannot always rejoice 
in our circumstances, but we can always 
rejoice in Him; and we can rejoice in our 
circumstances when we consider them in 
the light of His permission, of His tender 
care, and of the results of His glory, which 
they are being caused to subserve. We 
can always rejoice in the Lord, that He is 
near us—strong, sweet, true—just as the 
tenant of the almshouse may toddle forth 
to sun his rheumatic limbs in the genial 
warmth of early summer, forgetting for a 
moment the trials and twinges of his lot. 


The Psalmists are always calling us to 


80 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


joy; and in this they must reflect the main 
trend and spirit of the national life of their 
time. Poets interpret and reflect the spirit 
of the age in which they live. In the music 
of the Temple, which resounded with the 
melody of harp and psalter and instruments 
of ten strings, the inner heart of Israel 
found its appropriate expression. Perhaps 
it was the influence of the sunny air; per- 
haps of the simple, innocent, natural life of 
the people; perhaps from the freedom of 
great wealth on the one hand, or grinding 
poverty on the other. But certain it is 
that the Hebrew people must have reached 
a high standard of religious and natural 
gleefulness, judging from the exuberance of 
the Psalter and certain passages of the 
Prophets. At the end of the Psalter the 


organist pulls out all the stops in the organ 


ABOUNDING IN JOY 81 


of Nature, and pours forth a perfect torrent 
of praise, from the piping melody of a 


thrush to the roar of the ocean bass. 


“Sing unto the Lord a new song, 
And His praise in the assembly of the saints, 
Let Israel rejoice in Him that made him, 
Let the children of Zion be joyful in their King. 
Let them praise His name in the dance ; 
Let them sing praises unto Him with the timbrel 
and harp.” 


“Round your faces,” said an old-fashioned 
Methodist local preacher. I often think of 
it when I look on the faces of some re- 
ligious gatherings. The countenances are 
so expressionless and heavy. Some one in 
my hearing the other day called them 
“lumpish.” The word is not classical, and 
I am not enamoured with it, but it is very 


expressive, Christian people, when they 
F 


82 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


come together in their places of religious 
meeting, often present an appearance of 
insufferable gloom or depression. Why is 
it? Perhaps it is considered respectable, or 
God-honouring, or more consistent with re- 
ligion. Years ago our fathers were wont 
to refer to conversion as “becoming serious.” 
They would say, ‘So-and-so has become 
serious.” And it is in keeping with this 
expression that in some hymn-books, in the 
version of the Hundredth Psalm, the line 


which was originally written— 

“Him serve with 7th, His praise forth tell,” 
has been altered into— 

“Him serve with /ear, His praise forth tell.” 


Surely we need, then, to heed the message 
of the Methodist preacher, and round our 


faces, so that the sparkling eye and the 


ABOUNDING IN JOY 83 
happy expression may tell the peace and 
joy in God which reigns within. Miss 
Havergal gave, as her dying message, “The 
world needs drvight Christians.” 

Rejoice in the Lord alway, for joy ts strength. 
—Nehemiah (viii. 10) showed an accurate 
knowledge of human nature when he stayed 
the weeping of the people, as they stood 
condemned and _ conscience- stricken be- 
neath the reading of the law. The walls of 
Jerusalem were hardly finished, the natural 
defences as yet incomplete, the enemies of 
the newly returned exiles on the alert—it 
would have been suicidal on the part of 
the leaders to have allowed the people to 
be overwhelmed with sorrow. “Go home,” 
they said, “eat the fat and drink the sweet, 
neither be ye grieved, for the jot of the 
Lord is your strength.” During the late 


84 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


war, we were told of the scion of a noble 
house who had escaped from captivity at 
Pretoria being able to live for four days on 
some sticks of chocolate, because he had 
begun to taste the inexpressible joy of 
liberty. What cannot men do when their 
hearts are glad and free? Joy gives wings to 
the feet, sinews to the legs, muscles to the 
arms, elasticity to every motion. Rejoice, 
rejoice, rejoice in the Lord and always. 
Rejoice in the Lord alway, for joy ts attrac- 
tive-—The first thing that led me to seek 
the secret of God was the exuberant joy 
which I discerned beaming forth from the 
noble nature of a young man ae had re- 
cently yielded himself entirely to God. What 
he said was probably not remarkable. At 
least, it has long ago faded from my mind. 


But I said to myself, “Here is one who is 


ABOUNDING IN JOY 85 


happy in his religious life. Not condemned 
for the past, not conscious of a cloud between 
himself and God, not dreading the future. 
His religion is a light on his inner heart, 
and the glow of it is on his face.” To see 
it was to hunger for it, and to desire it was 
to obtain. Yes, there is a spring that rises 
in the soul, and flows over in musical ripples 
on the face and in the speech, which is 
infinitely attractive to those who have just 
religion enough to make them miserable. 
If only we were happy in our religious life, 
with the sparkle, the light, the song that 
Christ gives, many would come around to 
ask for our secret, whose joy has been like 
the brief crackling of thorns under a pot. 
Rejoice in the Lord, for joy ts proof against 
temptation.—The evil one is foiled by song 


as much as by prayer, and perhaps more. 


86 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


What can Sennacherib do when the virgin 
daughter of Zion laughs him to scorn? 
What can Ammon and Seir do against 
Jehoshaphat when he inaugurates the battle 
by appointing certain to sing unto the Lord, 
and praise the beauty of His holiness? As 
the microbes of disease cannot exist in the 
sunlight, neither can temptation succeed 
against a joyous, singing heart. Song is an 
antiseptic environment—a bank of sunbeams 
—which is utterly impregnable to all the 
assaults of the adversary. 

Rejoice in the Lord, for joy is very much the 
matter of the will—We can choose whether 
to look on the dark or the bright side of 
things, on the possibilities of failure or the 
probabilities of success; on the bank of 
clouds that stand like Alps on the horizon, 


or the blue skies that canopy overhead. 


ABOUNDING IN JOY 87 


Say to yourself sometimes, “I am going to 
be happier; I refuse to give way to these 
depressed and saddening thoughts; I am 
resolved to turn from my circumstances to 
my Saviour.” Do as David did, when he 
took himself to pieces and spoke to his soul, 
as though it were some other self: “Why 
art thou cast down, oh my soul, and why 
art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou 
in God, for I will yet praise Him.” Be 
glad, that some day you will have reason to 
be glad; rejoice because the sun is shining 
down the valley, in the direction you are 
going; rejoice, because weeping can only 
endure for the night, whilst joy is eternal 
and everlasting; rejoice that you have such 
a God, in whom are beauty and strength. 
Say with Habakkuk, “Though the fig-tree 


shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in 


88 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


the vine, the labour of the olive shall fail, 
and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock 
be cut off from the fold, and no herd be 
in the stalls, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, 
I will joy in the God of my salvation.” 
There is always a patch of blue in the 
darkest sky—look at that; it will grow. 
Count your mercies; God always leaves us 
more than He takes. If you don’t feel like 
singing, be sure to start a song; the singing 
voice will often stir the weary songless 
heart and it will catch the contagion. Hide 
yourself in God, put Him between yourself 
and your anxieties or your foes—even when 
your feet are fast in the stocks begin to 
chant some old Psalm, till the prison rocks 
and the chains fall from off your wrists. 
The perennial source of joy ts the undivided 


heart.—When we are divided between many 


ABOUNDING IN JOY 89 


conflicting interests, halting between two 
opinions, trying to serve two masters, dis- 
tracted by the cares of many things, which 
enter in to choke the word, we cannot be 
really joyful. But when the whole current 
of our being sets in towards God, wiping 
out the minor ruffles and cross-currents of 
the stream; when we have no motive save 
to please our master Christ and do His 
will; when we are the gilded temples for 
His indwelling, the channels for His out- 
working, then our peace begins to flow as 
a river, and having peace with God, we 
rejoice in hope of His glory, and rejoice 
in tribulations also, and rejoice in God 
Himself through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
(ROOl v5.12, 3,.1 8.) 

Probably we shall do wisely, not to seek 


joy as an end in itself, let us rather culti- 


90 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


vate the conditions out of which joy springs. 
It is always good when children sing. The 
song assures you that the heart is not dis- 
tracted with anxiety, or wrong-doing, or 
trouble. Singing is the overflow of a con- 
tented, quiet heart, which brims beyond 
its holding. When the burnt-offering began, 
in the old sacred story, the song of the 
Lord began also; and when once the whole 
soul is laid as a burnt-offering on God’s 
altar, the song begins which shall never 


Cease. 


vi 


THE PURITY OF INTENTION, THE 
KEY TO OUR LORD’S LIFE 
AND OURS 


VI 


THE PURITY OF INTENTION, THE 
KEY, 10> OUR =LORDS~ LIFE 
AND OURS 


AN Eastern prince was accustomed to retire 
for an hour every morning to a certain 
chamber in his palace, which was carefully 
reserved from every common eye, and in 
which he said that he found the secret of 
his life. When the room was entered, it 
was discovered that it was furnished like 
a shepherd’s hut, for his forefathers were 
shepherds. There, with the most simple 
surroundings, he had been accustomed to 
meditate upon his past, his present, and 


his future. 
93 


94 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


I want to conduct you into Christ’s inner 
chamber in which His Spirit dwelt, and 
the door of which He has left open for 
us, that we also may enter and dwell there. 
The text which more than others introduces 
us into the inner secret of our Saviour’s 
life is given in His own words: ‘As the 
living Father hath sent Me, and I live by 
the Father; so he that eateth Me, even he 
shall live by Me” (John vi. 57). From these 
words we may infer that what the Father 
was to Jesus, Jesus is willing to be to all 
who believe; and what Jesus said of His 
relationship to the Father, we may say of 
their relationship to Him, and we may read 
these words thus: “As the living Saviour 
hath sent me, so I live by the Saviour.” 

If devout souls would take the Gospel 


according to John, and substitute “Christ” 


THE KEY TO OUR LORD'S LIFE 95 


for “the Father,” and hang on Christ as 
Christ hung on God, they would not require 
a book of private devotion other than that 
which is furnished by this golden book of 
the inner life. 

Our Saviour might have lived an indepen- 
dent life—He was “the Holy One” before 
He stooped to us, and deliberately laid 
aside the use of the attributes of His God- 
head. During His human life He might at 
any moment have availed Himself of those 
divine attributes, and have fulfilled His 
mighty works in their power. Whenever 
He was hungry, instead of waiting for 
Peter or others to provide, He might have 
used His creative power to transform the 
very stones into bread, Had He so chosen, 
He might have planned His own life; and 


from the transfiguration mountain have 


96 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


stepped into paradise. He might have 
spoken His own words, and poured forth 
such floods of eloquence as would have 
shone on the pages of literature with dazz- 
ling brilliancy. He might have sought His 
own glory as the supreme end of His life, 
so displaying the wealth of His nature that 
His deity would have been apparent to all. 

Moreover, Satan was always urging Him to 
do iz.—Straight from the river Jordan He 
was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness 
to be tempted of the devil. In the first 
assault the Evil One said to Him: “Thou 
art the Son of God; Thou hast just been 
claimed as such; Thou hast all power; use 
that power for Thyself, and make these 
stones bread.” 

That was the crucial point in our Lord’s 


life, and in“ effect He replied: “It is not 


THE KEY TO OUR LORD'S LIFE 97 
My desire to be other than a dependent 


human being. Inasmuch as those whom I 


have come to save must learn the lesson 


of depending upon My Father and Me, I 
also will learn by personal experience what 
it is to depend by faith absolutely upon My 
Father. Man shall not live by bread alone, 
but by every word of God; and I will wait 
until My Father sends Me the help I need.” 
Afterwards, and throughout His earthly life, 
the same suggestion was ever being hissed 
in His ear, “Save Thyself” (Matt. xvi. 22, 23), 
but never once did He heed or yield to it, 
till on the Cross He surrendered His spirit 
to the Father, and trusted Him to raise 
Him from the dead. 

Dependence was the law of His life.—In 
Hits birth the Father gave Him life. “As 
the Father had life in Himself, He gave 

G 


98 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


unto the Son to have life in Himself.” It 
was not His own life, and after thirty-three 
years the Father asked again for it. When 
dying, Jesus said: ‘Father, receive My life.” 
He held His life in trust—God gave it, God 
maintained it, God required it, and at every 
heart-throb the Son said to the Father, 
“T live by Thee.” God was as much the 
breath of Christ’s life as the air is of - 
our natural life. The unaltering attitude of 
Christ was that of receiving life and breath 
and all things from the Father. Thus we 
should live, always drawing upon Christ, 
the fountain of hfe; He came that we 
might have life, and have it more abun- 
dantly, but we must receive the abundance 
of His grace if we would reign. As branches 
we must derive the vine-sap for our nourish- 


ment and vigour. 


THE KEY TO OUR LORD'S LIFE 99 


So in the p/an of our Lord’s life. Some- 
times He would say to His disciples: “Let 
us go across the lake and rest.” But He 
was quite willing to lay aside His cherished 
purpose when the people hurried around 
the lake and asked to be taught and fed. 
In their intrusion on His quiet He saw the 
emergence of His Father’s plan. Once when 
He was on the way to Jairus’ home a 
woman who had an issue of blood stopped 
Him, I know not for how long, and in the 
touch of her finger He saw the intrusion 
of the Father’s plan for the day, and at 
once arrested His own plan to follow it. 
In that wonderful fifth chapter of John, He 
says: “The Son can originate nothing— 
but what He sees the Father doing.” When 
He was in Joseph’s shop, as a young boy of 


twelve or fourteen, and saw Joseph making 


too THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


yokes for the oxen, He studied carefully 
how he made them, and fashioned the yoke 
on which He was working after the same 
pattern and shape. Afterwards, when He 
went forth on His life’s ministry, He was 
ever watching for the development of the 
Father’s plan, and the things which God 
did in the unseen and eternal world, He 
repeated before the eyes of men. So His 
plan was the plan of God. 

Jesus also depended upon the Father for 
His words. In one of the most beautiful 
translations of the Revised Version, in the 
fiftieth chapter of Isaiah, we are told how 
the Father, morning by morning, bent over 
the Son and awakened Him, whispering 
into His ear the words which He was to 
utter, and teaching Him how to speak 


words in season to them who were weary, 


THE KEY TO OUR LORD'S LIFE tor 


so that as Jesus went forth to teach the 
people day by day He did not speak His 
own words, but the words which the Father 
gave Him. It was indeed “by the Spirit” 
that He gave His last command to the 
Apostles whom He had chosen. 

Then as to Hs miracles. In that wonder- 
ful fourteenth chapter of John, Jesus says: 
“The words that I say unto you, I speak 
not from Myself, but the Father abiding in 
Me doeth zs works.” We might almost 
say that we do not know Jesus, because 
He was so completely dependent upon the 
Father. His words, His works, His life 
were the Father’s, and in Jesus we do not 
see Jesus but the Father mirrored, as heaven 
in a Clear lake. So also with As will, He 
was possessed of a will of His own, because 


He said, “Not My will”; but we remember 


102 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
that He also said, “Not My will but Zhzne 


be done.” 

We know, too, how He sought the Father's 
glory. He said, “I have glorified Thee on 
earth.” It was as though it mattered little 
what men said or thought of Him. His 
only care was to afford them deeper and 
truer conceptions of the Father, whom He 
came to declare. He pledged Himself to 
answer our prayers, “That the Father might 
be glorified in the Son”; and in His last 
prayer He said, “I would wish to be glori- 
fied, My Father, only that I may the better 
glorify Thee.” It was as though the Lord 
Jesus were only ambitious to be known and 
recognised by men, that He might unfold 
God’s character, and attract to Him. 

Lf our blessed Lord chose this life of depend- 
ence out of all possible lives that He might 


THE KEY TO OUR LORD'S LIFE 103 


have lived, ts tt not wisest, most blessed, most 
Christlike, for us to give up living the in- 
dependent life in the flesh, and to begin from 
this moment to depend upon Christ as Christ 
depended upon God? 

If our Master held His life moment by 
moment at God’s dictation, should not we 
shape our plans and expend our life as 
Jesus wills? If He allowed His plan always 
to give way to God’s plan, is it not evident 
that, instead of scheming, planning, and striv- 
ing to get our own way, we ought always 
to be looking out for Azs plan so as to 
yield submissively before it? If He gave 
up His words for the words which the 
Father put into His lips, do we not greatly 
mistake in trying to elaborate our sentences 
and weave the web of bewitching words 


instead of day by day waiting to receive the 


104 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


words our Saviour gives us? If we would 
depend upon the Master for the power of 
His life, opening all our being, and pre- 
ferring His power imparted to any power 
of our own, I need not say how our lives 
would at once become divine and marvel- 


lously powerful. 


How CAN JESUS BECOME TO US WHAT THE 


FATHER WAS TO HIM? 


First: We must be quiet; we must wait. 
In all music there are rests, and sometimes 
whole bars of rests; so there must be in 
every life the still hour for allowing God 
by the Holy Spirit to form His Son within 
us. Jesus often climbed into the mountain 
solitudes, apparently to give time for the 


thought of God the Father to fill His 


THE KEY TOCOUR’ LORD’S EIFE: ‘10s 


nature, and there must be times in our 
life when we give an opportunity for Christ 
to assert Himself and impress Himself 
absorbingly on the vision. 

Second: We must be sure to make Jesus 
jirst in everything. The first words in our 
Bible are very significant—“In the begin- 
ning God.” The story of every day ought 
to be commenced with the words: In the 
beginning the Word. He must be the Alpha, 
the first, the beginning. If, before you rush 
into a new enterprise, you would sit quietly 
down and be sure that Jesus Christ is first, 
it would save you from landing in many a 
quagmire. Let Jesus be first in every plan, 
every act, every sermon, every letter and 
interview. All must be begun, continued, 
and ended in Him. 


Third: We must make the glory of Jesus 


106 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


our aim, We may not always feel it to be 
our aim, but must choose it to be so. Our 
will must lie in that direction, as a needle 
which is to be magnetised lies along the 
magnet. Always remember this great prin- 
ciple of the Christian’s life, that when you 
cannot feel a thing, you must choose it by an 
act of your will, and then ask God to create 
in you the corresponding emotion, as the 
motive of your action. Let the glory of 
Jesus be your aim in every service. Let 
His glory be the thought, whether you eat 
or drink, or whatsoever you may do. This 
must be the supreme purpose, whether 
we are engaged in making money, in house- 
keeping, or in mission work. Our prayers 
for the conversion of our friends are often 
hindered by the imperfection of the motives 


that prompt them. We wish them saved 


THE KEY TO OUR LORD'S LIFE 107 


that they may no longer bring misery and 
disaster into the home. To succeed in 
prayer, our motive must be pure, and we 
must be willing to put the glory of Christ 
as the prime consideration in the conver- 
sion of those we love. 

Fourth: We must meet God’s will in every 
circumstance. Draw a circle, the circle of 
God’s will, then step into it, and keep in 
it all your life; so that whatever happens 
may reach you through the encircling will 
of God. Joseph’s brethren may put him 
in the pit, but it is not they who sent him 
into Egypt, but God. Judas may bring the 
cup, but Jesus says: “The cup which JZy 
Father hath given Me, shall I not drink 
it?” When we are living in the will of 
God, our enemy may shoot his poisoned 


arrows against us: they will glance aside 


108 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


unless God wills otherwise; but if He 
wishes them to strike, by the time they 
reach us they have become God’s permis- 
sive will for us. 

Lastly: We must reckon on God. We have 
no right to be constantly feeling our pulse 
and worrying about our faith. Let us look 
away from faith to the object of faith. It 
is better to have the least faith in Christ, 
than the greatest faith in our faith. To 
obtain strong faith, reckon on the faith- 
fulness of God. Begin to count God faithful. 
It is useless to question whether you have 
faith enough to believe a note of hand; 
the question is, whether the man who signed 
it is worthy of trust. 

Go over these steps again: be still: make 
Christ first in everything: live absolutely for 


Him: receive from Him all your words to 


THE KEY TO OUR LORD’S LIFE 10g 


speak, all your works to do, all the power 
of your life: when accosted by any sudden 
emergency or need, seek from Him, who 
sent the demand, the power to meet it: 
reckon absolutely upon Christ: meet His 
will in every circumstance. Such was the 
way that Jesus lived towards His Father ; 
live so towards Him. 

You may inquire how it was that the 
human nature of Christ became so abso- 
lutely yielded to the Father. The answer 
comes from one of the profound sentences 
in the Bible: “Who, through the Eternal 
Spirit, offered Himself without spot to God.” 
When our Lord was baptized, He said, by 
symbol and metaphor: “I come to do Thy 
will, O my God; yea, Thy law is within 
My heart.” And immediately there came 


on Him the power of the Eternal Spirit. It 


110 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


was in the power of that Spirit that He 
yielded Himself to God, without spot or 
blemish. If, then, we are to live towards 
Christ as Christ lived towards the Father, 
we must be energised by the same Spirit. 
Whatever our station or occupation, we may 
resolve to live that life from this hour, but 
may forfeit the power to live it within 
twenty-four hours, unless we rely on the 
Eternal Spirit to work mightily in us as 
in Him. The only power by which we can 
live the life of Jesus, is through the infilling 
of the Holy Ghost. Shall we not, then, re- 
solve to finish for ever with the independent 
life, and to dare to say, as never before, 
“The living Saviour hath sent me, and 
He lives in me”? To which we shall hear 
Him responding, from the excellent glory, 


“Because I live, ye shall live also.” 


Vil 


THE BLESSED STEPS OF HIS 
MOST HOLY LIFE 


ef 
* 


ar 


Vil 


THE BLESSED STEPS OF HIS 
MOST HOLY LIFE 


EVERY ear which is attuned to the music 
of noble words, and every heart which is 
accustomed to the perfect balance of theo- 
logical truth, must feel the fascination of 
the Collect for the Second Sunday after 
Easter: “Almighty God, Who hast given 
Thine only Son to be unto us both a sacri- 
fice for sin, and also an ensample of godly 
life.” This is a perfect blend of what 
was once the Unitarian standpoint and 
the Evangelical. The Unitarian, especially 


in Channing’s time, when Unitarianism 
113 H 


114 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


seemed likely to be one of the most potent 
forces in the religious world, laid stress 
almost entirely upon the ensample of the 
godly life, to the exclusion of the evangelical 
doctrine of the sacrifice for sin; and as a 
set-off to that extreme, the Evangelicals, 
especially in the early part of the last cen- 
tury, laid all stress upon Christ’s sacrifice 
for sin, but little or none on the ethical 
value of His life. We must blend the two, 
and hence the prayer goes on to say, ‘Give 
us grace that we may always most thank- 
fully receive that His inestimable benefit, 
and also daily endeavour to follow the 
blessed steps of His most holy life; through 
the same Jesus Christ our Lord.” What 
could be a nobler ideal for any one of us 
than to endeavour to follow daily the blessed 


steps of His most holy life! 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE rs 


There are three aspects in which the 
steps of Christ’s most holy life are de- 
lineated in the Word of God,—the anticz- 
patory of the Old Testament, the Zzstorical 
of the Gospels, and the commemorative of 
the Epistles. The Epistle of St. Peter tells 
us that Christ “left us an example that we 
should follow His steps.” We might dwell 
at length, as Dr. Stalker does, in his Lmago 
Christi, on the steps of Christ, as described 
in the synoptical Gospels; but it may make 
a better indent upon the memory to take 
the description of our Lord’s most blessed 
life as given to us in the meal-offering. 

The meal-offering, consisting of fine flour, 
frankincense, and oil (Lev. ii), foreshadows 
the human aspect of our Saviour’s life. The 
burnt-offering unfolds His entire consecra- 


tion to the will of God, even to the Cross; 


116 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


but the meal-offering which follows im- 
mediately, and in which there is no mention 
of blood, sets forth the human aspect of 
our Saviour’s character,—His daily life, or 
“the blessed steps of His most holy life.” 
It is one of the ‘sweet-savour offerings” 
fragrant to God, which have no necessary 
connection therefore with sin in the pro- 
pitiatory and expiatory aspect. It deals with 
Jesus, not as the sin-offering, but as the 
Holy One of God. In corroboration of that 
thought we notice that the whole of the 
meal-offering was consumed, part of it by 
fire, and the rest of it by the priests and 
the offerer, which reminds us that the whole 
life of our Lord was very grateful to the 
Father. He daily fed upon the obedience, 
humility, and purity of His Son. On the 
other hand, the life of Christ is fed upon 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE iGiy, 


by all mankind, and especially by those 
who are kings and priests unto God. It is 
for us to feed upon His character, so that 
as food passes into our nature, He may 
pass into our daily life, and that we may 
live as those in whom He is repeating Him- 
self. Hence, if we are told that we are to 
| follow His steps, and if those steps are an- 
ticipated in the characteristics of the meal- 
offering, it seems as if we should achieve 
this purpose best by resembling Jesus Christ 
in four aspects—(1) Zhe evenness of the fine 
flour; (2) The anointing of the oil; (3) The 
Jragrance of the frankincense; (4) The spark- 
ling nature of the salt. 

THE EVENNESS OF THE FINE FLOUR.— 
It is obvious to any one who has handled 
flour how even it is; no roughness, no grit; 


it passes so smoothly through the hand. 


118 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


Although it offers an inviting theme, there 
is no need to describe the process by which 
the flour is made so fine and even, of the 
rush of the turbid stream, of the movement 
of the great mill-wheel, and of the stones 
by which the grain is ground to powder. 
All this might have a deep and holy refer- 
ence to ourselves, if not to Him; for it is 
only by the bruising, grinding, and crushing 
processes of life that we can become as the 
fine even flour. 

With our Lord, what evenness there was 
in His temperament. There was no exag- 
geration, no preponderance of one virtue 
over another, but a perfect balance, harmony, 
and beauty. Moses was the meekest of all 
men, but there was a terrible piece of grit 
when he cursed the people at Meribah. 


There were many fine qualities in Peter, 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE 11g 


but we remember how, after he asked to be 
allowed to walk upon the water, he began 
to sink through unbelief; and that at 
another time, after telling the Lord that he 
would go with Him even to death, within 
a few hours he denied Him. The holy 
Apostle Paul had to take back his words 
about the High Priest. Even John called 
for fire from heaven to consume the villages 
of the Samaritans. All these great saints 
had a grit in them which was very different 
to the perfect evenness and composure of 
our Saviour’s life, 

On the one hand, He said that He must 
be about His Father’s business; but, on the 
other, He went down to Nazareth and was 
subject to His parents. When feeding the 
five thousand, He told His disciples they 


were to see that everybody had enough, 


120 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
but when all had been filled He took care 


that the fragments were gathered up, so 
that nothing was left. In the garden of 
Gethsemane we find Him prostrate in humi- 
lity before God, but, when the crowd 
comes, He meets it with majestic dignity. 
On the one hand, He would flash out 
flames of fire against the Pharisees; but if 
a woman came to touch the hem of His 
garment, or a father to plead for his child, 
with what infinite tenderness and sweetness 
He would help and save! There was a 
perfect balance and equilibrium in our 
Saviour’s life. 

Has there not been too little of this in 
us? We have been precipitate and impetu- 
ous, have taken up a duty and dropped it, 
have been hot, and soon cold; in private 


have vowed that we would never yield to 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE 121 


a certain sin, but we have yielded; there 
has been no counting upon us, people of 
moods and tenses, just like some mountain 
lake, now swept by the wind or radiant in 
the summer sunshine, but never for a dozen 
yards the same. If we have been strong, 
we have run a terrible danger of being ob- 
stinate; if we have been gentle, we have 
been tempted to be weak; if we have been 
so calm that though a storm were breaking 
on us, it left us unmoved, there has been 
danger of our becoming callous and _ in- 
different. It is so difficult to magnify one 
virtue without doing so at the expense of 
all the others. We all need to come to the 
evenness, consistency, and perseverance in 
doing well, which are symbolised by fine 
flour. 


THE OIL.—How many times, in these 


122 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


regulations about the meal-offering, allusion 
is made to the oil, which, in the typology of 
the Scripture, always stands for the anoint- 
ing of the Holy Spirit. This oil was applied 
in two ways to the meal-offering. In the 
case of the cakes, it was mixed with them; 
but in the case of the fine flour, it was 
poured over it; which may be taken to 
illustrate two aspects of the influence of the 
Holy Spirit upon our Saviour’s life. That 
the oil was mixed with the cakes recalls 
how the Holy Spirit overshadowed the 
Virgin, so that “the Holy Thing” was born 
of her by the operation of the Holy Spirit 
on the nature of His mother. Throughout 
our Lord’s life His character was permeated 
by the Blessed Spirit. That the oil was 
poured upon the flour, we are reminded that 


on the day of His baptism, before He 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE 123 


entered on His work, He stood beneath the 
descending unction of the Blessed Spirit, 
and was set apart for the service of God 
and man. From this we gather that for 
each one of us there must be the daily 
fellowship and communion of the Holy 
Ghost, by Whom alone our character can 
be made sweet and strong; and whenever 
we anticipate some extraordinary demand, 
we should seek a very special anointing of 
the Holy Spirit. Never forget that the 
meal-offering of a holy life is only possible 
as it is permeated and anointed with “the 
Unction of the Holy One.” 

THE FRANKINCENSE.—With the meal there 
was frankincense—the resin which exudes 
from the incense tree, and which, when 
burnt, gives a brilliant flame and fragrant 


scent. Frankincense must always stand for 


124 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


the joy of God which was so evident in our 
Saviour’s life. One seldom sees a painting 
that represents one’s ideal of our Saviour’s 
face. In most there is not enough of the 
sparkle, the joy, the lustre of the indwelling 
Shechinah, It could not have been quite 
the worn and weary face which many 
painters depict, who do not allow for the 
play of holy joy. 

With many of us, there is little enough 
of the frankincense of Joy. In the fifth 
circle of Dante’s /uferno he describes the 
suffering of those who yielded to hatred; it 
is a black and loathsome marsh; but Virgil 
tells Dante that there are others there, who 
suffer for evermore, because in the bright, 
sunny air they condemned themselves to 
gloom; or, as Shakespeare says, “They 


were sad as night, only for wantonness.” 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE 125 


There are many people just in this con- 
dition, who, in a redeemed world, where 
there is so much that is beautiful and 
bright, carry a perpetual gloom upon their 
faces. Perhaps most of us at times are 
tempted to leave the frankincense of joy out 
of our lives, and to run the danger of 
falling into the old sin, of which Dean 
Paget has reminded us, known as “accidie.” 

Are not there days in your life when you 
cannot smile or look pleasant, when you 
refuse to say what you have to say in a 
cheery and bright tone, when you are 
sunken in a deep black fog of your own 
making; days when you cannot sympathise 
with the laughter of little children, or the 
joy of those who are glad; days when you 
find it impossible to be tender to the 


sorrowful, or to minister comfort; days 


126 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


when you have no enthusiasm, but your 
life lies like a low-lying, marshy land, swept 
by an east wind, which is bringing up the 
mist from the sea? You settle yourself 
down into a fixed despondency, your voice 
is depressing to listen to, and your face 
miserable to see? This is what the old 
teachers called ‘‘ accidie.” 

You say, Is not this largely a matter of 
over-weariness, of a languid, tired spirit, of 
a nature which has been on too great a 
strain, and which is suffering from the re- 
action? Those excuses may be made for 
you by other people, but it is a perilous 
thing to make them for yourself. Be very 
pitiful for those who are weary and languid 
around you—you do not know what secret 
pain they may be suffering; but on yourself 


have no mercy, refuse to sit beneath the 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE 127 


pall of black darkness, always fight against 
your depressions, and vanquish them in the 
name of Jesus Christ your Lord. 

The noblest trait in Christian living is 
when men and women refuse to surrender 
to the difficulties of their circumstances or 
temperament, but dare to say, “Because 
these things threaten to make me miserable 
and useless, by the grace of the Holy Ghost 
I am going to drain these fens and run 
channels through these morasses, hoping 
for summer skies to shine upon this marsh, 
until the very sun shall heal the earth.” 
This is the burning of the frankincense. 

The best cure for “accidie” is to con- 
sider the sorrow of those who are more 
sorrowful than yourself; to perform some 
office of mercy; or better still, to throw 


yourself back upon the love of God, that 


128 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


this may steal like a benediction into your 
sad heart. See that you always burn frank- 
incense. 

THE SALT.— Our Saviour’s words were 
full of salt; pure and sparkling, incorrup- 
tible, and staying corruption, Salt is good, 
and the words of Christ are good, because 
so full of salt. The Book of Proverbs is 
the salt-cellar of the Bible. It would be 
well, particularly for the young, to commit 
to memory chapters of the Proverbs. In 
contradistinction to salt is /eaven (Lev. ii, 11), 
constantly used in the Bible of that which 
is corrupt and breeds corruption. In every 
workroom and workshop, how laden the air 
is with leaven, with corrupt germs, with un- 
holy words, and thoughts, and suggestions 
that breed in the heart, until, though years 


have passed, some word you have heard 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE 129 


will come back to spoil your _ holiest 
moments, and ferment, as leaven does. Let 
us take care that in our speech there is 
nothing that breeds ferment, impurity, or 
pride. 

And equally we must beware of honey (Lev. 
ii, 11), which stands for the luscious sweet- 
ness of nature. There are some people who 
are apt at saying sweet things, at being 
winsome and affable. It is very difficult to 
draw the line precisely; but, instinctively, 
we know when there is a sort of unreality 
in the sweetness, when it is too effusive, 
when compliments are applied and flatteries 
given with too lavish a hand, and we turn 
away with a kind of nausea. 

On the whole let us see to it that we em- 
ploy the sa/¢ of sound common sense. That 


does not mean that our talk is to be 
I 


130 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


monotonous. Salt stings, sparkles. Wit, a 
little touch of wholesome humour, the play 
of repartee, the sound conundrum of com- 
mon sense—all this is innocent enough; 
but let us take care of the leaven of criti- 
cism and impurity, and of the honey of 
mere natural sweetness, 

It may be said that this is a high ideal. 
Yes, but this was the life of Jesus! To 
attain it, do not seek to imitate Him simply, 
as the sculptor may imitate the model, for 
so you will suffer constant disappointment ; 
but remember that the relationship between 
you and Him is like that between the child 
and its mother. The child, in a sense, is 
part of the mother, the child has received 
the mother’s nature, and she really lives 
through her child. Such is your relation- 


ship with Jesus. You and He are one by 


HIS MOST HOLY LIFE 131 
a living faith. Daily say: “Blessed Lord, 


I cannot, but Thou canst; I fail, but be in 
me what I want to be and am not.” And 
if you fall, be sure to fall upf2l/, and not 
down. Many people when they fall, fall 
downhill in despair, and say, “I never, never 
can.” Other happier souls fall uphill, be- 
lieving that God forgives, that God will re- 
store, and help, and save. Say, “I have 
fallen; but it is not my real and best self, 
not my ideal, not what I want to be, not 
what, by the grace of God, I will be. I 
will forget the things that are behind, and 
press on to those which are before, follow- 
ing the blessed steps of His most holy life.” 

There is of course no manner of doubt 
that those who follow in the footprints of 
Christ will be led ultimately to the Garden 


and the Cross. It cannot be otherwise. “If 


132 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


any man serve Me, let him follow Me,” said 
our Lord; “and where I am, there shall also 
My servant be;” but He had already, in 
His previous breath, said, “ Except a grain 
of wheat fall into the ground and die, it 
abideth alone.” 

In all the Gospels there is no more strik- 
ing picture than of the eager figure of Jesus 
preceding the Apostles on their way to 
Jerusalem, whilst they followed in amaze- 
ment and fear (Mark x. 32); but He leads 
not only to the Cross and Grave, but to 
the Easter Morn, the Ascension Mount, and 


the Right Hand of God. 


VITT 
THE UNDIVIDED HEART 


VIII 
THE UNDIVIDED HEART 


“Teach me Thy way, O Lord; I will walk 
in Thy truth: unite my heart to fear Thy 
Name” (Ps. Ixxxvi. 11), is a beautiful prayer 
in a psalm, which has been compared to a 
tesselated pavement, because composed of 
fragments of other psalms reverently pieced 
together. But though most of its sentences 
may be discovered in other places of the 
Psalter, this petition stands unique in its 
beauty and strength. This is the Psalmist’s 
Spirit-given invention; here he is original. 
This is the gush of some geyser spring in 


his heart, that flashes in the light and pours 


135 


136 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
its perennial fountain of inspiration on the 
world. 

There are obviously three divisions in 
this verse: (1) “ Teach me Thy way.’—The 
Hebrew word used might be rendered 
“stake out.” Sometimes in riding through 
the country, parts of which are submerged 
in the winter floods, we see high stakes 
jutting out at various points. Our driver 
tells us that the river often overflows, and 
if it were not for these indications it would 
be impossible to discern the way. That is 
the precise idea of the Hebrew: “Stake 
out my way, that even when the storm 
rises, and the dark water sweeps across my 
path, I may realise that Thou hast marked 
it out so as to be unmistakable.” 

(2) “I will walk in Thy truth.’—Through- 
out the Psalter the word ¢vuth would better 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 137 


be rendered froth, z.c. faithfulness—“1 plight 
thee my troth.” When the Psalmist says, 
“T will walk in Thy faithfulness,” he means 
to say that all his days shall be spent, 
leaning and reckoning upon the faithful- 
ness of his Guide and Friend, in the very 
atmosphere of trust in the trustworthiness 
of God. 

(3) “ Unite my heart to fear Thy Name.’— 
We have another rendering in the Prayer 
Book version: ‘“O knit my heart unto Thee, 
that I may fear Thy Name”; that is, not 
simply is the heart united in itself, a simple 
and single purpose; but it becomes such 
because it is united and knit to the nature 
of the Eternal God. “O knit my heart 
unto Thee, knit it, weave it into Thy life, 
and never let me extract myself again—knit 


” 
! 


my heart unto Thee 


138 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


These three thoughts may be entitled V7za, 
Veritas, and Vita, the Way, the Truth, and 
the Life. And the answer to my text is in 
the announcement of our Lord, “i am the 
Way, the Truth, and the Life.” “Teach me 
Thy way”—“I am the Way;” “I will walk 
in Thy truth”—“I am the Truth;” “Knit 
my heart unto Thee”—“I am the Life.” 
The answer to the soul’s cry is in Him in 
whom all fulness dwells for the sons of 
men. Notice also the foundation argument, 
on which the prayer rests: (v. 5) For Thou, 
Lord, art’ good;” {v. 10) “For * Thou: art 
great;” (v. 15) “Thou art a God full.” 
“Thou art good, Thou art great, Thou art 


full; therefore knit my heart unto Thee.” 


THE DIVIDED HEART.—The world is full 


of instances of the divided heart. The 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 139 


double-minded man who is unstable, the 
man who is double-sighted, the man whose 
ways are perplexed because he has no de- 
finite purpose before him. The Greek word 
for care means “that which divides”: and 
Jesus Christ said we must live a life free 
from care, because care divides, weakens, 
and makes us blind. 

Some are divided é4y anxiety. When our 
companions are expecting us to take a bold 
and straightforward course, they are sur- 
prised to see a wavering line, as when the 
eagle that was expected to soar straight to 
the sun pursues an uncertain course, because 
an arrow is lodged in his breast. The man 
who is anxious cannot take a strong, straight 
course, any more than a man can sleep 
when he is wondering whether he has locked 


the door or wound his watch. 


140 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


Some are divided by contrariness, which 
is a most difficult and complicated dis- 
position of the soul. We want to be 
pleasant, helpful, agreeable, and amiable, 
but are conscious of the pressure of some 
cross-current. Whence it comes we know 
not; but we find ourselves between two 
strong influences, the one to be sweet and 
Christlike, the other to be awkward and 
restrained. 

Some of us are divided Jdecause of the 
incoherence and fitfulness of our impulses. 
Happy are those whose desires are well 
under hand; but with many they have the 
dominant place. Their passions are strong, 
their desires ungenerous. In many cases, 
doubtless, this results from some strain of 
heredity, which our ancestors have be- 


queathed to us, so that we are suffering 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 141 


from the lawlessness of men and women 
who have preceded us, and which belongs 
to long generations behind. 

Others are critical. Two souls strive 
within them, Whilst admiring what is good 
in other people, they are conscious of a 
second self that sits in judgment. It seems 
as if there is in most, a purer, holier, lovelier 
self; and behind that the dark, critical, 
cynical self, which is always judging and 
passing unkind comments. 

Others who are divided dy the accusations 
of conscience. They are always in dread lest 
they have done wrong, always thinking that 
God is angry, always failing to be at peace 


with Him or themselves. On Sunday they 


seem at full stretch for the Kingdom, caught 
up and borne heavenward ; but as soon as 


they touch this mundane world there is an 


142 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


inevitable reaction. The very yearning after 
God to-day will be met to-morrow by an 
equal intensity in their business, in making 
money, or in seeking pleasure. Paul tells 
us that he was conscious of these two wills 
—the better self which longed to do the 
will of God, and the lower, selfish, animal 
self which brought him into subjection. 
Augustine tells us that though the prayers 
of his mother so greatly affected him, he was 
constantly swept from his ideal by passion. 
He compares himself to a man oversleeping 
in the broad daylight, whose limbs are glued 
to the bed by drowsiness, and there is con- 
flict between the intention to arise and heavy 
slumber. You will remember, too, how 
Bunyan tells us that he realised the two 
selves at war within him. First, the Devil 


came and tempted him saying, “Sell Him! 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 143 


Sell Him! Sell Him!” but he resisted even 
to blood, saying, “I won't.” But as the 
Tempter’s voice continued, urging ‘“ Sed/ 
Him!” finally Bunyan answered, “ Let Him 
go if He will.’ Whereupon, for a whole 
year, Bunyan suffered a perfect agony of 
remorse and torture, on the one hand 
accepting Christ, on the other prepared to 
barter Him away. 

A divided heart lacks the first element 
of strength, it is unstable. The men who 
leave their mark in the world are the men 
of one purpose who, with Paul, can say, 
“One thing I do.” The small man who 
has one intense purpose becomes a great 
man. If a man is taken up by one great 
thought, by the greatness of his thought he 
will presently approximate to the level of 


his conception; but the man who is divided 


144 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


by diverse interests dwindles into a little 
man and a groper in the dark. Oh, happy 
are those that always live a balanced life of 
perfect equilibrium, who have their impulses 
well under control, who can keep the wild 
horses in hand, who can do what they 
ought to do and avoid the thing which 
their highest nature condemns. We must, 
for peace and strength, follow one purpose, 
saying, “Unite my heart! Knit my heart 


unto Thee !” 


THE CONCENTRATED HEART.—There are 
other aims besides religion which give peace, 
strength, and vision. John Foster tells of 
a young man who one day climbed the hill 
that overlooked the broad acres of the in- 
heritance which he had squandered and lost; 


as he sat and mused, looking over what 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 145 


had once been his ancestral home, the pur- 
pose flashed into his mind to recover it. 
He at once rose to put it into execution. 
Passing through the village and seeing some 
coals lying outside a house, he obtained a 
pittance for removing them, and from that 
moment gladly performed the most servile 
duties, which opened into more remuner- 
ative ones, until he gained sufficient money 
to repurchase the inheritance, finally dying 
worth tens of thousands of pounds. It was 
his one purpose to undo the past which made 
this young man strong. 

In another case it was the purpose to be 
rid of a certain crabbedness of temper, and 
to cultivate a spirit of perpetual urbanity, 
that gave a purpose and direction to life 
which had never before been realised, 


In the “Life of John Bright,” we are told 
K 


146 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


that it was the thought suggested by Mr. 
Cobden, that he might be able to lighten 
the heavy anxiety that beclouded many 
homes, which delivered him from the melan- 
choly which the death of his beloved wife 
had inflicted on his spirit. He was inert 
and paralysed until the inception of this new 
purpose inspired him to take up life anew. 
The purpose of philanthropy has again and 
again unified, quickened, and ennobled the 
soul that seemed spent and hopeless. It has 
girt its loins to fresh endeavour, and in its 
unity has become strong. Get hold of a 
purpose, and live for it. A stream that 
spreads itself too widely, and is dissipated 
into too many channels has no driving 
power; a very narrow stream becomes 
swift enough to turn the mills all along 


its course. A concentrated heart, even 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 147 


though not yet consecrated, is stronger 


than a divided heart. 


THE CONSECRATED HEART.—Concentration 
makes a strong man, but consecration makes 
a saint; and we get this strong saintly life 
when our heart is united—not simply united 
in ourselves, but united in ourselves because 
we are united to God. “Knit my heart to 
Thee, O God. In Thy goings forth through- 
out this world and all worlds, knit my heart 
to Thee.” 

It is the man who knits himself to Nature 
as Edison has done, as Newton and Faraday 
did, as great discoverers must all do, who 
finds that Nature serves them best. If you 
fight Nature, if you antagonise her, if you 
resist the laws of fire or water, you will 


burn or drown; but if you study the way in 


148 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


which Nature is working through the world, 
if you unite your life with her, then she will 
drive your motor-cars, light your lamps, and 
supply all the necessaries of daily existence. 

The same is true of the great laws of our 
national life. The law which is pleasant to 
the man who obeys it is ruin to those who 
resist it. The law which will promote virtue 
to its highest position will hang the mur- 
derer. You must unite or knit yourself 
to law to be blessed. 

Is it not so with human character? You 
may be acquainted with an individual with 
whom at one time you had no sympathy— 
indeed, you disliked him. But after a while 
he opened his heart to you. Some great 
sorrow came, and you and he were thrown 
together. You found that you had mis- 


judged and misread him, but when your 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 149 


heart opened out to him, and he became 
your close friend—when you were knit to 
him, and began to understand him, he be- 
came one of the greatest helps in your life. 

What is true of nature, true of law, true 
of human sympathy, is true also of God. 
If there are men who are living in opposition 
to God, they cannot realise what God is. 
He is an enigma to them. A great barrier 
of ice seems to separate between them and 
Him. But directly a man is knit to God, 
and he becomes at-one with God, his life 
acquires simplicity and power. 

Let us, then, open our hearts to the great 
God who is brooding over each of us, saying: 
“O Divine Will, knit my will with Thine! O 
Divine Love, knit my love with Thine! O 
Divine Sympathy, unite my sympathies with 
Thine! O Divine Rectitude, unite and knit 


150 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


my moral sense with Thine! O Divine Ac- 
tivity, knit the activities of my life with 
Thine!” God is always going forth on His 
great ministries. He is passing by your 
bedsides every morning, saying, “ Awake and 
come.” Let us ask then, that He may take 
our little lives into union with His great 
heart and mighty movement, that in keen 
sympathy and loyal co-operation we may 
move forward with Him! 

“Knit me, for I cannot knit myself; but 
come out of Thine eternity, step out, rend 
the veil with Thy strong hands, and come 
to me in my tiny commonplace existence ! 
My God, knit me and weave me into Thy 
nature, and weave Thy nature into me, that 
Thou and I may keep step, keep in tune 
and time, until time shall be no more. Knit 


me, unite me with Thyself!” 


THE UNDIVIDED HEART 151 
Do you want to be knit to God, to be 


made one? There is only one way, by 
Jesus. We must “receive the at-one-ment” 
from Christ’s pierced hands. Put away 
known sin, put away doubtful things, put 
away self-will. Let Jesus make you at one 
with Himself. Go, and speak to that man 
and woman whom you have slighted; ask 
for forgiveness from those you have wronged ; 
get right with brother and sister from whom 
you are estranged. At least be willing to 
be at one with them. Yield yourself to God 
that He may disunite you from the world, 
and unite you in yourself. He will not fail 
you, and you shall become one with Him, 
as the Father is in the Son and Son in the 
Father. Knit me, and keep me knit. Let 
this be our daily prayer! 


This growing attachment will necessarily 


152 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


bring about a detachment from the things of 
Time and Sense. As we are knit to God, 
the hold of the world will be loosened, 
Ruth’s new love for Naomi will naturally 
draw her away from her people and her 
gods, and even from the grave of her boy- 
husband. The moon’s attraction will lead 
to a tidal wave round the globe. It feels her 
pull upward, which is stronger than the old 
downward pull of mother-earth. So be it 
with each of us! “Draw us, and we will 
run after thee.” 


IX 


THE PURE INTENTION OF THE 
SOUL MAINTAINED IN THE 
MIDST OF LIFE’S DRUDGERY 


IX 


THE PURE INTENTION OF THE 
SOUL MAINTAINED IN THE 
MIDST OF LIFE’S DRUDGERY 


WHAT a difference heaven’s light makes to 
common objects! A worn-out bottle-skin, 
a patch on an old garment, the fox creeping 
to its hole, the homeward flight of birds 
from their feeding-grounds, a rustic penfold 
—all these shine with a new glory when 
touched with the luminous words and 
thoughts of Christ. The shavings and im- 
plements of a carpenter’s shop are for ever 
consecrated, because the light from His 


face shone on them during the years of 
155 


156 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


His service in carpentry. It is also true 
that when His thoughts and conceptions of 
life fall on the scenes of daily toil, “the 
common round” no longer appears as a 
tread-mill, but becomes a ladder which links 
the lowest earth with highest heaven. 
Drudgery, perhaps, belongs more to a 
woman's life than to a man’s. I think, for 
instance, of a cripple girl, shut up in a 
narrow tenement with her querulous and 
constantly complaining mother, keeping the 
tiny room spotlessly clean, and working 
with her crippled hands from early morning 
till late at night to support them both; of 
the women employed in the manufacture 
of brushes for road-sweeping, engaged in 
dipping hard bristles into boiling pitch and 
riveting them into the stamped pattern of 


the brush, their persons saturated with the 


IN THE MIDST OF DRUDGERY | 157 


mixture; of the girls who are employed in 
carrying sugar-sweets to ovens raised to a 
furious heat, stung by wasps in summer, 
and exposed to rheumatism in winter; of 
drudges in families and boarding-houses, on 
their feet from morning till night, and per- 
forming perpetually the same domestic 
duties; of lone women in secluded spots 
whose life is rarely lit up by an expression 
of love or interest, and whose daily track is 
the beaten one which has been trodden 
by their feet for tens of years. Such are 
cases of drudgery which are unlit by rays 
of earthly happiness. They spend their 
lives under leaden skies. Their path lies 
along the level sand, with no hill on the 
horizon nor juniper-bush to cast its tiny 
shadow. 


Men also have their drudgery. The 


158 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


lawyer’s copying-clerk who has sat at the . 
same desk for years reproducing acres of 
legal phraseology; the “hand” in the 
factory who is always engaged in perform- 
ing some trivial task which may only need 
the twist of a finger and thumb; the porter 
in the crowded station, ambitious for better 
things, but who probably will spend his life 
in shouldering heavy luggage; the cemetery 
chaplain, with his threadbare black, who 
probably will never receive a respite from 
the constant repetition of the Burial Service 
and contact with sable-vested mourners, until 
the service which he has so often read over 
others is mumbled over himself. 

Such are some of the drudges in human 
life. Those of us to whom life brings so 
many changes of travel, of intercourse with 


intelligent and noble souls, of new books, 


IN THE MIDST OF DRUDGERY 159 


new scenes, and new tasks, can _ hardly 
realise what life is which has no ups and 
downs, no changes, no infusion of the 
fresh elements that give charm and expec- 
tation. 

What are the considerations which will 
shed heavenly light upon drudgery like this, 
until common things begin to shine with 
heavenly lustre, as a bit of glass bottle 
across a valley which has caught the level 
rays of the setting sun and begins to sparkle 
like a star? 

The first thought which will light up life's 
drudgery ts the remembrance that it has been 
appointed by God's wise Providence.—God as 
much sent Joseph through the drudgery 
and discipline of prison as through the 
glory of the palace. Every part of his life 


was designed for the evolution of a Divine 


160 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 
Purpose for himself and others. If he had 


evaded the irksome duties of the prison, he 
would never have come in contact with 
Pharaoh’s servants, and so the link which 
bound prison and palace would have been 
missing. You can never tell why God 1s 
exposing ‘you to the fret and pressure of 
the present moment until you see the apart- 
ments of which it is the vestibule. All 
God’s purposes are love; “all things work 
together for good.” For the disciple, all 
long, straight roads, however dusty, lead to 
the Golden City, the sure anticipation, there- 
fore, of the goal which must be a happy 
one, since God is God, and our trust that 
He is bringing us thither by the shortest 
and wisest path, should gild with the light 
of expectant hope the tedium and mono- 


tony of the present. 


IN THE MIDST OF DRUDGERY 161 
The drudgery of life ts as much a Divine 


vocation as ave tts more brilliant passages.— 
Too often we speak of being called to the 
ministry, confining the term to the young 
lad, who, like Samuel, has heard the Divine 
Voice; as though it were unsuitable to 
speak of a carpenter being called. to the 
bench, the blacksmith to the forge, the 
shoemaker to the last. This exclusive use 
of the word is in direct collision with the 
Apostolic precedent which bids “every man 
abide in the same calling wherein he was 
called.” “ Brethren,” said the Apostle, who 
more than any has inspired the thinking of 
subsequent generations, “let every man, 
wherein he is called, therein abide with 
God.” 

If it were possible for the poor slaves of 


some great patrician’s household, who might 


162 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


be compelled, on their bended backs, to 
bear for hours together without the least 
movement the chess-board on which their 
masters were deliberately playing, to be 
taught to think that the menial service they 
were called to perform was a _ Divine 
vocation (1 Cor. vii. 21), surely there is no 
toil or duty assigned to us in the course of 
Divine Providence in which we may not 
hear the voice of God. If you listen when 
the bell arouses your tired body to another 
day of toil, you will detect the silver music 
of the bells of heaven summoning you to 
take up your part in the great economy of 
the universe. He who appoints stars and 
glow-worms, cherubim and fire-flies, suns 
and molecules of dust, to perform their 
several parts in the clockwork of the uni- 


verse, has appointed you as a little cog- 


IN THE MIDST OF DRUDGERY 163 


wheel or screw, and by your faithful per- 
formance of obscure and unrecognised duty 
you are helping to maintain the order of 
the great movement which extends through- 
out the universe and is slowly advancing to 
that “far-off, Divine event” of which the 
poet sings. 

The faithful performance of drudgery-duties 
ts tending to the formation of noble character.— 
All that God wants of any one is /fazthfulness. 
Not brilliance, not success, not notoriety 
which attracts newspaper notice, but the 
quiet, regular, and careful performance of 
trivial and common duties, as beneath “the 
great Taskmaster’s eye.” To be “faithful in 
that which is least” will win as rich a re- 
ward as faithfulness in the greatest. Indeed, 
it is harder to be faithful over a very little 


than over much, The opportunity, there- 


164 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


fore, of winning the highest reward in the 
future world is not given only to those who 
are called to occupy the high places of the 
field, where every brilliant act is chronicled 
by admiring pens, but to those who dig 
out the foundations, who do duty in the 
trenches, and who are buried in common 
graves, without magnificent obsequies or 
glowing epitaphs. Of many it will be said 
at last: “They had their reward” in the 
blowing of the trumpet of earthly fame and 
the murmured applause of many voices; the 
turn of those to whom no one said “Thank 
you” will then have arrived. 

Have you not seen the way in which 
men construct arches? A number of beams, 
wooden uprights, and cross-pieces are con- 
structed into the form of the arch which is 


to be. The structure looks very confused 


IN THE MIDST OF DRUDGERY 165 


and flimsy, it is difficult to trace the design, 
and one spark of flame would consume the 
whole; but upon its span the bricks and 
stones are deposited which will last for 
generations, So upon the mean structures 
of daily drudgery, which excites no en- 
thusiasm, which strains the muscles and 
wearies the nerves, is being built up a 
character which will be “a thing of beauty 
and a joy for ever” when the heavens have 
passed away ‘‘as a scroll.” 

In every piece of honest work, however irk- 
some, laborious, and commonplace, we are 
fellow-workers with God.—Throughout His 
miracles we find our Lord invited and used 
the co-operation of His followers, or of 
some material substance, such as bread and 
fish, or the clay for the blind man’s eyes, 


or the interposition of the strong hands 


166 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


which rolled away the stone and unbound 
the swathed limbs of Lazarus. All these 
are living illustrations of an eternal fact 
that God uses us as His fellow-workers in 
the accomplishment of His purposes. 

It is for Him to cause the growth of the 
golden corn; but man must reap and thresh 
it, grind out the flour, make and distribute 
the loaves of bread—only so can the great 
populations have their prayer answered as 
in many tongues they cry: “Give us this 
day our daily bread.” It is God’s work to 
flood with sunlight the woodland and 
forest, by earthquake and cataclysm to en- 
tomb vegetation in the cellars of the earth, 
and by long processes to change the green 
growth to coal; but all this provision would 
be useless unless man exhumed the ebony 


treasure, with infinite labour bore it to the 


IN THE MIDST OF DRUDGERY 167 


surface, and presently carried it, by collier- 
barque, or barge, or costermonger’s barrow, 
for consumption in human homes. The 
tailor is God’s fellow-workman, helping 
Him to clothe the bodies which He has 
made to need garments of various textures. 
The builder helps God to house the chil- 
dren of men. The merchant helps God to 
bring the products of the East to refresh 
and enrich the toiling masses of the West. 
The author, printer, and publisher help 
God to distribute His thoughts and Gospel 
for the quickening, comfort, and inspiration 
of men. The girl who makes chocolate- 
creams helps God to give pleasure and 
delight, as well as nourishment, to hundreds 
of children; and the lawn _ tennis-ball 
manufacturer helps God in the develop- 


ment and strengthening of the human 


168 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


body, on the endurance and vitality of 
which the success of the Gospel may 
largely depend on some far-off mission- 
field. It is a beautiful and _ inspiring 
thought as we each go forth day by day 
to what seems to us a piece of common 
drudgery, to realise that God is our fellow- 
helper, and that we are fellow-workers with 
Him. 

Take up your work, then, you who seem 
to be the drudge, the man-of-all-work, shoe- 
black, or slavey; do it with a brave heart, 
looking up to Him who for thirty years 
wrought at the carpenter’s bench, remember 
that “your labour is not in vain in the 
Lord.” Throughout all the many scenes 
through which you pass and the actions 
you perform, set the Lord ever before you. 


Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you 


IN THE MIDST OF DRUDGERY 169 


do, do all as in His Presence and to win 
His smile, so life will be knit together by 
one pure intention of soul, as the different 
metres of a poem are penetrated by the one 
thought, or plan, that persists from the first 
line to the last. 

Love is at the soul of everything, just as 
the commonest flint will emit sparks when 
struck. Wherever you may be, whoever you 
are, and whatever the burden and hardship 
of your life, you can love. It is pleasant to 
think that the sunshine, and the winds, and 
the trees are able to love in some way of 
their own. Though nature seems so solitary 
and silent through the long winter, or in 
the great far-stretching lands, she is never 
desolate, for through her the Spirit of Love, 
which is the Spirit of God, is ever breathing. 

God is the greatest Lover, therefore He 


170 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


is the happiest of all beings; and the more 
we love the nearer we are to Him. It is 
His love that is brooding over the world, 
and He will never cease to love. Let 
thoughts like these fill your heart; resolve 
to love perfectly, unselfishly, helpfully, and 
the most lowly life of drudgery will begin 
to glisten, as the grass-blades do when the 


sun and dew-drops garnish them, 


Xx 


LHe “PURE, INTENTION-~ OF THE: 
SOUL CONSISTENT WITH THE 
LIPE-IN- THE GREAT CEry 


xX 


THE PURE INTENTION OF THE 
SOUL CONSISTENT WITH THE 
LIFE IN THE GREAT CITY 


PAUL never failed to insist that he had 
been called equally as the other apostles; he 
affirmed that he was a witness of the Re- 
surrection as his fellow-apostles. For in- 
stance, in writing to the Corinthians, he 
said: “Last of all He was seen of me, as 
of one born out of due time.” And again: 
“Have not I seen Christ?” For Himself 
he had beheld that face above the bright- 
ness of the sun, the wounds in those hands, 


the feet that burned like brass in a furnace, 
173 


174 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


and had heard that voice as the sound of 
many waters. To his ear had come from 
Christ the summons, “Saul, Saul,” with as 
much emphasis and directness as when He 
had addressed Simon Peter in the old days 
of His human life. 

In the earliest stages of the Christian 
Church no one had a greater infiuence in 
formulating its doctrine, or initiating its 
activity, than he who, amid the glow of 
the Syrian noon, was stricken to the earth 
by the brilliance of a greater light. When 
we compare the teaching of the Epistles 
with the exquisite stories of the Gospels, we 
realise how much Christianity owed to the 
great Apostle of the Gentiles, who was the 
chosen organ of the Holy Spirit for His 
further revelations of truth. 


It is interesting to notice how immediately 


CONSISTENT WITH LIFE 175 


the new disciple addressed our Lord with 
the appellation which indicated his desire 
to prostrate himself at His feet, and be- 
come His loyal subject and servant. From 
that moment Christ’s will was to be pre- 
dominant and His commands imperative. 
It was therefore in keeping with the prac- 
tical nature of the Apostle’s mind that he 
should at once ask for something definite to 
do. To him visions were of comparatively 
little importance unless they could be real- 
ised in practical deeds. ‘Lord,’ he said, 
“what wilt Thou have me to do?” And 
He said, “Rzse and enter into the city, and zt 
shall be told thee what thou must do” (Acts 
ix, 5)-0). 3 

It was startling to be told, ““Go into the 
city.” For three days he had been ap- 


proaching Damascus with murderous intent, 


176 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


His purpose in visiting the city was to find 
out men and women who had believed in 
the Lord Jesus, that he might bring them 
bound to Jerusalem. In the execution of 
his project, he was prepared to enter home 
and meeting-place, to harry the infant 
Church. It might have been expected that 
Christ would have turned him back to 
Jerusalem for further instruction by the 
Apostles, or might have sent him to some 
secluded scene where he might meditate 
upon the great change which had suddenly 
altered the course of his life. What more 
natural than to send him to Tarsus, his 
home, where, amid the scenes of his early 
days, he could prepare for his life-work ? 
But instead of these, he was bidden to go 
into the city. Those who are bearing some 


intolerable weight of sorrow shrink from 


CONSISTENT WITH LIFE 177 


familiar and ordinary scenes, and long for 
an entire change, where their mind may be 
diverted from the associations of the past. 
The broken-hearted lover says, “Let me 
travel in foreign places”; the sorrow- 
stricken mother cries for relief from the 
rooms which have rung with baby laughter 
and are linked with irremediable loss, But 
for Saul there was no intermission in_ his 
ordinary routine of life. He had had his 
vision, and was now summoned to carry it 
with him into the busy scenes and hubbub 
of a city with which, probably, he was al- 
most as familiar as with Jerusalem, It was 
there, and from a humble disciple, Ananias, 
that he was to receive further instruction, 
A great law reveals itself here. The 
visions that God gives us are to prepare us 


for practical service, and we are sent back 
M 


178 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


to familiar scenes to work out there the 
inspiration and stimulus that we have re- 
ceived. The Risen Christ appears to us, 
and immediately the summons rings out, 
“Go into the city.” 

THE Brest THING FOR A MAN WHO HAS 
SEEN CHRIST IS TO GO INTO THE CITY.— 
Notice the sanity of Christ’s teaching. The 
Romanist says that when we have seen our 
vision we are to seclude ourselves from 
ordinary life, immuring ourselves behind 
monastic walls and closely-barred windows, 
straining our eyes for repetitions of the 
celestial beauty. Others bid us live in a 
limited circle of Christian duty, perpetually 
looking for the second advent as the one 
means by which the world is to be put 
right, and ignoring the claims of the city 
upon the Christian disciple, as though the 


CONSISTENT WITH LIFE 179 


carcase should be left without its salt, and 
the darkness without the glow of the lamp. 
More wholesome is our Lord’s prayer that 
His disciples should not be taken out of 
the world, but kept from its evil, that they 
should be the counteractive of the darkness, 
sin, and sorrow around, until His light shall 
break upon the eastern sky as the dawn of 
a new age. 

The call of the city ts the corrective of the 
temptation which accosts us all to become 
dreamers.— When a man _ has beheld the 
Risen Christ he is strongly tempted to build 
an oratory on the spot, and to spend days 
and nights waiting for a repetition of the 
glory which dazzled him; but to do this 
is to miss the divine intention in having 
opened our eyes to see, 


We are familiar with the distinction be- 


180 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


tween ideas and their form, between in- 
spiration and embodiment, between thoughts 
and acts. There is always a temptation in 
human life to divorce them. Some men 
will sit in their arm-chairs and dream 
dreams, see visions, and elaborate systems, 
who are absolutely useless in the progress 
of the race, or in the march of civilisation. 
They resemble artists who never translate 
their visions of beauty to canvas or marble. 
The temptation to this is very real to us all. 
We dream of victories, but never enter a 
battle; we imagine heroic action, but never 
attempt one; we _ represent ourselves as 
cheerfully enduring martyrdom, but take 
care never to come within a hundred miles 
of the scaffold or stake. So God bids us 
go into the city to save us from vaporising 


our religion in dreams, illusions, and vain 


CONSISTENT WITH LIFE 181 


fancies. It is as though the voice of God 
came to us each morning after we had beheld 
the Risen Christ, each Sunday after we had 
knelt in the church, filled with high and 
holy intentions, and bade us go forth into 
the city, with its need and sorrow, its temp- 
tation and battle, that our character might 
be ennobled by putting into effect the fair 
and beautiful conceptions which had en- 
tranced us. Ah, we find ourselves of very 


different stuff in the actual contact of the 
world to what we imagined ourselves to be! 

Lt ts necessary also to go into the city, because 
we shall meet there influences which will promote 
our highest welfare—Had He chosen, our 
Lord could have said everything that needed 
to be said to His new disciple; but that 
is not His way. He is ever economical 


of the supernatural. He appeared to Saul 


182 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


because nothing else would have arrested 
him, or changed his career; but having 
done this once He left Ananias to do the 
rest. He did what He must do, and left 
Ananias the remainder. Only by entering 
the city could Saul be brought in contact 
with the simple-minded disciple who could 
complete the Master’s commencement. 

It is in the city that we meet the Ananiases 
of our lives—the simple, humble, obscure 
people prepared to influence us, as did the 
servants of Naaman, who persuaded him to 
pacify his rage and test the waters of Israel. 
Society is bound together by strong human 
ties; the city cannot exist without the 
country; the upper classes are more 
dependent than others upon the ministry 
of the lower; Peters are brought to 


Christ by Andrews, the miracles of Christ 


CONSISTENT WITH LIFE 183 


are supplemented by the co-operation of 
the apostles, and Saul is brought into the 
clear light by Ananias laying his hand upon 
him, and saying, “ Brother Saul.” We are all 
learning more than we know from contact 
with the men and women whom we meet in 
the city. Men that carry water-pots conduct 
us to the rooms in which our Pentecosts 
take place. 

Also, the city needs us —The world will not 
come to our Churches, or read our Bible, or 
look into the dazzling face of Christ. Its 
children seem to think that Christianity 
means our withdrawal from what is healthy 
and homelike, into some dim and mystic 
region where life is robbed of half its signi- 
ficance. They speak of religion as “becom- 
ing serious”; they think that a “religious 


life” must be spent apart from store and 


184 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


street in communities of celibates. How 
necessary it is, therefore, that the disciples of 
Christ should go “through dusky lane and 
wrangling mart” with Heaven’s light upon 
their faces, and repeating a holy strain in 
their hearts, to teach men that religion is 
warm, natural, and human. 

For all these reasons we must go into the 
city. There we shall learn more than ever 
the cloister can teach; there we shall receive 
influences which are necessary for the de- 
velopment of the highest type of character ; 
there we shall become the world’s Bible, its 
light, inspiration, and conscience. No sooner 
has the vision faded than we have to gird up 
our loins and arise, telling what has been 
told, bearing witness of what we have seen, 
and lighting the murky gloom with the re- 


flected glory of the celestial and divine. 


CONSISTENT WITH LIFE 185 


IT Is BEST OF ALL FOR THE CITY TO BE 
VISITED BY MEN WHO HAVE HAD THE VISION 
OF CHRIST.—Many amongst us lay too much 
stress On machinery. They think to lift men 
by careful organisation, by councils and 
committees, by social reform and legislative 
action. But men need more. “Where there 
is no vision the people perish.” “Man 
cannot live by bread alone”: he demands 
the words that come from the mouth of God. 
It is not enough to have elaborate edifices 
with five porches for wounded and suffering 
humanity ; there must be an angel to trouble 
the waters. The heart cries out for brother- 
hood, peace, faith, hope, love, righteous- 
ness, and liberty, and only those who have 
beheld these incarnated in the Risen Lord 
can meet the deepest needs of their fellows. 


Run your thought over the page of history, 


186 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


and say who has done most for his race—the 
men of ideas or the masters of organisation ? 
We must not undervalue the latter, but after 
all they follow, not lead; they make good the 
roads whilst the others have explored the 
country, and led the march of humanity. 
The idealists of our race, those who have seen 
visions and dreamed dreams, the Cavours, 
Mazzinis, men who have stood on Pisgah, 
and beheld a country which they were not 
destined to enter, the men who have coined 
the key-words, and sung the marching 
music of the centuries, the prophets and 
seers of the race—these are they who have 
left the most indelible mark. 

It is most important in a symmetrical life to 
combine vision and city.—lt is inexpressibly sad 
for a man to toil and moil in the city with- 


out having, from time to time, his vision. 


CONSISTENT WITH LIFE 187 


It is equally injurious, as we have seen, for 
a man to have his vision apart from the 
city. To the denizen of the city we would 
say, Go forth beyond its gates, and open 
your eyes to see and your ears to hear, and 
come back with the light of eternity in your 
soul; to him who has seen the vision we 
would say, Get as quickly as possible into the 
city, there to realise the possibilities of life. 
What is your vision? It must be of the 
Man, Christ Jesus, the ideal Man, the perfect 
realisation of God in man. It must be of 
Jesus suffering for the sins and sorrows of 
men, and for yours. “I am Jesus whom 
thou persecutest.” It must be of Jesus, 
the Saviour, whose Blood cleanses from all 
sin. Never rest until by the grace of the 
Holy Ghost this vision has been yielded, 


not to mortal eyes, but to those of the soul. 


188 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


What is your city? It is the place where 
God calls you to suffer or toil, to bear the 
burden and heat of the day, to wrestle with 
various forms of injustice and wrong. Are 
you humble in the presence of Christ? Be 
equally humble in the midst of city life. Is 
your faith strong when you kneel beneath the 
open sky? Let it not fail you when you can 
only see a scrap of the vault of blue between 
the high houses. Does immortal hope spring 
in your breast, here where Jesus speaks of the 
great future? Let it be dominant in tone and 
gesture, speech and act. Bathe yourself in the 
eternal, which seems so near when you are 
alone, and then go forth to believe that it 
underlies the throb and stir of the world of 
men, as ether interpenetrates all substance 
and existence lying as a mighty ocean be- 


tween our shores and the Jasper Throne. 


XI 


THE PURITY OF THE SOUL’S IN- 
TENTION REVEALING ITSELF 
IN LOVE 


XI 


THE PURITY OF THE SOUL’S IN- 
TENTION REVEALING ITSELF 
IN LOVE 


THERE are moods of the soul when we 
would be prepared to barter every incident 
in the Gospel if we might retain the parable 
of the Good Samaritan. At such times it is 
priceless, We would be prepared to sur- 
render the story of the prodigal son, of the 
woman who was a sinner, and of the dying 
thief, if only we might retain it, as the star 
of hope shining on the bosom of night. 
THE CIRCUMSTANCES OUT OF WHICH IT 


AROSE ARE FAMILIAR. — The lawyer was 


19 


192 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


evidently a student of Scripture, and was 
probably a well-intentioned man, standing 
out from the rest of the crowd. He said: 
‘““Master, I want to know the secret of that 
life which is beyond the narrow horizon of 
this world, unmarked by the flight of the 
years, in which God and the holy spirits 
are living in the eternal and unseen. I am 
weary of the narrowness of my ordinary 
existence, I long to import into this 
commonplace the spirit of eternity. What 
must I do that I may inherit eternal life?” 

Our Lord replied: “Why ask such a 
question of Me, when you have the clue to 
its solution in your own Scriptures? What 
do you find there?” In answer, his inter- 
locutor quoted the old command, thou shalt 
love God in heaven, and thy brother-man 


on earth. 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 1093 


“You have rightly answered,” said our 
Lord; and there can be no possible doubt 
that if a soul will rid itself of the selfishness 
which is the bane of life, and begin to live 
in the constant thought of God on the one 
hand and of man on the other, forgetting 
itself in its expenditure on behalf of others, 
it may at once pass into that blessed life 
which fills heaven with rapture. We are 
taught this by the very construction of our 
Anglo-Saxon language, for, surely, ove is the 
past tense of live, just as drove is the past 
tense of drive; in other words, the soul 
which has loved has lived: souls that do 
not love only exzst. If there has been a 
supreme love in the life, even though the 
outward enjoyment of it may be intermitted 
for a time, there has been a draught of the 


river of God which is full of water, that 
N 


194 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


proceeds from the Throne of God and of 
the Lamb. Do you love? Then you live 
with something, at least, of the very life of 
God, 

The lawyer still further pursued his ques- 
tion by asking, “But who is my xezghbour ?” 
The Lord answered in effect, ‘Ah, there 
you mistake! It is not for you to ask who 
is willing to neighbour me, but whom am 
I prepared to neighbour?” So long as the 
soul is self-concentrated enough to inquire 
for those who should draw near and com- 
fort it, so long is it still under the thrall of 
selfishness; but directly it ceases to think of 
being neighboured, and sets itself to neigh- 
bour others, there comes into it the blessed 
joy of God. Seek for neighbours and you 
will never find them. Live to be the neigh- 


bour of all who need, and you will have 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 195 


as many as you require when the days of 
which you say, “I have no pleasure in them,” 
are at hand. 

The incidents of this parable were pro- 
bably founded on fact. We can almost see 
that long, lonely road, wild and desolate, 
that led down from Jerusalem, situated in 
its circle of hills, to Jericho on the margin 
of the Jordan. The inn, standing half- 
way, with its stabling, but with no trees or 
vegetation near, providing a much-needed 
shelter for man and beast. The only deni- 
zens of the Pass being the wild things, 
such as rabbits that burrow, grouse and 
ptarmigan, the hawk poising in the blue air. 
The great boulders casting their shadows in 
the intense light, and affording sheltering- 
place for bandits. The lonely traveller was 


set upon in the wildest part of the road by 


196 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


the Bedouin, and making a show of fight, 
was felled to the ground, pillaged of his 
possessions, stripped of his clothes, and so 
desperately wounded as to become uncon- 
scious. The whole scene was tragic and 
terrible. 

The priest, who represents formal religion, 
felt no necessity to arrest his progress, ex- 
cept to look upon the mass of unconscious, 
bleeding flesh. The wounded traveller had ~ 
no special claim upon him, and the Levite 
followed his example. The two passed by 
on the other side, leaving the hapless suf- 
ferer to his fate, and he was too far gone 
to raise a hand to beckon help, or a groan 
to appeal for it. 

Then the Samaritan drew near, was 
touched with the spectacle of helplessness, 


had compassion and bent over the dying 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 107 


man, staunched his wounds, pouring in the 
oil and wine which revived the ebbing life, 
brought him on his own beast to the inn, 
where he was well known, and through the 
livelong hours of the night took no rest, 
but spent himself in resuscitating his fyvo- 
tégé, moistening the parched lips, changing 
his posture, alleviating the high fever of his 
blood, until, as the morning star shone on 
the margin of the night, he felt able to 
leave him in the care of the host, with the 
promise that he would defray all further 
expenditure. 

LovE TO GopD.—God’s love to us is 
beautifully set forth in this story. Surely 
we may expect that He will show to us 
the love which He expects us to show to 
others. May we not reverently say that He 


will love us with all His heart and soul 


198 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


and mind and strength? He loves as the 
Samaritan did, though we have been enemies 
in our mind by wicked works, and have had 
no dealings with Him. He will love us, 
though, as in the case of the wounded tra- 
veller, there is nothing attractive cr beautiful 
in us, but the reverse, for surely our sin is 
more repellent to His holy nature than the 
spectacle of wounds, bruises, and putrifying 
sores were to the kindly Samaritan. His 
love does not wait for our appeal, any 
more than the compassion of the Samaritan 
awaited the appeal of the poor victim of 
the bandits’ outrage, and it is here that the 
parable is of such advantage to us. 

There are hours in our life when we 
stand upon the transfiguration mount, and 
the solar look is upon our face. The sense 


of joy and rapture in our hearts makes us 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 199 


feel able to combat every difficulty and 
vanquish every foe; but these experiences 
are comparatively rare. Not infrequently 
we, too, lie upon the thoroughfare of life 
pillaged, stripped, and wounded; we have 
lost the jewels of faith, hope, love, and 
joy; we have been despoiled of any reason 
for self-esteem and congratulation, we can 
hardly cry for help; the love, yearning, 
desire, and prayer of other days have died 
down as the flame into black cinders; but 
then it is that God has compassion, and 
draws near, bending over our life. He has 
pity on us who have no pity on ourselves, 
loves when we do not love Him, resusci- 
tates our ebbing life, pours in the wine 
of the precious blood, and the oil of the 
Holy Spirit, takes care of us with a ten- 


derness of solicitude which no woman, 


200 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


however loving, could exceed. Ah, it is a 
blessed thing for the soul when God has 
compassion and takes care of it! 

But how shall we love God? Is it so 
very hard? Does not His character attract, 
or, if not, do not His long-suffering and 
tender mercy lead to grateful recipro- 
cation? But supposing that all this fails, 
may we not love Him with our strength 
and mind, even though we do not feel the 
rapture of emotion ? 

We must distinguish between the /act 
and the emotion of the fact, between Jove 
and the feeling of love, for the former 
may exist when the latter is deficient; we 
may love God with our strength, devoting 
to Him the energies of our nature; with 
our mind, thinking of and for Him con- 


tinually; and even with our soul, recog- 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 201 


nising His Lordship and superlative claim, 
without being able to join with Rutherford, 
or Faber, or Miss Havergal in their emo- 
tional outbursts. Love God with your 
mind and strength, make Him first, live 
for Him as the one object and goal of 
existence, and the dying spark of love will 
become fanned into a flame, and you will 
love God with your heart. 

It is wonderful also how much our love 
to our fellow-man will promote our true 
love to God. He who says that he loves 
God must love his brother also, and he who 
truly loves his brother will, almost certainly, 
be brought to love God. “He that liveth 
in love liveth in God and God in him,” 

LovE TO OUR NEIGHBOUR.—Our neigh- 
bour is the person who needs us most. 


It may be some inmate of our home, a 


202 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


servant, a relative, an habitual and familiar 
friend, it may be some companion in the 
occupation and business of life, or it may 
be some individual who is cast in our way 
by what seems chance, but is really Pro- 
vidence. The next person who needs you 
is your neighbour. 

It must be remembered, as the parable 
teaches, that our neighbour is not always 
able to appeal to us, is certainly not one 
to whom we would be naturally attracted, 
and may be one against whom we have 
some personal antipathy. It is easy to 
like people who are naturally attractive 
and agreeable, but that love is by no 
means the highest form of Divine love. 
When we were yet enemies, Christ died 
for us: God loves us, not because we are 


fair, but to make us so. 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 203 


In order to stimulate this love in our 
hearts to such people, again it is well to 
begin with the strength and mind rather 
than with the heart. We cannot command 
our emotions, but we can direct the 
energies of our strength. Supposing there 
be in your home some aged relative, con- 
torted by rheumatism, apt to yield to 
querulous complaints, and to murmur at 
the least interruption of the even tenor of 
comfortable environment, you may find it 
very difficult to love him with your heart, 
at least, in the first instance. You may, 
however, love him with your strength by 
ministering, by carrying him in your arms 
up and down stairs, by doing errands for 
him; you may love him with your mind 
by thinking, planning, and devising methods 


for his comfort, and little alleviations of his 


204 THE SOUL'S PURE INTENTION 


tedium; you will then come to love him 
with your soul, appreciating qualities in his 
character which had until then escaped your 
notice; and, finally, you will come to love 
him with your heart; and when, at last, 
the poor emaciated body is cousigned to 
mother earth, you will stand beside the 
grave with a flood of genuine tears. 

It is simply marvellous how compassion 
leads to true affection, and how we come 
to love people to whom we _ perform 
kindly and unselfish deeds. Love with 
your strength, and you will come to love 


with your heart. 


LOVE TO THE OUTSIDE MassEs. — The 
religious world, as represented by the priest 
and Levite, has been too forgetful of those 


who are not found, for the most part, 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 205 


within our places of worship. The reli- 
gious leaders of the people with cold charity 
have passed by the children of men who 
may have been opposed to all religious 
systems, or, at least, have been despoiled of 
virtue, purity, self-control, faith, hope, love, 
Too often there has been the casual look, 
and then the averted face, and the onward 
step towards the comforts and amenities of 
home, whilst the helpless have been left to 
make what shift they might. 

All this must be altered by the Church, 
which should evince towards the outcast and 
lost the compassionate love of God. We 
must bring them to the inn of the Church, 
must administer to their physical need, but, 
above all, must care for their spiritual ne- 
cessities. The Master, in these words, seems 


to bid us take care of those who cannot 


206 THE SOUL’S PURE INTENTION 


care for themselves. He was the first Good 
Samaritan. He painted His own portrait, 
when He depicted the loving interest of this 
stranger in this wounded Jew. He bids us 
“go and do likewise.” He expects that day 
by day His people should reflect His own 
heart of compassionate love as the moon 
reflects the sunshine, and in doing this He 
knows that we shall discover the fountain 
of eternal life rising up within us with 
perennial freshness. 

The lesson for all of us is that we should 
ask for the anointed eye, that we may be 
quick to see those cases of need which God 
has put in our way to elicit our comfort 
and help. Let us be sure that there is 
hardly a day in our life when some wounded 
traveller on the long road does not require 


our help, and as we have received mercy 


REVEALING ITSELF IN LOVE 207 


let us pass it on; as we have been forgiven 
let us forgive; as we have known the pre- 
ciousness of the oil and wine let us be quick 
to impart them; let us comfort others with 
the comfort wherewith we ourselves have 
been comforted; let us take care of them as 
God is ever taking care of us, 

This exquisite story is followed by the 
lifting of the veil on the human friendship 
of our Lord. We behold Him in the midst 
of a family group, where Martha serves and 
Mary sits at His feet. We are told, else- 
where, that Jesus loved Martha, and her 
sister, and Lazarus. Here is another aspect 
of Love, and here also is Life. The love 
of merciful help and the love of human 
friendship are the golden clasps of a life, 
which is happy and content, though the lot 


be poor and winter lies over all the land. 


Printed by BaLlantyne, Hanson & Co. 
Edinburgh & London 


hee 


ol 


LIBRARY RULES 


1.2 — 


nnNNMINN | 


6 
(a) Reserve Books may be _ borrowed 
for a period of two hours. In case no 
call has been made in the interval, books 
may be renewed for a second two hours. 
(Where there is only one copy, book 
must be used in the library.) 
(b) Reserve books taken at 10 p. m. 
Mondays to Fridays are due at 9 a. m. 
the next morning. A reserve book taken 
from the library at 12m. Saturday is due 
at 9 a. m. the following Monday. 
Books not on reserve may be drawn from 
the library for two weeks and may be 
renewed once for the same period, except 
one-day books. 
A fine of two cents a day will be charged 
on each book which is not returned ac- 
cording to the above rule. 
MAGAZINES ARE NOT to be taken 
from the library without the speciai 
permission of. the librarian. 


No book may be ta 
without being char 
Borrowers are resp 
age done to the vo 
possession and a 


re 


GTU Library 
2400 Ridge Road 
Berkeley, CA 94709 
For renewals Cal] (S10) 649-2509 


All itenas are subject to recall. 


staid 
pee, 
Stet hianversise : 
peciesorevert 
ss 


erssutn 


=?" ” — 
zs Seeriaiaenmnas 
sieaetenraterepeapyeso omer ene aes 

Pesessteranign terete 
= srearuiagepsyepe ration 


is arcenene oeb4) 
raoatabenarenere 


errinteeaaeerer 


be cans 0 


Seen eae ee 

ert abareareerettl 

Soe Talttysrpeereestastorsassteersaes 
Gi Sates 


sige Bisons 
etiteartress ST ta feecetreterer te 
ion site pet 
peril Beaeavorenntts ries teat Beasetreetiiats 
iteitenraaiay foepeyes et Slap iy neteere rie 
cis stegpr aap tat i Sar 
sa fie ate feet 
ipheaeee le Ty tless. 
epeersls at i 


Ae eeertreer 
Soa a 
est eect iets 


errs 


