Il 


| 


» 
td 
oO 
c= 
wv 
he 
cs 


| 


| 


| 


| 


| 


| 


1001 1344665 


| 


|| 


| 


| 


lI 


| 


| 


| 


| 
| 


School of Theology at Cl 












SCHOOL OF THEOLOG 
Ale CLAREMONT. 
Galtornia 













































































DwicuTt L. Moopy 


6 The Man and His Mission 


ony 
es) 
} 











PART | 
A Biographical Shetch 


BY 


GEORGE T. B. DAVIS 















PART Il 
Gharacter Studies 










: BY 
PRESIDENT FRANK W. GUNSAULUS PRESIDENT RUSSELL H. CONWELL 









BISHOP JOHN H. VINCENT BISHOP SAMUEL FALLOWS 
REV. HERRICK JOHNSON REY. GEORGE F. PENTECOST 
Dr. FRANK CRANE Dr. P. S. HENSON 
JOSEPH COOK JOHN V. FARWELL 






REv. NEWELL DWIGHT HILLIS 
AND MANY OTHERS 







PART III 







Aoody’s Dramatic Version of Famous Bible Stories 
1—The Adventures of Daniel 5—Hlijah and the Priests of Baax 
'2-The Tale of a Blind Man 6—The Story of the Leper 
8—The Story of Mephidoseth 7—The Story of the Widow’s Son 
4—The Story of Barabbas 8—The Story of Naaman 






9—The Story of the Penitent Thief 





Fheology [<itbrary 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


CopyRicat, 1900 
BY 
K. T. BOLAND 


University of Southern Californie 





INTRODUCTION. 


BY RT. REV. SAMUEL FALLOWS, D. D., LL. D. 


. ENRY DRUMMOND once remarked that the most 
S _ hopeful sign of modern times was the intense interest 
ws 


~ manifested everywhere in the lives and deeds of the greatest 
men and women. Gladstone said, “Example inspires; ad- 
vice chills.” Thus it has ever been throughout the ages. The 
greatest lives merely reflect the inspiring example of great 
men gone before. Moses combined the greatness and good- 
_- ness of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. In David's life we see the 
- concentrated genius of a score of the judges and rulers of 
Israel preceding him. The apostles—poor, untutored, unlet-. 
tered men—became the world’s leaders for all future ages be- 
~ cause of their contact with the God-man, Jesus Christ. 
Moreover, a great soul gathers into its unfathomable 
depths the goodness and greatness of all the noble hearts 
_ with which it comes in contact. Dwight L. Moody, inspired, 
first and foremost, by the example and words of Him “who 
. spake as never man spake,” and secondly, gathering fresh 
_ divineness from every rare soul he met, became the great- 
est religious leader of the nineteenth century. It is said 
_ that his was the most unaccountable life of the age. It is 
indeed unaccountable unless we see the strain of love that con- 
__ stantly flowed into it from his Lord and Master, Jesus Christ. 
_ Like Enoch, we can truly say he lived with God; he walked 
4 with God; and he was not, for God took him. 
__He was an incarnation of that sublime Bible statement, “If 
9 


i) ps SE ie Os 





10 INTRODUCTION 


ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what _ 
ye will and it shall be done unto you.” 

It is absolutely true that in his early days Mr. Moody heard 
some one remark, “The world has yet to see the power of one 
man wholly consecrated to Christ.” He quietly remarked, “I 
will be that man.’’ He surrendered himself absolutely and en- — 
tirely to God, and as a result he shook two hemispheres and 
left an imperishable stamp upon the Christian world for all 
future time. 7 

It is needless that I should eulogize this wonderful man. 
In the following pages the foremost Christian leaders of 
America, and his co-laborers and co-workers from the begin- 
ning, have portrayed his character and traced his career, each 
from his own angle of vision. Their combined sketches and 
tributes form a beautiful and glowing composite photograph 
of one of earth’s rarest and divinest souls. 
_ May God’s richest blessing rest upon this book; may it 
have a million readers; and may the inspiring example of this 
man ever grow and increase throughout the ages to come 
until the kingdoms of earth are the kingdoms of our Lord. 


SAMUEL FALLows. 





CONTENTS 


: Prologue. Moody’s First Christmas in Heaven. Dr. Frank W. Gunsaulus. 


PART I. 

A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
Chapter. Page. 
Pa Nloodys) Childhood and= Youth=.5.otcon\.cces see ee 27 
Witee MireWloody.se Harly=Recollections: +> is acmiiosc ce ee 35 
bile oceks iis ortiuness binds is SayiOr....00-4. 0 eee 40 
IV. Starts a Sunday-School in Chicago’s Slums...0....:..-.... 47 
We Gives up Business tor Gospel Work....:s002:. cote 58 
Wile Becomes eadenofl thes Y.. Ma CcAG a. cut tewt cr eee 69 
VitK Mr. Moody Pounds a Union:Church. ... ccs en ces 75 
VIII. Revival Meetings Among Civil War Soldiers.............. 80 
HeXeauELow, Moody-and: sankey Mette... caok ees fac tence canoe 88 
X. Moody and Sankey’s Remarkable Work in Great Britain.. 99 
XI. The Wonderful Story of the Gospel Hymns.............. 109 
eliiunmGreatsivevivals in American Cities ss .1.ss. 1.5 e ene 113 
XIII. Moody’s Educational Monument at Northfield........... 120 
avi Moody s tome and: Daily hile. ios2.. 0. oy)0 5 oats Oe 127 
XV. At Moody’s Church—After Thirty-Six Years.............. 142 
XVI. Moody’s World’s Fair Gospel Campaign.................4 149 
DaVveline Moody's. Work Among. Prisonerts. .....seecee- cae ose ssteae 156 
DaVAPil Nir Moody’ se last /Serilion’s < catsis eco Scie es's heeiee ate sete ee 161 
XIX. The Death and Burial of Dwight L. Moody.............. 180 


PART -II. 
CHARACTER SKETCHES AND TRIBUTES 
1. Mr. Moody’s Thrilling Career and Message.. By Rev. N. D. 


ERTS st poets telehere oreheeohes cP ip oos ao nie, ke os ohe ars oli ch afc tenesStetah toate 205 
2. A Natural Prince and Leader. By Rev. F. B. Meyer, of Lon- 
GOm ome land csrccr a crest. Nite stotsteiererat woneiato sate eiriareca paneer 212 
3. Dwight L. Moody—A Criticism and an Appreciation. By Rev. 
Geor sen bo F EN teCOSt oe cwacertersfa st ote dae o'er atous osha is herons 220 
4. Ingersoll and Moody—A Contrast. By Bishop John H. Vin- 
COULG a eicle ciolcicieresleherelt cciclolerais selet. sisisie.sye;e\e'e'e/e eleis sievelexsie%sle/eias 231 


a II 


12 


oe yan 


Ii. 
12. 


13. 


14. 
15. _ 
16. 


17. 
18. 


19. 
20. 


21. 


22 
23) 
24. 


25. 
26. 


CONTENTS 


The Secret of Moody’s Power. By Dr. P. S. Henson.......... 237. 
A Man With a Message. By Dr. Frank Crane....:...0......- 245 
The Greatest Man of the Century. By President Russell H. 
Gon well ae. & sig era epee edie ata eared oe cee balg Peer te eee 249 
The Likeness of Paul and Moody. By President F. W. Gun- - 
Sari] US oe ss obs giatesaln Side race g Sials-a ble aod ayaa ckis ote ferertate oe ere ater eae 258 
Moody and His Ways. By John V. Farwell................ wetness 
Moody, the Earnest Man of the People. By Bishop Samuel 
PPALIOWS 2 Siviaje. «sie pia ste sleince-ssehofe re aise Riatehe eis Mitta Marae eae eee 285 
Moody as a Study in Effectiveness. By Dr. Herrick Johnson.. 288 
Ten Sources of Moody’s Powers. By Joseph Cook........... 204 
Moody and Northfield. By Rev. G. Campbell Morgan, of 
london ineland sa.-ianseeece RARE EEA i 207 
Moody’s Greatest Work. By Mr. Henry M. Moore........... 301 
Moody’s Manliness and Modesty. By William E. Dodge..:... 305 
The Greatest Worker in God’s Vineyard. By Dr. J. Monroe 
Gibson, of London, England’. «ccm. << ccse- oi rs eee 312 
D. L. Moody—A Miracle. By Rev. A. C. Dixon............. 315 
A Modern Saint. Rev. John McNeill’s Tribute...... a coe adcs onees 318 
Moody Was God’s Mouthpiece. By Rev. George C. Lorimer.. 322 


Moody and Lincoln—A Likeness. By Dr. Theodore L. Cuyler. 329 
Never Spoke an Unkind Word. By Mr. Wm. Fry, Dublin, 
Delain isso: cts ee neteleeca ate cin tine ete el ae ee tO oe 332 
Personality of Mr. Moody. By Dr. James Buckley........... 335 
Moody Was a Modern Prophet. By Bishop W. F. Mallalieu... 345 
The Story of the Scottish Campaign. ey Lord Overtoun, of 


Glasgow;: Scotlands ss... ss cco cotnid aie eae ne 349 
“One of the Seventy.” By Dr. Wilton Merle Smiths 3 wcdeeeeee 352 
Story of Mr. Moody’s Burial. By Ira D. Sankey.............. 354 


PART III. 


-MR. MOODY’S OWN VERSION OF FAMOUS BIBLE STORIES 


$07 COSA OV a ats 


Ties Story,of Barabbas....< a ciemicretrcaupstohe corse tease Seta ene 350 
he Story, of Hhyah and the Priests of Baal cc. case eeeteee 363 
‘ihevstory. ofthe Adventures of ?Daniel. 1. .cen eu eeetere 367 
The-Story. of \Christ and Bartimeus:i1.5 44:.00: peck nin ge ae eee 386 
‘he:Story.cof Mephibosheth’)...7 s2cnesuen mire teil th, Jeet eee 390 
MhewStorysolthe sleeper... anspor ieee ee bsiecshevwe Geel ord rere 304 
‘Khe-Story of the Widow's Sonic ¢ .r.s4.s.ccha ek sete a ee 306 
he Story.of Naaman.’ 05. GA aaiate aah sees. ee 398 


‘The: Story of the Penitent.Thicivy.c.s.c0 «anne nee neers 403 





“ILLUSTRATIONS 





Portrait—D. L. Moody, with Autograph. 
-Portrait—Bishop Samuel Fallows, Chicago. 
Portrait—President Frank W. Gunsaulus. 
D. L. Moody and J. V. Farwell’s First Sunday-School Class. 
- Portrait—Ira D. Sankey. 

Portrait—Mr. Moody from a Recent Photograph. 
“Snap Shots of Moody Conducting Revival Service. 
Portrait—Mrs. Moody. 
__ The Bible Used by Mr. Moody. 
Mr. Moody’s Mother. 


£ _ Wanamaker Falls. 


Mr. Moody’s Study. 

Round Top—Mr. Moody’s Final Resting Place. 
The Union Church at Northfield. 

Moody Avenue—Northfild. 

Mr. Moody’s Sunday-School Class in 1856. 


- Portrait—Rev. R. A. Torrey. 


 Portrait—Ira D. Sankey, with Autograph. 
The Moody Bible Institute—Chicago. 
D. L. Moody, His Daughter and Granddaughter, 
Moody’s Residence at Northfield. 
The Old Moody Homestead. 
_The Northfield Seminary Buildings. 
Northfield Seminary Girls. 
-Morquand Hall. 
Dr. F. B. Meyers’ Outdoor Study at Northfield. 
Camping on Moody’s Lawn. 
The Seminary at Northfield. 
Mr. Moody’s Donkey, ‘Dandy.’ 
_ Headquarters for Moody Revival Meetings at Philadelphia. 
- Portrait—Dwight L. Moody at the Age of Eighteen. 
The Teachers and Students of the Bible Institute, Chicago. 
_ A Breath of Fresh Air. 
Mr. Moody Conducting an Open Air Gospel Service at Camp Northfield. 


Moody and Sankey Leaving England. 


Mr: Moody and His Missionary Pony. 


Interior of the Church at Northfield, Where Mr. Moody’s Funeral 


Services Were Held. 
13 


14 ILLUSTRATIONS 


Male Choir at Moody’s Chicago Avenue Church. 

Mr. Moody’s Residence in Summer. 

Crossley Hall—Mount Hermon School for Boys. 

Portrait—Dr. Newell Dwight Hillis. 

The Home of the Northfield Training School for Christian Workers. 
Portrait—Rev. Geo. F. Pentecost. 

Portrait—Bishop John H. Vincent. 

Portrait—Dr. P. S. Henson. 

Interior of the Auditorium—Northfield. 

Portrait—Dr. Frank Crane. 

Portrait—Dr. Russell H. Conwell. 

Portrait—John V. Farwell. 

Portrait—Rev. Herrick Johnson. 

Portrait—Dr. Joseph Cook, LL. D. 

Rey. G. Campbell Morgan and Rev. H. C. MacGregor. 
Portrait—Rev. A. C. Dixon. 

Moody’s Chicago Avenue Church. 

Portrait—Professor D. B. Towner. 

View Across the Connecticut River—From Seminary Grounds. 
Moody’s North Side Tabernacle, Chicago. 

The Auditorium—Northfield. 

The Crucifixion. 

Barabbas Passing Out from Bondage to Freedom. 

Blind Bartimeus Receiving His Sight. 

Mount Carmel. 

The Maid Telling the Mistress About the Wonderful Prophet, Elisha. 
Daniel in the Lions’ Den. 











THE RT. REV. SAMUEL FALLOWS 
Bishop of the Reformed Episcopal Church, 


itute, Chicago, 


st 


In 


dent of Ar 


i 


S. 


Pre 


op) 
5 
4 
=) 
ms 
ep) 
Z 
— 
© 
2 
MD 
zi 
ws 
fy 
E 
Z 
oa) 
a 
op) 
(1) 
ae 
A, 








PROLOGUE 


MOODY’S FIRST CHRISTMAS IN HEAVEN 
(WRITTEN ON CHRISTMAS DAY) 
BY REV. F. W. GUNSAULUS 
[Copyright 1900 by George T. B. Davis.] 


J T IS always Christmastide in heaven. The angels are 
always singing there, and their song is the one which 
gladdened the hearts of the adoring shepherds on earth, nine- 
teen centuries ago: “Glory to God in the highest, peace on 
earth good will to men.” 
~ Dwight L. Moody, the most widely known of modern 
evangelists, one of the greatest of the servants of Jesus, one 
of the truest of the champions of the cross in private life and 
public deed, one of the noblest heralds of the Gospel of the 
Son of God, spent and enjoyed Christmas day more than 
three-score times on earth. He is spending now his first 
Christmas day in heaven. There has been a glad reunion 


: with all whom he loved and honored in his life on earth He 


thas met mother and friend. It is a joyous inaugural of new 
and deeper acquaintance with prophet and saint, hero and 
martyr, psalmist and preacher. I say “a new acquaintance,’ 
because for many years he has had intimate soul-acquaintance 
with the best and saintliest of religious believers and doers. 
He has now met them, and they have welcomed him. 


“Ten thousand times ten thousand 
In sparkling raiment bright, 
The armies of the ransom’d saints 
Throng up the steeps of life; | 

~ It is finish’d, all is finish’d, 
Their fight with death and sin; 
Fling open wide the golden gates 
And let the victors in.” 

17 


a, PROLOGUE 


This victor has not entered without salutation. 

The gravitations and the affinities of earth and heaven, 
allying, pervading and controlling souls are permanent and 
divinely active. Moody is safe with the host who loved 
God here and who love him there. Nothing can ever separ- 
ate his catholic soul from any of them. Not a great theo- | 
logian, he has met and been greeted by Augustine. Not 
permitted the crown of martyrdom, but always giving his 
life to his work, he has seen and rejoiced with Polycarp. Not 
a mellifluous or dramatic orator but ever commanding men 
by holy utterance, he has found rich intercourse with Chry- 
sostom. Not a profound scholar, but masterful of the light 
which scholarship sheds upon the path to and from Cal- 
vary, he has conversed with Lightfoot as well as Ignatius. 

There were, and yet are characteristics of spirit and like- 
nesses of experience which render the dream of divinest 
associations, facts, already attained or sure to be attained in 
the long hours of eternity. There was a Luther in Moody; 
and if it has not already occurred, it will be of great moment, 
even in heaven, when the bluff and often imperious initiator 
of the Reformation, with nearly four centuries of heavenly 
light modifying the fiery glance men saw on earth and trem-' 
bled at, shall strike glad hands with him through whom God 
revivified the church in the nineteenth century. I can con- 
ceive that Wesley and Whitfield, who one hundred years - 
before wrought a similar work in the history of English- 
speaking Christian experience, shall come together and pour. 
forth their praises with him, unto One whose name is above 
every name and who makes his evangelists both trophies and. 
conquerors. Heaven is a place where genius has its recon- 
ciliations through holiness. And God so loved the world 
through Moody, that in the home-coming of such a worker as 
was he, Jonathan Edwards must be found with Horace Bush- 
nell and old blind Cruden, who compiled the concordance 





RES ee Se yer in are TT Se ee 


oe PROLOGUE 6 


: which Moody so often used, must share the delight of the 


graceful and flaming Kirk, under whose ministry the evan- 


_ gelist was converted. But these are only a few of the souls 


a) 


who throng the streets of heaven, to render thanksgiving 


unto God that by His grace in Christ-Jesus,, Dwight L. 
_ Moody was won to a cause whose championship makes his 
name one of the most influential of earth, if not one of the 


most illustrious in heaven. If Fenelon and Savonarola are 
surpassed in the ardor of the “Good-morning”’ which they 
have spoken to him or are to speak, it must be by Saint Fran- 
cis Xavier and Sir Charles Borromeo. The evangelist makes 


the statesman possible and nations are safe where the cham- 
pion of the cross has disclosed the fiery bolt of Sinai, and 
_ revealed to men that fountain of self-sacrifice where the law 


_ which has been broken falls into the breaking heart of love 


-and peace is sure. So, on some to-morrow in heaven, Lin- 


coln, who, while he was saving the country which Moody 


loved, was not too busy to speak to the ragged boys in his 


- Sunday school, will stand with Gladstone and Shaftesbury, 
3 with Gordon and Knox, to exult in what God has wrought 
in their England and Scotland and America by the simple and 


-sinewy speech of Moody. 


The one towering person among those whose career as an 


evangelist of the Lord commanded most of Moody’s 


‘admiration and legal discipleship on earth was Paul, 
the apostle to the Gentiles. Moody often said that Paul’s ac- 


_ count of his conversion in Acts X XVI. 14-16 was the story of 
_ God’s way of making a great preacher. How like was 
' Moody’s experience unto that of Paul who was once Saul of 
Tarsus. What a meeting that must be when these heralds of 


the Cross salute one another! No man more eagerly or de- 
votedly followed another, though there were nearly nineteen 


hundred years between them. Paul was a scholar; Moody 
was unlearned. Paul labored to sow seeds in a field of stones, 


20 PROLOGUE 


with sharp swords thirsting for his blood; Moody stood in a 
harvest-field thick with golden grain which, while he desired. 
to make it a field for seeding again, offered him the one diffi- 
culty coming from the fact that men’s garners were full, and 
the world had grown so rich through Christianity that it had 
forgot the Christ. Paul was confronted by fierce intolerance; 
Moody was met by sleepy materialism and tame indifference. 
No man in the history of Christendom ever more truly be- 
lieved what another man said than did Moody of Paul. Had 
not the apostle of the Gentiles put aside these differences be- 
tween him and the trembling evangelist as he stood at the 
opening of his career when, in a flood of light, he had re- 
vealed the superiority and sovereignty of grace over every- 
thing else, saying: “For behold your calling, brethren, how 
that not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not 
many noble, are called; but God chose the foolish things of the 
world, that He might put to shame them that are wise; and 
God chose the weak things of the world, that He might put to 
shame the things that are strong; and the base things of the 
world, and the things that are despised, did God choose, yea 
and the things that are not, that He might bring to naught 
the things that are: that no flesh should glory before God. 
But of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who was made unto us 
wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification, and 
redemption; that, according as it is written, ‘He that glorieth, 
let him glory in the Lord.’” Had not Moody believed that 
Paul told the truth, just as a man believes the word of his 
friend, and had not Moody perceived, largely through the 
study of Paul, that to love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity 
and in truth is the beginning and the end of the Gospel, he 
never would have said to his friend at the conclusion of that 
meeting forty-five years ago in the little mission-school, 
“Reynolds, I have got only one talent. I have no education, 


‘davnNDAdGOd S.AGOOW SV NAONX ATINOWNOO 
‘SSV1D ‘IOOHOS AVANNS LSUId S:-TIEMAVS ‘A [ GNV AGOOW “1 ‘d 

































































































































































































































































IRA D. SANKEY, 
AUTHOR OF THE INSPIRED SONG: 


“There were ninety and nine that safely lay 

In the shelter of the fold, 

But one was out on the hills away, 

Far off from the gates of gold— 
Away on the mountains wild and bare, 
Away from the tender Shepherd’s care, 
Away from the tender Shepherd’s care ” 








PROLOGUE 23 


’ 


but I love the Lord Jesus Christ, and I want to do something 
for Him. I want you to pray for me.” 

After all, this is the heart-center of every victorious minis- 
try. Without this inner power, Paul preached at Athens and 
made a relatively small impression in spite of his evident 
learning; with this same power, Moody preached in Edinburg 
and shook the land of John Knox till it trembled with the 
breath of God—and he gave evidence of no learning at all. 
Nevertheless, he was a profound gospel-scholar, just as was 
Paul. Below the assertions of culture which belonged to the 


head, whose cold ideas and reasonings divide men, there 


flowed the heart-stream of an experience with Christ whose 
phenomena and dicta scholarship misses, while it unites, like 
an all-embracing current, all continents and islands of human 
~ hope. Why was it that Moody could reach the most schol- 
arly as well as the most ignorant in a vast auditory, at one and 
the same time? Why was that the man who had stopped at 


a noon-meeting with his dinner pail found the professor who 


came in from the school with his uncorrected examination 
papers and moved as was he by the same utterance? How 
could a coal heaver and a Drummond, a teamster and a 
George Adam Smith find inspiration for life at the fountain 
his words disclosed? The answer must be found in this, that 
Moody got down beneath the things which make men to 
| differ from one another and revealed fundamental necessities 


__ in human nature, and at the same time showed the path to 


. those supplies by which the love of God feeds the heart of 
humanity. 

This was Pauline, but above all, it was Christlike. And 
much as Moody loved Paul, and glorious as must have been 
the meetings between Moody and Paul, Moody loved his 
Saviour with a supreme ardor and there is no treasure in the 
English language sacred enough to be of use to the imagina- 
tion when we think of that moment, only a few hours ago, 


24 PROLOGUE 


when there was realized to this man what he hoped for as he 
sang with thousands round about him on earth: 


“Some day the silver cord will break, 
And I no more as now shall sing; 

But O! the joy when I shall wake 
Within the palace of the King. 


' “And I shall see Him face to face, 
And tell the story—Saved by grace; 
And I shall see Him face to face, 
And tell the story—Saved by grace.” 


PART I. 


MR. MOODY’S LAST WORDS. 


“The world is receding and heaven is opening,” 
A glorious vision enraptures my soul; 
I see just before me the King in His beauty; 
The race is now ended, I’ll soon reach the goal. 


I’ve tried in my weakness to tell the glad story, 

That God is our Father and Christ is our Friend; 
And now my reward is a heaven of glory, 

A glory with Jesus that never shall end. 


I’ve labored for riches and gathered. bright jewels, 
But not the vain riches that drag many down; 
My jewels are sinners I’ve led to the Savior, 
The jewels selected by Christ for His crown. 


Farewell, fellow workmen, I give you my blessing; 
Work on till the Master in glory appear; 
Remember my message to cheer you in labor, 
“The world is receding and heaven is near.” 


Davip H. Kina, D. D. 


Be f 4 5 


PART I. 
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH — 


CHAPTER? I; 
MOODY’S CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 


D WIGHT L. MOODY, the most unique and extraor- 

dinary religious figure of the nineteenth century, sprang 
from the best blood in historic New England. His ancestors 
on both sides were of pure English descent, and for nearly a 
century had lived in the neighborhood of Northfield, Mass., 
where he first saw the light in 1837. The spot where he was 
born lies in the midst of the famous Berkshire hills, and is one 
of exquisite beauty. The town of Northfield lies in a valley 
cut through by the meandering Connecticut River; while 
round about on every side rise picturesque hills and mountains. 
Like nearly all great men, Moody had a great mother. Dwight 


-was the sixth of nine children. 


When four years old his father died, leaving the wid- 
owed mother to care as best she could for her large family, 
the eldest of which was scarcely fifteen. Their homestead 


~ consisted of a substantial frame house with only two or 


three acres of adjoining land—the whole heavily mort- 
gaged. The mother was strongly urged to give her chil- 


_ dren to the neighbors to bring up for her, but she sturdily 
- refused, preferring direst poverty to parting from her flock, 


who were her dearest possessions on earth—her jewels. The 


eldest boys did odd jobs for neighboring farmers, and tended 


their little plot of ground; the mother worked from morn- 


- ing till night, now at home, now at the neighbors’. Thus by 


27 


28 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


dint of closest economy and constant struggling they man- 
aged to exist—though often they had little more than bread 
and water upon the family table. 

In the midst of these Spartan conditions the boy who was 
destined one day to sway the people of two hemispheres was 
reared. 

As a child, some of the characteristics which later made 
his name a household word wherever the English language 
is spoken could readily be detected. He had as sturdy a 
constitution as one could wish for. His limbs had muscles 
of iron, his nerves were threads of steel, he was the incarna- 
tion of superabundant restless energy. He had the will, while 
a child of five, of a boy of fifteen. He had the ambition of 
a full grown man when but a boy of ten. He was a leader 
among his comrades. And since the truth must be told, his 
Jeadership often resulted in all sorts of mischievous pranks 
upon his own household and upon the neighboring farmers. 
For study and school life he had small use—he was too rest- 
less to sit still for five consecutive minutes; he must ever 
be doing something—he it building up or tearing down. He 
was withal a remarkable boy, in whom a keen-sighted visitor 
might have detected numerous signs of large achievement 
in the future. Many stories are told of his boyhood escapades 
and experiences. 

While not a saintly or sentimentally devotional boy, he had 
a wholesome religious nature. While still a young lad he 
had a unique answer to prayer—a sort of presage of the hun- 
dreds of answers he was to have in after years. Once while 
he was crawling under a heavy rail fence, one of the rails 
becoming displaced the whole structure tumbled down and 
pinned him to the ground. There he lay, imprisoned by the 
cruel rails. He struggled until he was covered with perspira- 
tion, and completely exhausted. He then began to call for 
help, but he was far away from the nearest farmhouse and 





SA é ~ 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 29 


no one heard him. At length he began to think that he 


should die there on the mountain-side, all alone. But sud- 
denly he remembered his mother’s talks about God’s hearing 


__ and answering prayers and determined to ask God’s help in 


getting away. 

He prayed earnestly a few seconds, then again bent all his 
remaining strength to the task of freeing himself, and, be- 
hold! up went the rails and he crawled out happy and 
unharmed and free. 

That Moody should resort to prayer when all earthly ~ 
means had failed was not strange, for from childhood he had 
been made familiar with God’s name and power through his 
mother’s intensely religious nature and training. He had 
learned to read the Bible before any other book while sitting 
upon her knee. 

He had heard the famous Bible stories told over and 
over again by his mother on Sunday afternoons. It was 
his mother’s custom to repeat at the beginning of a meal 


‘at frequent intervals a text of scripture or a verse of a 


hymn, which the children would repeat in chorus after her. 
Thus in his ealiest years, while his mind was most plastic to 
outside impressions, the future evangelist became familiar 
with the noblest sentiments of saintly hymn writers and God’s | 
prophets and messengers throughout the ages. 

Many stories are told of young Moody’s youthful pranks, It 
is related that while attending the village school, young Moody 
was selected to recite Mark Anthony’s Oration over Caesar. 
He did so with dramatic effect. The two or three days before 


the time of recitation were spent in building a coffin, inside - 


of which was put a tom-cat. This he caused to be carried into 
the room just before delivering the oration. All went well, 
as he recited the famous piece, until, at a certain point, he 
violently kicked the coffin, and out jumped the tom-cat, causing 


a great uproar, which was long remembered in the school. 


30 DWIGHT L. MOODY — 


One summer while hiring out to a family, composed solely 
of two old ladies, he caught a squirrel in the field and placed 
it in his dinner-pail. When the good ladies opened the pail, 
out jumped the squirrel, nearly frightening them out of their 
wits. 

Many similar stories are told of his adventures and esca- 
pades. Thus the boy grew up until seventeen years of age, 
when he set out into the world to seek his fortune, the farm 
not being able to support the large family. 






Se aE 














MRS. MOODY 
Wife of the great evangelist. 


AGOOW ‘YW Ad GHSN ATEId AHL 





v as tt 
T Pesemecn seh, 26 


poo < 
oo 
ies 2 


Ses 




















MR. MOODY’S MOTHER 
Died, 1896, in her ninety-first year. . 


*owoy $,Apoo| “AJ WOLF Sojrul 9914} JNOYL ‘s}woIJOL [NjJI}Avad JSoul Ss _p[eyYyWION Jo suo 


STTV4 GHAVAVNVA 





CHAPTER II. 
MR. MOODY’S EARLY RECOLLECTIONS 


AS HE TOLD IT IN ENGLAND 


¢ rl CAN give you a little experience of my own family. 

Before I was four years old the first thing I remember 
was the death of my father. He was unfortunate in business, 
and failed. Soon after his death the creditors came in and 
took everything. My mother was left with a large family 
of children. One calamity after another swept over the 
entire household. Twins were added to the family, and my 
mother was taken sick. 

The eldest boy was fifteen years of age, and to him 
my mother looked as a stay in her calamity, but all at 
once that boy became a wanderer. He had been read- 
ing some of the trashy novels and the belief had seized 
him that he had only to go away to make a fortune. Away 
he went. I can remember how eagerly she used to look for 
tidings of that boy; how she sent us to the postoffice to 
see if there was a letter from him, and recollect how we used 
to come back with the sad news ‘No letter.’ I remember 
how in the evenings we used to sit beside her in that New 
England home and we would talk about our father; but the 
moment the name of that boy was mentioned she would hush 
us into silence. Some nights when the wind was very high, 
~ and the house, which was built upon a hill, would tremble at 
every gust, the voice of my mother was raised in prayer for 
that wanderer who had treated her so unkindly. I used to 
think she loved him more than all of us put together, and I 
believe she did. On Thanksgiving Day—you know that is a 
family day in New England—she used to set a chair for him, 

35 


36 _ DWIGHT L: MOODY. 


thinking he would return home. Her family grew up and 
her boys left home. When I got so that I could write, I sent 
letters all over the country, but could find no trace of him. 
One day, while in Boston, the news reached me that he had 
returned. While in that city, I remember how I used to look 
for him in every store—he had a mark on his face—but I _ 
never got any trace. One day while my mother was sitting 
at the door, a stranger was seen coming toward the house, 
and when he came to the door he stopped. 

He stood there with folded arms and great beard flow- 
ing down his breast, his tears trickling down his face. 
When my mother saw those tears she cried, ‘O, it’s my 
lost son,’ and entreated him to come in. But he stood still. 
‘No, mother,’ he said, ‘I will not come in until I hear first 
that you have forgiven me.’ Do you believe she was not will- 
ing to forgive him? Do you think she was likely to keep him 
long standing there? She rushed to the threshold, threw her 
arms around him and breathed forgiveness.” 


“WHERE IS MY WAND’RING BOY TO-NIGHT?” 


“Where is my wand’ring boy to-night— 
The boy of my tenderest care, 

The boy that was once my joy and light, 
The child of my love and prayer? 


“Go for my wand’ring boy to-night; 
Go, search for him where you will; 
But bring him to me with all his blight, 
And tell him I love him still.” 


Uf: 


“When I was a boy—before I was a Christian—I was in a 
field one day with a man who was hoeing. He was weeping 


Rabe eh > Ree) sae peg fe R 





SF 


= OTHE MAN -AND HIS°MISSION. > 37. 


and he told me a strange story, which I have never forgotten. 
When he left home his mother gave him this text: 

| 

‘SEEK FIRST THE KINGDOM OF GOD.’ 


But he paid no heed to it. He said when he got set- 
_ tled in life, and his ambition to get money was grati- 
fied, it would be time enough then to seek the king- 
dom of God. He went from one village to another and 
got nothing to do. When Sunday came he went into a 
village church, and what was his great surprise to hear the 
minister give out the text, ‘Seek first the kingdom of God.’ 
He said the text went down to the bottom of his heart. He 
thought it was but his mother’s prayer following him,and that 
- some one must have written to that minister about him. He 
felt very uncomfortable, and when the meeting was over he 
could not get that sermon out of his mind. He went away 
from that town, and at the end of a week went into another 
- church and he heard the minister give out the same text, 
- ‘Seek first the kingdom of God.’ He felt sure this time that 
_ it was the prayers of his mother, but he said calmly and de- 
liberately, ‘No; I will first get wealthy.’ He said he went 
on and did not go into a church for a few months, but the 
first place of worship he went into he heard a third minister 
preaching a sermon from the same text. He tried to drown 
—to stifle his feelings; tried to get the sermon out of his 
mind, and resolved that he would keep away from church 
altogether, and for a few years he did keep out of God’s 
“house. ‘My mother died,’ he said, ‘and the text kept coming 
up in my mind, and I said I will try and become a Christian.’ 
The tears rolled down his cheeks, as he said, ‘I could not; no 
sermon ever touched me; my heart is as hard as that stone,’ 
pointing to one in the field. I couldn’t understand what it 
was all about—it was fresh to me then. I went to Boston 


38 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


and got converted, and the first thought that came to me 
was this man. When I got back I asked my mother, ‘Is Mr. 
Ls living in such a placer’ “Didn’t I write you about 
him? They have taken him to an insane asylum, and to 
every one who goes there he points with his finger up there 
and tells him to seek first the kingdom of God.’ There was 
that man with eyes dull with the loss of reason, but the text 
had sunk into his soul—it had burned down deep. O, may 
the spirit of God burn the text into your hearts to-night. 
When I got home again my mother told me he was in his 
house, and I went to seehim. I found him ina rocking-chair, 
with that vacant, idiotic look upon him. As soon as he saw 
me, he pointed at me and said: ‘Young man, seek first the 
kingdom of God.’ Reason was gone, but the text was there. 
Last month, when I was laying my brother down in his grave, 
I could not help thinking of that poor man who was lying 
so near him, and wishing that the prayer of his mother had 
been heard, and that he had found the kingdom of God.” 





TE 


“T remember when I was a boy I used to try to walk across 
a field after the snow had fallen, and try to make a straight 
path; and as long as I kept my eye ona point at the other 
side of the field, I could make a straight path, but if I looked 
over my shoulder to see if I was walking straight, I would 
always walk crooked—always. And where I find people turn- 
ing around to see how others walk, they always walk crooked. 
But if you want to walk straight through this world, keep 
your eye on the Captain of your salvation, who has gone 
within the vale. Just keep your eye on Him, and you will 
have peace and light. 

I remember, too, I used to try to catch my shadow. I used 
to try to see if I could not jump over my head. I ran and 


roNANY 


_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 39 


jumped, but my head always kept just so far ahead of me. 
I never could catch my shadow, but I remember when I was ~ 


‘ a little boy, I was running with my face toward the sun, and 
I looked over my shoulder and I found my shadow coming 


after me. 

And I find since I became a Christian, that if I keep my eye 
on the Son of Righteousness, peace and light and joy and 
everything follow in the train; but if I get my eye off Him, 


_I always get into darkness and trouble. So if you want to 


keep in the light, keep your eye fixed on the Son of Righteous- 
ness and follow Him.” 


IV. 


“I remember when I left my mother, and went off to Boston 


and tried to get work and failed. It seemed that there was 


room for everyone else in the world, but there was none for 


me. For about two days I had that awful feeling that no 
_ one wanted me. I never have had since, and I never want it 
again. It is an awful feeling. It seems to me that it must 
have been the feeling of the Son of God when He was down 
here. They did not want Him. He had come down to save 


_ men and they did not want to be saved. He had come to lift 


men up, but they did not want to be lifted up.” 


CHAPTER III. | 
SEEKS HIS FORTUNE: FINDS HIS SAVIOR 


A T THE age of seventeen young Moody left his native 
village to win his own way in the world. He first went 
to Greenfield, where his brother was attending school, but after 
a few. months, seeking larger opportunities for success, made 
his way to Boston. He secured a situation as clerk in the 
shoe store of his uncle, Mr. Samuel S. Holton. How he came 
to go to Boston, some of his characteristics at this age, and 
the story of his conversion is graphically described by Mr. Ed- 
ward Kimball, who was Mr. Moody’s first Sunday-school 
teacher. He says: 

“To tell the story correctly I must go back of the important 
event a few weeks to Thanksgiving day. A Thanksgiving 
family dinner party was assembled at the Moody home, which 
was on a farm a mile and a half from Northfield, Mass. At. 
the table among others were Samuel and Lemuel Holton of 

Boston, two uncles of the Moody children. Without any pre- 

liminary warning young Dwight, a boy of about seventeen, | 

spoke up and said to his Uncle Samuel: ‘Uncle, I want to 
come to Boston and have a place in your shoe store. Will you 
take me?’ Despite the directness of the question, the uncle 
returned to Boston without giving his nephew an answer. 

When Mr. Holton asked advice in the matter from an older 

brother of Dwight, the brother told his uncle that perhaps he 

had better not take the boy, for in a short time Dwight would 
want to run the store. 

“Dwight was a headstrong young fellow, who would not 
study at school and who was much fonder of a practical joke 
than he was of his books. His expressed desire to go to Boston 

40 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION ~ 41 
and get work was not a jest that the boy forgot the day after 
Thanksgiving. The two uncles were surprised when one day 

in the following spring Dwight turned up in Boston looking 
for a job. His Uncle Samuel did not offer him a place. Dwight, 
when asked how he thought he could get a start, said he 
~ wanted work and he guessed he could find a position. After 
days of effort and meeting nothing but failure the boy grew 
discouraged with Boston and told his Uncle Lemuel he was 
going to New York. The uncle strongly advised Dwight not 
to go, but to speak to his Uncle Samuel again about the mat- 
ter. The boy demurred, saying his Uncle Samuel knew per- 
fectly well what he wanted. But the uncle insisted, so that 

_asecond time the boy asked his Uncle Samuel for a place in his 

_ store. 

“Dwight, I am afraid if you come in here you will want 
to run the store yourself,’ said Mr. Holton. ‘Now, my men 
here want to do their work as I want it done. If you want 
_ to come in here and do the best you can and do it right, and 
if you'll ask me when you don’t know how to do anything, or, 
if I’m not here, ask the bookkeeper, and if he’s not here, ask 

one of the salesmen or one of the boys, and if you are willing 
to go to church and Sunday-school when you are able to go 
anywhere on Sundays, and if you are willing not to go any- 
where at night or any other time which you wouldn’t want me 
or your mother to know about, why, then, if you'll promise all 
these things you may come and take hold and we'll see how we 
can get along. You have till Monday to think it over.’ 

“ T don’t want till Monday,’ said Dwight; ‘I'll promise 
now.’ And young Moody began work in his uncle’s shoe 
store. 

_ “A remark the boy’s uncle made to me afterward will give 
‘an idea of the young man’s lack of education at this time. 
‘The uncle said that when Dwight read his Bible out loud he 
‘couldn’t make anything more out of it than he could out of 


\ 


42 DWIGHT L. MOODY . 


the chattering of a lot of blackbirds. Many of the words were 
so far beyond the boy that he left them out entirely when he 
read and the majority of the others he mangled fearfully. 

“The young man came on Sunday to the old Mount Vernon 
church to Sunday-school. He told Superintendent Palmer 
who he was and asked to be placed in a class. The superin- 
tendent brought Dwight to the class I was teaching and he took 
his seat among the other boys. I handed him a closed Bible 
and told him the lesson was John. The boy took the book 
and began running over the leaves away at the first of the vol- 
ume looking for John. Out of the corners of their eyes the 
boys saw what he was doing and, detecting his ignorance, 
glanced slyly and knowingly at one another, not rudely, of 
course, you understand. I gave the boys just one hasty 
glance of reproof. That was enough; their equanimity was 
restored immediately. I quietly handed Moody my own book 
open at the right place and took his. I didn’t suppose the boy 
could possibly have noticed the glances exchanged between 
the other boys over his ignorance; but it seems from remarks 
made in later years that he did, and he said in reference to my 
little act in exchanging books with him that he would stick 
by the fellow that had stood up by him and who.had done him 
a good turn like that. 

“Then came the day when I determined to speak to Moody 
about Christ and about his soul. I started down to Holton’s 
shoe store. When I was nearly there I began to wonder - 
whether I ought to go just then during business hours. And 
I thought maybe my mission might so embarrass the boy that 
when I went away the other clerks might ask who I was, and 
when they learned might taunt Moody and ask if I was trying 
to make a good boy out of kim. While I was pondering over 
it all I passed the store without noticing it. Then when I 
found that I had gone by the door I determined to make a 
dash for it and have it over at once. I found Moody in the 




















DWIGHT L. MOODY 


From a recent photograph. 








SNAP SHOT OF MOODY CONDUCTING 
REVIVAL SERVICE © 


B c—_* 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION. — 8 


: back part of the store wrapping up shoes in paper and putting 


them on shelves. I went up to him and put my hand on his 


shoulder, and as I leaned over I put my foot upon a shoebox. 
I feel that I made a very weak plea for Christ. I don’t know 


just what words I used’nor could Mr. Moody tell. 1 simply — 


told him of Christ’s love for him and the love Christ wanted 
in return. That was all there was of it. It seemed the young 


man was just ready for the light that then broke upon him, 


a 


was exceedingly ambitious and was not afraid of hard work. | 
He determined that one day he would become a great merchant 


and there, in the back part of that store in Boston, the future 
great evangelist gave himself and his life to Christ.” 
Although young Moody was unlettered and in appearance 
a typical country boy, yet by his overflowing energy, wit and 
good nature he soon won the admiration of his fellow-clerks 
and worked up a large personal trade in boots and shoes. 
Indeed, within three months after entering the house he was 
selling more boots and shoes than any other man in it. He 


- prince. 


Thoroughly converted, young Moody was, however, still 


densely ignorant of the deeper things of the spiritual life. 
Jn view of his wonderful work in later years, it seems almost 


incredible that he should have been so ill-informed. The con- 


trast between his condition then and that only a few years later 


is most dramatic and wonderful. Moody knew so little about 


the primary facts of the Christian life that the church would 


not receive him until! he had been on probation for twelve 
months. After his first examination by the church committee, 


Mr. Kimball described his condition as follows: 


“He could not tell what it was to be a Christian; had no 


‘idea of what Christ had done for him; and with the utmost 


encouragement, aided by the presence of his teacher, whom 
he loved, he could answer but haltingly, chiefly in mono- 


syllables, and then only when the question was of the simplest, 


4 


46 ‘DWIGHT L. MOODY. | 


and its answer was obvious. I remember the chief question 
and its answer—the longest answer he gave: ‘Mr. Moody, 
what has Christ done for us all—for you—which entitles Him 
to our love?’ ‘I don’t know,’ he said; ‘I think Christ has done 
a good deal for us; but I don’t think of anything in particular, 
as I know of.’ ” 

Even after a year’s time he had seemingly advanced but 
little. Of his spiritual condition on the occasion of his second 
examination Mr. Kimball says: 

“When he met the committee again, no merely doctrinal 
questions were asked him: any more than before, and little 
more light appeared; but it was decided to propound him for 
_ admission, in view of his evident sincerity and earnest determi- 
nation to be a Christian, although he was still unable to give © 
any intelligent reason for hoping that he had given his heart 
to God.” 

In May, 1856, Mr. Moody was received into the Mount 
Vernon church of Boston. In the following September he left 
that city for Chicago. 





CHAPTER IV. 
STARTS A SUNDAY-SCHOOL IN CHICAGO’S SLUMS 


() N A beautiful day in the fall of 1856 young Moody arrived 
: in Chicago, and soon afterward obtained a situation 
as salesman in the boot and shoe store of Mr. Wiswall on 
Lake street. He carried a letter of recommendation to Mr. 
Wiswall, but the latter received him with some trepidation, 
owing to his rather uncouth appearance and impetuous man- 
ner. Ina few weeks, however, young Moody had become the 
favorite of his employer on account of his energetic ways. His 
hearty style made him extremely popular with the class of 
~ customers that patronized Mr. Wiswall’s establishment, and it 
soon became the custom among the other clerks, when uncour- 
teous or unmanageable customers came in, to turn them over 
~ to young Moody, who beat them at their own tactics of fancied 
sharpness and never failed to send them away in a good 
humor. 

At this time Mr. Moody was intensely ambitious. He deter- 


— mined to become a leader in the world of finance. Mr. Wis- 


wall says: “His ambition made him anxious to lay up money. 
His personal habits were exact and economical. As a sales- 
- man he was just the same zealous and tireless worker that he 
afterwards became in religion.” . 

A gentleman who was a clerk in those days in the same store 
~ gives the following interesting recollection of Mr. Moody at 
that time: “Moody was a first-rate salesman. It was his 
particular pride to make his column foot up the largest of any 
on the book—not only in the way of sales, but also of profits. 
He took particular delight in trading with notional or unrea- — 
sonable people, especially when they made great show of 

. 47 


48 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


smartness and cunning and thought themselves extraordinarily 
wise. Nothing was ever misrepresented in the smallest par- 
ticular, but when it came to be a question of sharpness of wit 
between buyer and seller, Moody generally had the best of it.” 

For two years Mr. Moody was a clerk in this and other boot 
and shoe establishments in Chicago, before giving up business 
to devote himself entirely to Christian work. During most of 
this time he lived at a boarding-house kept by a Mrs. Phillips, 
on Michigan avenue. He had a famous circle of fellow-board- 
ers, some of whom are still living, but more dead, among 
them being Edward Isham, Norman Williams, Levi Z. Leiter, 
General George W. Smith, General John L. Thompson, Benja- 
min B. Page and William H. Seward. Mr. Isham, in answer 
to inquiries regarding Mr. Moody’s characteristics at that time 
and later, said: 

“Moody was an exceedingly earnest, active and forcible man, 
strenuous in all his activities, but he was at the same time a 
broad-minded, generous-hearted, affectionate man, of whom 
all who knew him were very fond. He was the same man in 
early days as later. Every one of the circle remained fond of 
him to the very end, no matter how much he differed from 
them in views. 

“His friendliness made all friendly to him. Those who 
knew him best had always the most unbounded confidence in 
his sincerity and the greatest interest in his work. He aston- 
ished all his friends by his extraordinary development of power 
in the lines he took up. I don’t know of any one man who has 
reached and influenced more men by the sound of his own voice ~ 
since the days of Peter the Hermit.” 

Speaking of Mr. Moody’s endurance and the immense 
amount of work he accomplished, Mr. Isham said: “I remem- 
ber one night I was driving him in my sleigh to the tabernacle. 
He had been hard at work all day, having spoken once before, 
and he was to speak again that night. I was surprised at his 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION. 49 


vigor, and I remember I expressed, my wonder to him that he 
kept up so continuously. This was his reply tome: ‘The fact 


is, [never allow my thoughts to run except in the one channel.’ 


I do believe Moody spoke the truth when he said that. He 


never allowed any temptation or allurement to divert him. 


_ His earnest interest was always directed in one line. His whole 


life expressed absolute self-control, absolute self-discipline, 
_ absolute self-subordination. His later life was simply the out- 
growth of the qualities we knew and admired in him in the 


y 


: early days.” 


As an illustration of the way in which Mr. Moody continu- 
ally had the spiritual wellbeing of his friends on his mind, Mr. 


- Isham told this anecdote: “The last time I saw him was at the 
_ funeral of our common friend, Norman Williams, at Wood- 
stock, Vt. After the services he went back to his hotel and 
_ wrote a four-page letter to me, with sentences heavily under- 
scored, following his usual lines of thought. The letter was 


one more of his efforts to pluck me out of the burning, in which 


- I suppose he considered me a brand.” 


But while Mr. Moody was, first and foremost, a man of busi- 
ness, it must be remembered that he was also a member of 


i the Christian Church, and had by no means forgotten that 
while serving his employer he must also serve his God. Not 


long after his removal to Chicago Mr. Moody connected him- 


self with Plymouth Church, of which Rev. J. E. Roy was pas- 
~ tor, and devoted all his spare time on week-days and Sundays 
to religious work. His first work in this direction consisted 


of renting four pews in the church, then going out into the 


_ highways and byways and compelling young men and boys 


to come in and fill them Sunday after Sunday. This was 


~ somewhat of a sensation in religious circles, but Mr. Moody’s 
- enthusiasm carried it through to success. 


Dr. Roy is still living in Chicago. When I recently asked 


him about the truth of the pew story, Dr. Roy said: “It is 


50 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


absolutely true that the young man rented four or five pews 
and filled them with young men. He also went out and hunted © 
up Sunday-school scholars, but I don’t think that he asked for 
a class in the Sunday-school, as has been commonly reported. 
He said that he could not teach; but he was exceedingly active, 
took part in our prayer-meeting and went to neighboring 
prayer-meetings. He did not, however, attract large atten- _ 
tion until he started his ragged Sunday-school on the shore 
of Lake Michigan. This was the wickedest spot in Chicago, 
and that was why Moody went there. Now it is covered with — 
palatial homes. It was on the North Side, and his work over 
there took him from the Plymouth into the New England 
Church.” 

The story of Moody’s first Sunday-school class on the shore 
of Lake Michigan is one full of romance. Not feeling confi- 
dent enough to teach a class of boys from cultured and refined 
homes, as were those in Plymouth Sunday-school, he set out 
_ to find the worst class of youngsters in the city of Chicago. 
These he found on the North Side, in a low district known 
as “The Sands.” Here he gathered eighteen ragged and dirty 
urchins, the lowest class of street arabs, seated them on a drift- 
log, and under the open canopy of heaven proceeded to instruct 
them in his homely fashion in the things of the spiritual life. 
Sunday after Sunday he gathered these children from the 
lanes and alleys, and so inspiringly did he talk to them that 
his class soon became too large for the logs on the beach. 
He then rented an empty saloon in the same district and started 
a mission. Rev. G. S. F. Savage of Chicago recalls some 
interesting facts concerning Mr. Moody’s work at this stage. 
He says: “I met him soon after he began his work on the 
sands and was compelled to rent an old deserted saloon. The 
building had become too dilapidated even for a saloon. In 
this tumble-down old house he began to gather in the chil- 
dren. He went out into the streets with candy and knick- 





Ha Ss he Rent as geats eoery pees ied PoE eter, z ae rt 


teas ee oa Bs 
= + 


Reet as hs 


‘THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 5 


| Knacks and got the good-will of the children. When the school 
grew larger, he bought a pony and rode around the neighbor- 
~ hood. He gave the boys and girls a ride on the pony and 


<3 


pleased them immensely. The children all fell in love with 


him.” | 
“Not long after he started the mission,’ continued Dr. 
Savage, “he invited me to come to a Thanksgiving service in 


the evening. There were no gas-fixtures in the house and he 
“was trying to light it with a half-dozen candles; but the dark- 


ness had rather the best of it. I found him with a candle in 
~ one hand, a Bible in the other, and a child on his knee, which 


he was trying to teach. There were twenty-five or thirty chil- 
dren in all, and they were as sorry a lot of ragamuffins as 


~ could be found in Chicago. Moody asked them what they had 


to be thankful for. One said one thing and another said an- 
other thing, but they were generally agreed that there was 


nothing for which they were quite so thankful as for Mr. 
Moody himself. 


x 


“The school grew rapidly and soon became the greatest in 


the city. Afterward it went into a large hall and Moody 


began to have a name in the city. It was hard work for him to 
preach in those early days. One day I found him in his room 
trying to get upa sermon. He had thrown off his coat and was 
struggling with his Bible and a concordance, while the sweat 
ran down his face. Another time he came to me with an 
anxious look. ‘I have never preached on the Holy Spirit,’ he 


- said, ‘and to-night I want to make that my subject. Can you 


help me?’ I gave him an excellent little book on the Spirit. The 


- next morning he came to me with beaming face. ‘I read that 
book through three times,’ he said, ‘and then preached it; and 


do you know, fourteen persons were converted!’ After a 


while he talked to me about being ordained. ‘What do you 


think about my being ordained?’ he asked. ‘Don’t,’ I replied, 


_ 4f you are ordained you will be on a level with the rest of us. 


52 | DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Now you are a preaching layman and that gives you an — 
advantage. You are on the right road. Keep toit.’ It cannot 
be said that he talked well in those days, nor were his manners 
attractive; but he was tremendously in earnest.” : 

During the years following Mr. Moody’s arrival in Chicago 
his interest in religious work grew rapidly from day to day, 
although he did not for an instant neglect his business. Indeed, 
so successful was he in the latter field that in a few years 
he had saved, from his earnings and investments, nearly 
$12,000. 

In‘a short time Mr. Moody’s Sunday-school outgrew the 
small and cramped quarters of the old saloon. Then, using 
his own money and obtaining help from some influential 
friends with whom he had become acquainted, he rented a 
large hall over the old North Market. This hall was generally 
used on Saturday nights for a dance, and it took most of the 
forenoon of Sunday to sweep out the sawdust and wash out 
the tobacco and beer. Nothing daunted, however, Mr. Moody 
went into the thing heart and soul, swept out the place each 
_ Sunday morning, and soon succeeded in filling it with com: 

_fortable chairs. Among the men who assisted Mr. Moody © 
financially at this time was Mr. John V. Farwell. After 
Moody had received a considerable sum from Mr. Farwell, he 
inquired what the successful man of business was doing in the 
way of personal work for his Savior. Finding that his time 
was not fully occupied, he invited him to visit his mission Sun- 
day-school. 

On the following Sunday Mr. Farwell paid his first visit 
to the North Market street school. The scene that he witnessed 
was novel and rather startling. As yet seats had not been 
placed in the hall, and the scholars, to the number of nearly 
1,000, were engaged in every conceivable sort of romp and 
caper. Some were leaning up against the walls smoking ; 
others were playing leap-frog on the bare floor: others were 


aie 


Sikaee 


oe 

re ee 

maven Re 
ps PER: 


> 
Q 
=) 
im 
ep) 
WY) 
ea 
Q 
2 
© 
= 
ed 
= 


, his mother. 


} 
Sg 
A 

> 

n 
YY 

o 
(ea) 


The picture on the wall is Mrs 








ee arty. a=. 


























A [24h Os poaoy oM Woy wWIY Jo—eavs3 uo, oq}—oaer8 9} 998) pure doy punoy 0} 08 ued noX seek Suyu0o ou} UL ,, 


~HOV'Id ONILLSHS TVNIA S.:AGOOW ‘YIN—dO.L GNNOd 











ras ‘QoJAJas [eIOUNJ oy} Sulinp yoyseo oy} ul AB Apoq. s,Apooy “IJ 9190 
‘CTSIMH.LUON LV HOUNHD NOINN FHL 





“YST[OSUBAD }LO13 OY} Joe PoUleU VS¥IIIA 9} UI JooI}s [NjIJnNvoq JsOUL OU, 


‘CTSIAUHLUON ‘ANNEAV ACOOW 





SO 
ee SS 








THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 57 


wrestling or fighting; others were calling out mockingly, 
“Morning paper!” “Black your boots!” “Shine, mister; shine, 
shine!’—in short, a general state of pandemonium and chaos 
reigned throughout the hall. Finally, however, a Mr. Stillson 
began to read the Scriptures and there was a partial hush. 
~ Then Mr. Moody mounted the platform and began talking 
in a familiar, but intensely earnest and enthusiastic way, trans- 
lating spiritual things into the idiom and brogue of the street, 
which the boyish and roguish hearers could fully comprehend. 
In a few moments the room was perfectly quiet and Mr. Moody 
literally held that multitude of 1,000 in his hand. His words 
were vivid pictures and full of emotion that tenderly touched 
the heart of each hearer. 

Mr. Farwell was astonished beyond measure at all he saw | 
and heard. Upon being requested to make a speech, he said 
a few words, but only a few, fearing lest he should weary his — 
impatient audience. His astonishment, however, turned to 
amazement when, at the close of his words, Mr. Moody rose up 
and moved that Mr. Farwell be elected superintendent of the 
Sunday-school from that day forth by acclamation. A deafen- 
ing shout that shook the windows of the building proclaimed 
his unanimous election. It was in this dramatic fashion that 
Mr. Farwell began his work as a Sunday-school superintendent, 
under the leadership of Mr. Moody. 

The tremendous success of Mr. Moody’s slum Sunday-school 
proved beyond peradventure of doubt that Mr. Moody pos- - 
sessed a rare genius for proclaiming God’s Word among the 
common people. : 


CHAPTER V..- 
GIVES UP BUSINESS FOR GOSPEL WORK 


NE day an event occurred which changed the course of 
Mr. Moody’s life and led him to abandon business and ~ 
devote himself entirely to religious work. How this hap- 
pened can best be told in Mr. Moody’s own words. He says: 

“I had never lost sight of Jesus Christ since the first night 
I met him in the store in Boston. But for years I was only a 
- nominal Christian, really believing that I could not work for 
- God. No one had ever asked me to do anything. When I 
_ went to Chicago I hired five pews in a church and used to go 
out on the street and pick up young men and fill these pews. 
I never spoke to those young men about their souls; that 
was the work of the elders, I thought. 

“After working for some time like that, I started a mission 
Sabbath-school. I thought numbers were everything and so 
I worked for numbers. When the attendance ran below 1,000 
it troubled me; and when it ran to 1,200 or 1,500 I was elated. 
Still none was converted ; there was no harvest. 

“Then God opened my eyes. There was a class of young 
ladies in the school, who were without exception the most 
frivolous set of girls I ever met. One Sunday the teacher 
was ill and I took that class. They laughed in my face and 
I felt like opening the door and telling them all to get out and 
never come back. 

“That week the teacher of the class came into the store where 
I worked. He was pale and looked very ill. 

“What is the trouble?’ I asked. 

““T have had another hemorrhage of my lungs. The doctor 
says I cannot live on Lake Michigan, so I am going to New 


York state. I suppose I am going home to die.’ He seemed 
58 





uae MRE Bat NS 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION sg 


__ greatly troubled, and when I asked him the reason, he replied: 
‘Well, I have never led any of my class to Christ. I really 
believe I have done the girls more harm than good.’ 

- “T had never heard anyone talk like that before and it set 
me thinking. After awhile I said: ‘Suppose you go and tell 
them how you feel. I will go with you in a carriage, if you 
want to go.’ He consented and we started out together. It 
was one of the best journeys I ever had on earth. We went to 


the house of one of the girls, called for her and the teacher 


talked to her about her soul. There was no laughing then! 
Tears stood in her eyes before long. After he had explained 
the way of life he suggested that we have prayer. He asked 
me to pray. True, I had never done such a thing in my life 
as to pray God to convert a young lady there and then. But 
we prayed and God answered our prayer. 

“We went to other houses. He would go upstairs and be all 
out of breath and he would tell the girls what he had come 
for. It wasn’t long before they broke down and sought salva- 
tion. When his strength gave out I took him back to his 
lodgings. The next day we went out again. At the end of 
ten days he came to the store with his face literally shining. 

“ Mr. Moody,’ he said, ‘the last one of my class has yielded 
herself to Christ.’ I tell you, we had a time of rejoicing. He 
had to leave the next night, so I called his class together that 
night for a prayer meeting and there God kindled a fire in my 
soul that has never gone out. The height of my ambition 
~ tad been to be a successful merchant, and if I had known that 
meeting was going to take that ambition out of me I might 
not have gone. But how many times I have thanked God 
since for that meeting! 

“The dying teacher sat in the midst of his class and talked 
with them and read the fourteenth chapter of John. We tried 
to sing ‘Blest be the tie that binds,’ after which we knelt down 
to prayer. I was just-rising from my knees when one of the 


6o DWIGHT L. MOODY 


class began to pray for her dying teacher. Another prayed, 
and another, and before we rose the whole class had prayed. 
As I went out I said to myself: ‘O God, let me die rather than 
lose the blessing I have received tonight.’ 

“The next evening I went to the depot to say good-bye to 
that teacher. Just before the train started one of the class 
came, and before long, without any prearrangement, they were 
all there. What a meeting that was! We tried to sing, but 
we broke down. The last we saw of that dying teacher he 
was standing on the platform of the car, his finger pointing 
upward, telling that class to meet him in heaven. 

“I didn’t know what this was going to cost me. I was 
disqualified for business; it had become distasteful to me. I 
had got a taste of another world and cared no more for making 
money. For some days after the great struggle of my life 
took place. Should I give up business and give mysyelf to 
Christian work or should I not? I have never regretted my 
choice. Oh, the luxury of leading someone out of the darkness 
of this world into the glorious light and liberty of the gospel!” 

On leaving business to devote himself entirely to religious 
work, Mr. Moody devoted himself day and night to the task 
of building up the North Market street school. He rapidly 
enlarged its scope, so that meetings were held week-days and 
week-evenings, as well as on Sunday. It became a people’s 
institute among the poor of that district—with the ultimate — 
aim of saving souls shot through every effort. Classes in 
reading and writing and other branches of education were 
conducted evenings; but his main effort was ever directed to 
preaching the Gospel week-days as well as Sundays. The 
school flourished more and more, until it became far and away 
the largest in the city and the most famous Sunday-school 
in the entire Northwest. - 

About this time President-elect Lincoln visited Chicago and 
paid his memorable visit to Moody’s Sunday-school. The 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 6 


story of how he was induced to pay the school this high honor 
is as follows: 

The superintendent, Mr. John V. Farwell, on learning of 
Mr. Lincoln’s presence in the. city, being a friend of Mr. 
Lincoln’s, called on him, and among other things told him 
of the remarkable school conducted by the energetic religious 
worker, Mr. Moody, on the North Side. Mr. Lincoln was 
greatly interested and promised to visit the mission on the 
following Sabbath. When the day arrived, Mr. Farwell sent 
a carriage for the President-elect, who was staying at the 
home of a prominent citizen of Chicago, and was in the midst 
of his dinner when the carriage arrived. However, on hearing 
* that Mr. Farwell had come for him, Mr. Lincoln left his half- 
_ finished dinner, took a hasty leave of his host, and at once 


started for the school. 


As they journeyed along, Mr. Lincoln requested Mr. Farwell 
not to ask him for a speech, as he had never addressed a 
Sunday-school and would hardly know what to say. Mr. 
_ Farwell promised. As the two men entered the great hall, 
the enthusiasm of the street waifs and ragamuffins knew no 
- bounds. Cheer upon cheer greeted the President-elect. It 
- was with great difficulty that their enthusiasm was finally 
somewhat stilled and the usual exercises carried on. When 
at the conclusion of the service Mr. Farwell introduced Presi- 
dent Lincoln, the enthusiasm once more broke out tumultu- 
ously, and continued cries of “Speech!” were heard throughout 
the hall. 

Thus called upon by the common people whom he loved, 
Mr. Lincoln made a brief address—which was the first and 
last Sunday-school speech of his life. He told the boys and 
girls that the Sunday-school room was the best possible place 
they could gather in on Sunday afternoons, and the Bible 
- was the best possible book they could study. He told them 

that what they learned from the Bible would he of greatest 


62 -- DWIGHT. _L. MOODY, 


use to them in after life if they practiced its precepts; and — 
finally, that their chances of becoming honorable and famous 
men and women depended very largely upon the attention 
they bestowed upon the Bible lessons they were then receiving. — 


As he finished, a third ovation of wild cheers greeted the 


President and continued until he left the hall and his carriage — 
disappeared down the street. 

Many interesting anecdotes are recalled by Moody’s co- 
workers of his experience in this famous Sunday-school. 
One incident is especially noteworthy as showing both Mr, 
Moody’s strategy and his supreme faith in the Spirit of God. 
One day Mr. Moody learned of the children of a famous liquor 
dealer, who had for a number of Sundays attended his school 
but suddenly ceased to come. As was his custom, Mr. Moody 
went to find out the reason for the absence of his scholars. 
On reaching the saloon and making known his errand, how- 
ever, he received a very warm and rough reception and a_ 
~ fierce injunction to “get out of that place as quickly as possible 
and never show his head in it again.” 

Return, however, he did, and that frequently, but only to 
meet with a blasphemous rebuff each time. The saloonkeeper 
declared, “I would rather have my son a thief, and my daughter 
a harlot, than that you should make fools and Christians of 
them over there at your Sunday-school.”’ 

But Moody still persisted. One day he found the saloon- 
keeper in a better humor than usual, and asked if he had ever 
read the New Testament. Bluntly the saloonkeeper replied: 

“No. Have you read Paine’s ‘Age of Reason’ ?” 

The evangelist was compelled to answer in the negative. The 
saloonkeeper then proposed that if Mr. Moody would read the 
“Age of Reason” he would read the New Testament. 

Mr. Moody gladly agreed to this. Toa friend he remarked, 
“He had the best of the bargain; but it gave me a chance 
to call again to bring him the book.” 





La ee Oe se Se iW Le eee ® 2 
See Beat atc set NS sd Vise eee 


_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 63 


With great toil Mr. Moody finally succeeded in completing 
the “Age of Reason,” and called upon the publican to find out 


how he liked the New Testament. But the man was uncon- 


vinced as yet, and wanted a public debate. Said he to Mr. 
Moody: . 
“You are always inviting me and my children to go to 
meeting. You can have a meeting here if you want to.” 
“What!” exclaimed Mr. Moody, “will you let me preach © 
-in your saloon?” 
“T will,” said he. . 
“And will you bring in your family and let me call in a 
congregation composed of the neighbors?” 
“I will,’ replied he. “But remember that I and my friends 
will have a chance to talk in this meeting as well as you.” 
“All right,” said Mr. Moody. “You may have forty-five 
minutes while I will take only fifteen.” 
The day for the meeting dawned; but when Mr. Moody 
_ reached the place he found that it was too small for the large 
- crowd that had gathered. They had adjourned toa neighbor- 
ing house, which he found full of atheists, blasphemers and 
rough characters, eagerly awaiting a wordy and perhaps other 
_ battle with the young missionary. Nothing daunted, however, 
_ and with a prayer in his heart that God would give the vic- 
tory, Mr. Moody entered the building and took.his place in 
the midst of the group. 

At once they poured at him a great number of questions; but 
he stopped them, crying, “No questions! I will use my time in 
preaching Christ to you—not in arguing with you. Goon and 
say what you like for forty-five minutes; then it will be my 
- turn.” 

At once four or five of the leaders began to talk, but before 
many minutes had passed they had disagreed and were quar- 
reling with one another over their different doctrines. As the 

time passed, the debate grew furious, and the atmosphere soon 


64 DWIGHT L. MOODY — 


became rife for a fight. All this time, however, Mr. Moody 
had been holding his watch in his hand. “Order! Your time 
is up,” he cried, after forty-five minutes had elapsed. “I am 


in the habit of beginning my addresses with prayer. Let us 


- pray.” And, suiting the action to the word; he kneeled down 


and began imploring God to have mercy on the assembled 


_ crowd and to give them faith in Christ and in the Word of 
God. 

Many were touched by the earnest appeal. But he had 
scarcely ceased speaking when he requested a little boy, who 
had been remarkably converted in the Sabbath-school a short 
time previous, to pray. This child was full to overflowing of 
the Spirit of God. As his small but clear voice arose and he 
began talking to his Father and Friend, Jesus, a hush fell on 
the entire group. As the little boy continued to tell God all 
about those wicked men, and prayed that his Holy Spirit might 
convert them, it indeed seemed as though a second Pentecost 


had come, and as if the Holy Spirit had descended upon the, 


gathering. Some began to weep and others began to pray, 
while still others rushed out of the room unable to withstand 


the almost visible power of the Spirit. A number were in-. 


stantly converted by this remarkable prayer of the Spirit-filled 
child. 

As Elijah won a complete victory in his contest with the 
priests of Baal, so Mr. Moody’s victory over the rumseller and 
his infidel friends was complete. The saloonkeeper’s children 
attended Sunday-school regularly thereafter, while it was not 
long until the father himself stood up in a noon-day prayer- 
meeting and begged for prayers for his conversion. 

At this time Mr. Moody’s meetings were often disturbed by 
the rowdyism of Catholic boys. For a time Mr. Moody said 
nothing, but finally the interruptions became so frequent and 
of such a serious character that he went to Bishop Duggan, 
the Roman prelate of Chicago, and told him all about the 


| 

















6 


’S SUNDAY SCHOOL CLASS IN 385 


MOODY 


MR 









































REV. R. A. TORREY, 


Pastor Moody’s Chicago Avenue Church; also Superintendent of 
‘“The Moody Bible Institute.’”’ 


ss THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 67 


> affair. Moreover, Mr. Moody declared that he frequently 


called upon Roman Catholics who were sick and did every- 


_ thing in his power to help people in trouble, no matter what 


their creed. In conclusion he asked the Bishop to issue an 

order restraining the boys from breaking up his meetings. 
The Bishop was both surprised and. pleased with Mr. 

Moody’s boldness, zeal and kindly spirit. But he replied with 


_ tact that he would with pleasure give the recommendation asked 
for if Mr. Moody would become a member of the Catholic 


church, saying that such an energetic worker should certainly 


~ join the true church of God. 


Mr. Moody declared that he was afraid his joining’ the 


- Catholic church would injure his work among the Protestants. 


“Not at all,” replied the Bishop. 
“What! Do you mean that I could go to noon pray-meet- 
ings and pray with all kinds of Christian people—Baptists, 


Methodists, Presbyterians, all together, just as I do now?” 


“Certainly,” replied the Bishop. “If it were necessary you 
might do that.” 

“Do you, then, favor Protestants and Catholics praying to- 
gether ?” 

oY eS.” 

“In that case, Bishop,” replied Mr. Moody, “I wish you 


would kneel down right here and pray for me, that God will 


show me the light, and if it is His will, help me to join the true 
church and be a worthy member of it.” 
_ Such a request the Bishop could not refuse. So down the 


two kneeled—the uncouth youth and the polished prelate. 
_Earnestly and ardently the Bishop prayed for the heretic—but 


no sooner had he reached the “Amen” than the heretic began 


as ardently to pray for the Bishop. 
Such tact and good-will completely won the Bishop, and 


| they were good friends from that day forward. Mr. Moody 
"was not converted by Bishop Duggan; but that prelate is said 


68 DWIGHT L. MOODY 

to have remarked that if such had been the case there is no 
telling what high position in the true church he might have 
attained. Years later, when Mr. Moody was conducting his 
great campaign in England, the incident was widely published 
in British journals. One day a Catholic priest, who had read 
it, called upon Mr. Moody, and long and earnestly labored 
with him to abjure his heresy and join the true church before 
it was too late. “If you would only join the true church,” ~ 
said the priest, “you would be the greatest man in England.” 





CHAPTER VI. 
"BECOMES LEADER OF THE Y. M. C. A, 


HE Young Men’s Christian Association of Chicago was 
organized in 1857; but while officially a, young men’s 
association, it was really conducted and managed almost en- 
tirely by persons well advanced in years. At first it flourished 
vigorously, owing to the influence of the great revival of 
1857-8, but soon the work became stagnant and mechanical. 
- At this point, however, young Moody grew interested in the 
work, and, under the inspiring influence of his words and . 
example, a new spirit was infused into the meetings. He inter- 
ested other young men in the work and soon the attendance 
at the noon prayer-meetings rapidly increased, until the hall 
was over-crowded and they were compelled to move to a large 
- back room in the Methodist Church block. It must be remem- 
 bered that at this time Mr. Moody had no regular means of 
support, and in lieu of a lodging-house he slept upon the 
benches in this room. Oftentimes, having no money save a 
few pennies, he lived for days upon crackers and cheese ard 
water. Such self-denial and Christian heroism, however, was 
not to be without its reward. It was in these days of privation 
_ that Mr. Moody consecrated himself more than ever to God’s 
service. A short time previous he had heard a man remark, 
“The world has yet to see what results can be accomplished 
~ by one man wholly consecrated to God.” Moody said quietly, 
“T will be that man!” and from that time his single and sole 
aim was to glorify God with every moment of his time and 


every ounce of his strength. Mr. Moody’s devotion to the 


work soon led to his being elected to the management of the 


association, but he sturdily refused to receive a penny for his 
9 


79 oY DWIGHT Te MOODY: 


labor. Mr. S. A. Kean, for the last fifteen years Treasurer of 
of the Chicago Young Men’s Christian Association, says: 

“Mr. Moody found a congenial field of labor in the Asso- 
ciation. His advent to the weak and struggling organization, 
which was run almost entirely by middle-aged men, was like a 
stiff northwest breeze. His zeal and devotion rapidly became the 
life and hope of the Association, but he shocked the nice sense 
of propriety of some of these gentlemen, by carrying its work 
among a class of people who had hitherto been neglected, under 
the impression that its proper line of effort was among the 
higher classes of young men. Under Mr. Moody’s leadership 
the Y. M. C. A. became a very popular institution, extending 
its influence to all classes of society, bringing culture and 
wealth to the assistance of the ignorant and poor. Mr. Moody 
was most fertile in originating schemes for the raising of 
money for the Association, but of the tens and hundreds of 
thousands of dollars which he secured for us he accepted 
nothing whatever for himself. He even refused a salary, say- 
ing it would embarrass him and limit his freedom to go ata 
moment’s notice wherever the Lord might call him. I was 
Treasurer of the Association from the time of his first con- 
nection with it, and I do not remember to have paid him a 
dollar, either for his services or the expenses incidental to his 
work. Neither do I remember any appropriation being made 
for his assistance, though he often needed and always deserved 
it. His friends sometimes blamed him for his neglect of his 
own interests, but in reply he would always say: ‘God is rich 
and I am working for Him.’ During these years his favorite 
text of Scripture was Paul’s saying, ‘This one thing I do, for- 
getting the things which are behind, and reaching forth unto 
those things which are before, I press toward the mark of the 
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.’ ” 

More and more as Mr. Moody threw himself soul and body 
in the work of the Y. M. C. A. it grew and flourished. 


EWA eas I cece i et ee a ea a AR 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION. 7 


The noon services were conducted by Mr. Moody with such 
originality and enthusiasm that they rapidly became renowned 
throughout the entire northwest. Strangers visiting the city 
naturally attended them as one of the wonders of Chicago. 
Mr. Moody personally greeted each comer and endeavored to 
make them feel thoroughly at home. The meeting began with 
_ stirring songs, given out by the leader or some one in the 
audience, and continued throughout with the utmost freedom 
and familiarity. Indeed, from the platform Mr. Moody would 
often call on an individual as follows: “You, brother, over 
there by the first window, do you love the Lord and have you 
-some testimony for Him?” 

He would then, after the man had finished speaking, ask his 
name; where he came from; what business he was engaged in; 
what church he attended; and would end up by giving him a 
friendly word of counsel and advice. A few minutes later he 
would call out: ‘That red-haired man on the back seat, are 
you a Christian?” 

The man thus addressed would rise to his feet and say a 
few words, whereupon Mr. Moody would ask his name and 
residence, writing it in his little book, and assure the man to 
consider himself from henceforth an old member and to get 
_ right to work bringing in others. 

At other times he would walk up and down the aisles, noting 
the faces of the audience and seeking for persons under con- 
viction. Finding such a one, he would at once approach him 
and tenderly and earnestly endeavor to secure his salvation. 
Sometimes he would approach the penitent individual, kneel 
down beside him, and have the whole congregation kneel also 
while he poured out an audible prayer for his conversion; and 
more than once such an impulsive proceeding resulted in instant 
salvation. 

It was Mr. Moody’s regular habit to enter a little closet in 
the building and on his knees commune with God from 11 te 


72 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


11:45 a.m. Ata quarter to twelve he went down on the side- 
walk in front of the hall, his face glowing with Christian 
enthusiasm, and spoke to as many passers-by as possible, en- 


deavoring to persuade them to attend the prayer-meeting. One 


day while thus engaged he laid his hand on the arm of a 
powerful man who was hurrying along and asked him, “Are 
you for Jesus?” 

“T am,” was the answer. 

“Then go right up to the noon prayer-meeting.” 

This was more than the stranger had expected, for he had 
fallen from the habit of attending prayer-meetings. To use 
his own words, he “used to be a Baptist, but had not worked 
at it now for a good while.” Hence he endeavored to excuse 
himself, saying, “I cannot go up to-day.” 

“Yes, you can,” exclaimed Mr. Moody, understanding the 
man’s condition in a flash; and it was only by a pretense of 
anger and display of force that the backslidden Baptist was 
able to get away. 

With half a hundred others, however, he was successful dur- 
ing his fifteen minutes of work on the sidewalk. Exactly as 
the clock struck 12 he would rush up the stairway, three or 
four steps at a time, and hasten to the platform to help forward 
the meeting. The leadership of the service he frequently gave 
into other hands, securing the services of clergymen and conse- 
crated laymen throughout Chicago and the Northwest. But 
no matter who spoke, Mr. Moody’s spirit animated every meet- 
ing, and oftentimes he would take charge of it in the middle of 
the service if it was inclined in any way to drag or become 
dull. If any one of the audience began to preach instead of 
giving a short and stirring testimony, Mr. Moody at once 
shut him up, calling for a hymn or quoting a text of Scripture. 
Indeed, so inexorable was his demand for point and brevity 
that these noon-day prayer-meetings soon became the model 


from which nearly all others throughout the Christian world — 


ia orb aia Oi kare eS See 
if Se tee, en NS ee Se 
bial KS 





ss THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 3 


took their cue. It is doubtless true that Mr. Moody more 
’ than any other man taught the Christian people of Chicago 
the art of speaking and praying in meeting pointedly and 
_ briefly, and in later years just as truthfully did he teach almost 
*he entire Christian world the same art. 

in 1865 the hall in the Methodist Church block becoming 
. too small, Mr. Moody originated a scheme for a stock company, 
whereby a large and handsome hall should be built, devoted 
exclusively to Y. M. C. A. work. The money necessary for the 
undertaking was soon subscribed and the hall completed, the 
- most prominent financial backer being Mr. John V. Farwell, 
who was so tremendously interested that he subscribed to the 
undertaking the land upon which his house stood, valued at 
$30,000. It cost $100,000 and was located on Madison street, 
in the heart of the business portion of Chicago. It contained 
an auditorium capable of seating 3,000 persons; a large room 


. for the noon prayer-meeting about one-third that size; a 


- library; a reading-room; offices for the Tract and Publication 
department; the relief department and the employment bureau ; 
_ private rooms for some of the officers who were to live in it 
and have charge of the building ; and, last but not least, a closet 
_ for private prayer. 

The dedication of this building, on the 29th of September, 
- 1867, marked a new era in the progress of the Y. M. C. A. 
work throughout the world. While the dedicatory services 
were in progress Mr. Moody suddenly arose and moved that 
in honor of Mr. John V. Farwell’s services the auditorium be 
~ named Farwell Hall. The motion was seconded and carried 
_ with a cheer. In delivering the opening address on this occa- 
sion President Moody said: “If there is one thing more than 
another for which Chicago is distinguished, it is the rapidity 
of its growth, in size, wealth and in the extent of its trade. 
But of all the great and swift successes which have come to 
us, none is more striking than that of the Young Men’s Chris- 


74 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


tian Association. A few years ago this Association was grow- 
ing weaker and weaker, and at one time it came very near 
dying. Those who organized it made the mistake of supposing 
that if they opened some rooms and gave notice of meetings 
to be held in them, sinners would come there of their own 
accord to be saved. But they were not long in finding out 
that if they would save the lost they must search for them in 
the byways and dark places, where they are hidden away from 
the light of Christ and His gospel. Then we began to go out + 
and bring them in. That was just what Christ told us to do. 
And now, because we have obeyed Him and gone to work in 
His way, Christ has helped us to build this hall. 

“Tt seems to me the Association has just commenced its 
work. There are those, indeed, who say that we have reached 
the limit of our power. But we must rally round the cross; 
we must attack and capture the whole city for Christ. 

“His answer to our prayers and His blessing on our work 
give me faith to believe that a mighty influence is yet to go 
out from us that shall extend through this county and every - 
county in the state; through every state in the Union; and 
finally, crossing the waters, shall help to bring the whole world 
to God?” 

A marvelous prophecy this! Little did this Y. M. C. A. 


worker dream that in a few short years his prophecy would be 


fulfilled beyond his wildest hopes. For four years Mr. Moody 
held the presidency of the Y. M. C. A., and then declined re- 
election, being put in, however, as vice-president. 


CHAPTER VII. 
MR. MOODY FOUNDS A UNION CHURCH 


URING these years, however, all Mr. Moody’s energies 
were not devoted to the Y. M. C. A. He had continued 

his North Market street mission, with services not only on 
Sunday but throughout the week. The work rapidly grew 
into a church rather than a mere Sunday-school, and in 1863 a 
commodious chapel, with tower and spire, was erected in 
Illinois street, not far from the old Market Hall, at a cost of © 
about $20,000, which money was collected by Mr. Moody him- 
self. It was known as the Illinois Street church until in 1873, 
when the edifice was destroyed by the great Chicago fire and 
- the present handsome structure at Chicago avenue and La Salle 
avenue, known as Moody’s Chicago Avenue church, was 
erected in its stead. The creed of this Illinois Street church 
as prepared by Mr. Moody was extremely simple. It reads 


as follows: 
ARTICLES OF FAITH. 


(Creed Union Church—Common Property.) 

I. We believe in the only true God (John xvii. 3), the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost (Matt. xxviii. 19). Who 
created all things (Rev. iv. 11), and upholds all things by the 
word of His power (Heb. i. 3), in whom we live, and move, 
and have our being (Acts xvii. 28). A God of truth, and 
without iniquity, just and right is He (Deut. xxxii. 4) ; and 
He shall judge the world (Psalm ix. 8). 

II, We believe all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for 
instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be 

75 


76 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works (2 Tim. 
ill. 16-17). 

ITI. We believe that by one man sin entered into the world, 
and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all 
have sinned (Rom. v. 12), and judgment came upon all men 
to condemnation (Rom. v. 18). For the wages of sin is death, 
but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord (Rom. vi. 23). 

IV. We believe there is none other name under heaven, given 
among men, whereby we must be saved (Acts iv. 12). For 
_ other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is 
_ Jesus Christ (I. Cor. iii. 11). We also believe that Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that He was 
buried, and that He rose again the third day according to the 
Scriptures (I. Cor. xv. 3-4), and sat down on the right hand 
of the Majesty on high (Heb. i. 3), now to appear in the 
presence of God for us (Heb. ix. 24). 

V. We believe God so loved the world that He gave His 
only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life (John. iii. 16); and he that 
believeth not God hath made Him a liar; because he believeth 
not the record that God gave of His Son, and that is the record, 
that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in His 
Son. He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the 
Son of God hath not life (I. John v. 10-12). 

VI. We believe that Christ, the Head over all to the Church 

(Eph. i. 22), hath commanded us to baptize in the name of the 
_ Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matt. xxviii. 
19) ; and the same night in which He was betrayed, took bread; 
and when He had given thanks, He brake it, and said, Take, 
eat: this is my body, which is broken for you; this do in re- 
_ membrance of me. And after the same manner also He took 
the.cup, when He had supped, saying, This cup is the New 
Testament in my blood. This do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in 





NX 


Pe EN ede DO genes ol Cake Gi es 


Se * . ie 


- THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION — 77 


remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this bread, and 


drink this cup, ye do show the Lord’s death til He come 
(I. Cor. xi. 23-26). 

In accepting and subscribing to the above articles of faith, 
we by no means set aside or undervalue any of the Scriptures 
of the Old and New Testament, but believe all to be equally 
God’s own written Word, given to us through the inspiration 
of the Holy Spirit; but the knowledge and belief of the truth, 
as stated in our articles of faith, we deem necessary to salva- 
tion and sound doctrine, and thereby requisite for Christian 
fellowship. 

As pastor of the church, Mr. Moody was a great success. 
Like a shepherd, he knew all his flock by name, and was ever 
ready to help the poor and unfortunate by every means within 
his power. He was able to say with Job, “The blessing of him 
that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the 


- widow’s heart to sing for joy. I was eyes to the blind, and 


feet was I to the lame. I was a father to the poor, and the 
cause which I knew not I searched out.” 

Mr. Hitchcock, who is still a member of Mr. Moody’s church, 
and was at one time a member of his household, gave me the 
following interesting glimpse into Mr. Moody’s methods at 
this time: 

“At an early hour in the morning, the omnibus which was 
to take Mr. Moody and a number of his leading men, was at 
the door, and with a carefully prepared list of residences they 
began the day’s labor. The list included a large proportion 
of poor families living in garrets and in the upper stories of 
high tenement houses. As our omnibus reached a family be- 
longing to his congregation, he would spring out of it to the 
ground and leap up the stairs three or four steps at a time, 
rush into the room 2fter a rapid and hurried knock and pay 
his respects in these words: 

“You know me, I am Moody; this is Deacon de Golyer, 


/ 


78 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


this is Deacon Thane, this is Brother Hitchcock, Are you all 
well? do you all come to church? and Sunday-school? Have 
you all the coal you need for the winter? Let us pray;’ and 
down we would all go upon our knees, while Mr. Moody 
offered from fifteen to twenty words of tender, sympathizing 
supplication, that God would bless this man and his wife and 
each one of the children. Then springing to his feet, Mr. 
Moody would dash on his hat, dart through the doorway and 
down the stairs, followed by struggling deacons, shouting a 
hearty good-bye behind him, leap into the omnibus and off 
the horses run to the next place on the list, the entire exercise 
occupying about one minute and a half. We kept this up all 
morning. Before long the horses were tired out, for Moody 
insisted upon their going on a run from one house to another, 
so the omnibus was abandoned and the party proceeded on 
foot. One after another his companions became exhausted 
from running up and down stairs and across the streets, and 
‘kneeling on bare floors and getting up in a hurry, until re- 
luctantly, but of necessity, they were obliged to relinquish the 
attempt; Moody was left to make the last few of the 200 calls 
alone. He returned home in the highest spirits and with no 
sense of fatigue, to laugh at his exhausted companions for 
deserting him. The next year, however, nothing daunted, 
Mr. Moody repeated this extraordinary performance with the 
exception that he did not take a carriage, but went through a 
similar social and religious work on foot, reminding his 
friends that on a previous New Year they had often felt obliged 
to leave the carriage before reaching the house, lest the sight 
of it should grieve or offend the poor home they visited, to 
whom it would appear a needless extravagant and injudicious 
use of money, and therefore they would give their pastor and 
his friends a less sincere and affectionate welcome.” 
About this time, however, the great Civil War broke out, and 
Mr. Moody became the leading spirit of the Christian com- 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION : 79 


mission. Later he became engaged in Sunday-school work, 
traveling from one end of the Union to the other; but though 
absent from his church in body, he was still present with them 
in spirit. Years after Mr. Moody had left Chicago, Mr. Hitch- 
cock said: “If it is announced that a letter is to be read from 
Mr. Moody, we are sure to have a crowded school. He really 
holds us in his hand, although he has been absent for so 
long.” ; 


CHAPTER VIII. 
REVIVAL MEETINGS AMONG CIVIL WAR SOLDIERS 


D URING Mr. Moody’s work in Chicago from 1856 to 
. 1861, his name had become a household word in that 
city. But the breaking out of the Civil War opened up a far 
wider field of usefulness, into which he plunged with char- 
acteristic energy, and his name rapidly became known through- 
out the nation. Soon after hostilities began, the devotional 
committee of the Chicago Young Men’s Christian Association, 
of which Mr. Moody was chairman, mapped out a plan for 
an active Gospel campaign among the soldiers. The first 
75,000 volunteers were under way so quickly that very little 
could be done in the form of religious work among them; but 
when the second call, for 300,000 more, was made, and a 
camp of rendezvous, called Camp Douglas, was established 
_ near the southern limits of Chicago, Mr. Moody instantly saw 
and grasped his opportunity. When the first regiment arrived 
on the ground, Mr. Moody and his committee were there hard 
at work pitching a big tent, preparatory to holding a camp 
prayer-meeting that night. As fast as other regiments arrived 
_ other tents were pitched, in which were placed all kinds of re- 
ligious literature, and long tables with abundant writing 
material, in order to remind the soldiers of the duty of writing 
home. Eight or ten meetings were held nightly in the different 
camps and continuous services were held on Sunday. Mr. 
Moody and his committee were obliged to issue call after call 
for assistance. In reply one hundred and fifty clergymen and 
laymen placed themselves under his direction. Scores of men 
were converted nightly and hundreds on Sunday, during the 


entire time that the camp was located at Chicago. In all over 
& 


a) 
— 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION er 


1,500 gospel services were held in Camp Douglas. Of Mr. 
Moody’s activity at this time, Mr. B. F. Jacobs says: 

“In these meetings Mr. Moody seemed almost ubiquitous. 
He would hasten from one barrack and camp to another, day 
and night, week-days and Sundays, praying, exhorting, con- 
-versing personally with the men about their souls, and reveling 
in the abundant work and swift success which the war had 
brought within his reach.” 

After the battle of Fort Donelson, on the 15th of February, 

- 1862, urgent calls came from Kentucky for gospel workers. 
In response a special committee of relief was sent, composed 
_ of Mr. Moody, Rev. Robert Patterson, D. D., and Mr. B. F. 
Jacobs. A number of others followed them from Chicago, 
eager to render any assistance within their power. Meetings 
similar to those in Camp Douglas were held in Kentucky with 
equally good results. Hundreds, and even thousands, were 
born into the kingdom in the midst of the awful carnage of 
war. 
As the war continued and the conflict increased in fierceness, 
~ Mr. Moody and his companions performed well-nigh Hercu- 
lean tasks in caring for the wounded and preaching Christ to 
_ the dying. Back and forth between Chicago and the various 
~ camps and battlefields, with tireless vigor and jubilant faith, 
_ Mr. Moody toiled and traveled during the four terrible years 
of war. During this time of strain and hardship, Mr. Moody’s 
faith increased a hundred fold. So frequent were the answers 
to his prayers that he was rather surprised than otherwise if 
the penitent soldier for whom he prayed was not converted 
before the concluding “Amen” was reached. One of the 
Christian commissioners gives the following remarkable in- 
stance of how God answered the prayers of these consecrated 
workers. It is a modern version of the miracle of the loaves 
and fishes: 

One night a party of Christian workers found themselves on 


a 


f 


82 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


a lone battlefield in charge of hundreds of wounded soldiers, 
who, on account of the sudden retreat of the army, were en- 
- tirely without shelter or food. After hours of heroic work 
in bringing the poor fellows water from a distant brook and 
searching the haversacks of the dead for rations and finding 
scarcely anything, the men suddenly realized that unless they 
had a large supply of food at once the wounded men would 
die from starvation. Gathering in a little group they held a 
hurried consultation. 

“What are we to do?” was asked by one and all. “The 
army is far out of reach and there is no village within a radius 

of a dozen miles.” 
| Suddenly a man full of faith exclaimed, ‘Let us pray to 
God to send bread.” : 

‘Acting on this suggestion, the group of Christian commis- 
sioners knelt down in a circle and held a prayer-meeting under 
the open canopy of heaven, telling God of their extremity and 
beseeching Him to send help at once However, it took the 
greatest faith even to make this prayer, for, humanly speak- 
ing, there seemed no earthly possibility of the request being | 
answered. The men then resumed their work of mercy and 
labor all night long in relieving the sufferings of the men and 
in giving Christian consolation. 

As the first ray of the dawn came over the hills, they were 
astonished to see a large wagon approaching. On closer inspec- 
tion it proved to be a Dutch farm wagon, piled high with loaves 
of bread. On asking the driver where he came from and why 
he came, he said: 

“When I went to bed last night I knew that the army was 
gone and I could not sleep for thinking of the poor fellows 
who were wounded and would have to stay behind. Some- 
thing seemed to whisper in my ear, ‘What will those poor fel- 
lows do for something to eat?’ I could not get rid of this 
voice, It continued so strongly that I awoke my wife, told her 





1 


OSVOIHO “SN.LILSNI ATSId ACOOW AHL 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 85 


of my thoughts, and begged her to at once arise and begin mak- 
ing as much bread as she could. She agreed heartily and 
_ immediately set to work. Meanwhile I hitched up my team 
and went around to all our neighbors, telling them of the 
wounded soldiers who were doubtless left behind and asking 
them to give me all the bread they had in their houses. Some 
hours later when I reached home my wagon was full, but my 
old wife succeeded in piling her baking on the top, and I then 
hastened to bring the bread to the boys, feeling just as if I 
was being sent by our Lord Himself.” 

‘Such were the wonderful answers to prayer experienced by 
Mr. Moody and his heroic co-laborers in the midst of the Bisa 
conflict. 

Another remarkable incident of the campaign among the 
- soldiers was the revival among rebel prisoners. It was one of 
the most remarkable prison revivals ever conducted. During » 
the midst of the conflict about 10,000 rebel prisoners were 
captured at Fort Donelson and taken to Camp Douglas, Chi- 
cago, which was temporarily turned into a prison. On the 
arrival of the men in Chicago, Mr. Moody felt a great burden 
for their salvation. He felt that they were as much his 
brothers as the Union soldiers, and that God’s spirit was 
equally powerful to work upon their hearts. 

After many efforts he finally obtained a pass permitting one 
person to hold meetings among them. This he gave to the 
Secretary of the Young Men’s Christian Association, Mr. 
Hawley. He himself, however, having no ticket of admission, 
secured a torch, and in the evening, accompanied Mr. Hawley, 
acting as his servant and thus hoping to pass the guard without 
question. But this unique ruse failed. The guard, saw that 
the permit was for one person only, and under no circumstances 
would admit Mr. Moody to accompany Mr. Hawley within 
the gates. 

As they were discussing the matter, however, a superior 


re 


86 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


officer passed by, overheard the conversation and came up to 
learn the cause of the disturbance. He at once recognized Mr. 
Moody, heard his side of the case, conducted him to head- 
quarters and there secured for him a permit to hold meetings 
whenever he wished. Greatly rejoicing, he hastened again to 
the entrance and, joining his co-worker, Mr. Hawley, they 
proceeded at once to hold a prayer-meeting. 

A brief passage from the Scriptures was read, they both led 
in prayer, and then each gave an earnest exhortation to accept 


salvation. The spirit of God was present in power, and at that — 


first meeting large numbers of prisoners stood up, signifying 
their desire to accept Christ as their Savior. Indeed, so intense 
was the interest manifested that meetings were held thereafter 
afternoon and evening each day. The entire camp was swept 
with the revival spitit. As success grew and increased daily, a 
large number of ministers of different denominations were 
called upon to assist in conducting the meetings, and did so 
gladly. Hundreds, and perhaps thousands, were won to Christ 
in a few weeks. The entire camp was a scene of joy instead 
of sorrow. Large quantities of religious literature, including 
religious papers, Bililes and Testaments, were sent to the 
camp; the prisoners were treated as equals in every respect, 
and at the conclusion of their term thousands of men returned 
to their Southern homes thanking God for their bonds. 

At the conclusion of the war Mr. Moody returned to Chicago 
and devoted himself to three special lines of work. F irst and 
foremost, he strengthened and built up his church at Chicago 
and La Salle avenues; secondly, he became once more the 
leading spirit of the Y. M. C. A.; thirdly, he began to take 


an active part in Sunday-school work in other cities, traveling . 


here and there throughout the various states of the Union, at- 
tending Sunday-school conventions, which were then at the 
zenith of their power, and while there conducting a series of 
gospel meetings. 





Oe ee 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 87 


Before :é 1BF0 Mr. Moody had gained an almost rane repu- 
- tation as a Sunday-school speaker and worker, and more and 
more, as the years went on, he devoted himself to this work. 
From Maine to Texas, from Montreal to San Francisco, from 
St. Paul to New Orleans, Mr. Moody went year after year, 
preaching and praying, rousing Sunday-schools and Christian 
Associations into activity, laboring with the pastors of churches 
in revivals, coming home now and then to give a few weeks’ 
earnest labor to his own congregation and finding a hatful of 
calls awaiting him. He thus gained experience of inestimable 
value and received a training better than that of the schools 
for the still greater work which the Lord had in store for him 
across the sea. 


CHAPTER IX, 
HOW MOODY AND SANKEY MET 


HE STORY of how Mr. Moody first met Mr. Sankey 

was recently told by the latter, shortly after he had 

received the intelligence that the world had lost the services 
of one of its greatest evangelists. 

It was in the year 1870, that two young men journeyed 
to Indianapolis, Ind., to attend the International Conven- 
tion of the Young Men’s Christian Association. The one 
was Dwight L. Moody, who came from Chicago, Ill., and 
the other was Ira D. Sankey, whose home was at New 
Castle, Pa. 

They had heard of each other, but had never met. Moody 
had already gained some reputation as a speaker, and Sankey 
for his ability to win souls by his singing of hymns, but 
neither figured very prominently as leaders of the exercises 
at the convention. 

At that time, Sankey was a Government officer in Penn- 
sylvania, holding a commission in the internal revenue ser- 
vice—a position paying him something like $1,500 per year. 
His religious work, until that time, had been conducted dur- 
ing leisure hours. 

Sankey had heard enough of Moody to make him curious 
to see him and hear him talk, and when he went to the 
convention he immediately commenced to look for the young 
man from Chicago. 

Arriving at the Academy of Music, where the convention 
was being held, he took a seat close to the rear of the hall. 

He waited and listened for an hour or so, but was com- 
pelled to leave the place without even hearing anybody men- | 
tion the name of the man for whom he was hunting. : 

88 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 8&9 


Few people seemed to know who Moody was or anything 
about him. It was afterward learned that Moody occupied 
a seat near to the door and close to where Sankey was on 
the opening day of the convention. 

Neither took any very prominent part in the proceedings, 
the greater portion of the programme being occupied by the 
more important speakers. 

The first meeting of the two men did not occur until a 
day or so after they had arrived at Indianapolis, and then 
only under rather novel circumstances. 

It was announced that “Mr. Moody, from Chicago,” would 
conduct a prayer meeting on a certain morning at 6 o’clock 
in a little room some distance away from the Academy of 
Music. Notwithstanding the early hour for the service, 
Sankey determined to take advantage of the opportunity to 
see and hear the man whom until that time he had been 
unable to find. 

The distance to the little room where the prayer meeting 
was to be held was much greater than Sankey had antict- 
pated, and the service was half through when he arrived. He 
found a seat, as he expressed it, in the “amen corner,” and 
sat down. 

He had scarcely been seatetl when somebody touched him 
on the elbow, and turning around, he discovered that he 
was sitting beside the Rev. Robert McMillen, whom he 
happened to know quite well. 

McMillen asked Sankey to take charge of the singing at 
the service, explaining that there seemed to be nobody pres- 
ent who could lead. 

At the conclusion of a very lengthy prayer, McMillen 
nudged Sankey, and told him to start right in and sing. 
Without waiting for any further invitation, young Sankey 
arose and sang with wonderful feeling the words: 


\ 2 J EES ES rise = ee er ay 


OG DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


“There is a fountain filled with blood, 
Drawn from Immanuel’s veins; 

And sinners plunged beneath that flood, 
Lose all their guilty stains.” 


The congregation forgot to join in on the chorus, and 
Sankey finished the hymn by himself. pa 
Moody was well pleased with the singing during the 
remainder of the service. When the meeting was brought 
to a close McMillen asked Sankey to step forward and he 
would introduce him to Moody. A procession was formed 
which slowly made its way to the front of the room where 

Moody was standing. 

As Sankey drew near, Moody stepped out and took him 
by the hand. 

“Where are you from?” Moody asked. 

_ “Pennsylvania,” replied Sankey. 

“Married or single?” 

“Married. I have a wife and one child.” 

“What do you do for a living when you are at home?” 

“Tam in the Government service.” . 

All this time Moody had been holding Sankey’s hand. 
Looking down into his face with his keen black eyes he said: 

“Well, you'll have to give it up.” 

Sankey stood amazed and was at a loss to understand just 
what Moody meant by telling him he would have to give up 
what was to him a good position and one affording him a 
very comfortable living. 

He was so taken back for a few seconds that he could make 
no reply. Moody, however, explained what he had meant. 

“You'll have to give up your Government position and 
come with me. You are just the man I have been looking 
for for a long time. I want you to come with me. You can 
do the singing and I’ll do the talking.” 

Sankey had by this time partly recovered from his sur- 


eae ae A ee 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION _ gI 


prise, but the thought of giving up a good position for an 
uncertainty was too much, and he begged for time in which 
to consider the matter. Moody asked him if he would go 
with him and pray over the question, and out of politeness 
Sankey consented. 

Moody prayed that Sankey would see his way clear to do 
as he had asked, and Sankey argued within himself against 
the proposition. The two finally parted and Sankey returned 
to his room impressed by Moody’s prayer, but still unde- 
cided. 

That was on Sunday. All that day and night Sankey 
thought over Moody’s words, but the next morning found 
him still inclined to stick to the Government position with 
its salary assured every month. 

Just at a moment when he was more inclined to be wavering 
than anything else a card was brought to him. He exam- 
ined it and found it was from Moody, and asking him to 
meet him at a certain street corner that evening at 6 
o'clock. 

Without knowing what he was wanted for Sankey wrote 
an acceptance upon the back of the card and returned it to 
_ Moody. Together with a few friends he went to the ap- 
- pointed place at 6 o’clock that evening, and in a few seconds 

Moody came along. 

Without even stopping to speak, Moody walked on and 
into a store near by and asked permission to use a store 
box. The permission was given and Moody rolled the large 
box out on to the street corner and then calling Sankey 
aside asked him to get up and sing something. 

Sankey complied, and after one or two hymns had been 
sung Moody crawled up onto the box and commenced to 
preach. The workingmen were just on their way home from 
the mills and factories, and in a short time Moody had 
secured a large crowd. Sankey says of him that he preached 


92 Sk DWIGHT L. MOODY 
that evening from that store box as he has never heard him 
preach since. 

The crowd stood spellbound as the words fell from 
Moody’s lips with wonderful force and rapidity. After he 
had talked for about fifteen minutes Moody leaped down 
from the box and announced that he was going to hold a 
little meeting of his own at the Academy of Music, and in- 
vited the crowd to accompany him there. 

Arm in arm Moody and Sankey marched down the street 
singing hymn after hymn as they went. The crowd followed 
closely at their heels, and the men with their dinner pails for- 
got to go home, so completely carried away were they with 
the sermon from the store box, 

Speaking of that march down the street, Sankey declared 
it to have been his first experience as a Salvation Armyist. 

It took but a few minutes to pack the Academy of Music 

to the doors, and Moody saw that the men in their working 
clothes were first seated before he ascended to the platform 
to speak. 
_ His second address was as captivating as the one delivered 
on the street corner, and it was not until the delegates had 
arrived for the evening session of the convention that the 
meeting was brought to a close. 

Sankey was still undecided when Moody again brought up 
the question of their going together. 

However, he accepted an invitation to spend a week with 
Moody, and before that week was over he had sent his com- 
mission to Hugh McCullough, who was at that time Secre- 
tary of the Treasury, and a soldier who had been imprisoned 
at Libby Prison was given Sankey’s place in the internal 
revenue service. 

It was during the service at Moody’s church in Chicago one 
evening that the great fire occurred which destroyed so much 
of that city. 


‘PlPYY4WON Ul satIp & IOJ NO 
dALHONVGGNVaS GNV AALHONVG SIH ‘AGOOW “1 ‘d 











‘perp ay eleym pure ‘sivoX 44119} ATIe9u IOF poaTl 4sljoSuvso Jeors oy} YOIYM Ul esnoy Sq], 


‘CTSISH.LUON LV HONHCISEA S.AGOOW 











“pelp OY YOLYA UI sNoy oY} JO MOI} S,oUOjs B CG}TM—uJOG SvAL }ST[OSUVAD }VOIS OY} YOIYM Ul OsnoYy oy, 


GVHLSHNOH AGOOW CIO HHL 








IOAIY JNSIJOouMOD 9} Ssoio’ WOI} UddS SB ‘pleyYYION Je sjooyos s,Apooy Jo spunois puv sSurpjing [n}ijneeq sq, 


SONIGTING AYVNUNHYS ATHISHLYON FHL 








THE MAN. AND HIS MISSION 97 


The church was crowded with men and women when the 
warning rumble of the fire alarms compelled Moody and 
_ Sankey to bring the meeting to a sudden close. Moody’s 
church was destroyed that night and some of the people who 
had attended the meeting were burned to death at various parts 
of the city before sunrise the next day while trying to save 
their homes. 

The two evangelists were now without a home in which 
to preach. Moody took the first train out of Chicago and made 
a hurried journey to Philadelphia, New York and Washington, 
and soon returned with sufficient money to enable his congre- 

gation to rebuild their church. 

_. Mr. Sankey, in the meantime, returned to his family in 
Pennsylvania. But no sooner was the new tabernacle erected 
in the midst of the ruins than the two brethren returned and 
commenced their work again together, taking up their lodgings 
in ante-rooms of the great rough building and giving them-_ 
selves day and night to comforting the bodies and saving the 
souls of the unfortunate people who thronged this place of 
refuge. In a few weeks a remarkable revival of religion had 
sprung up and was being carried on with surprising and grati- 
fying results in the new tabernacle. 

In the spring of 1872 Mr. Moody visited England a second 
_ time, and during his absence Mr. Sankey conducted his meet- 
ings in Chicago. A remarkable example of Mr. Moody’s faith 
in God occurred when he started on this journey. He receives 
an invitation to go to England. God wants him there. He 
- announces his intended departure to his family, who are to go 
with him, and to his church and Mr. Sankey, who are to be 
left behind. He appoints the day to give them his parting mes- 
sage and to bid them farewell. But he has no money. He 
cannot pay his passage. The last day arrives. That evening 
he is to take the train for New York. No-money for car or 
steamer fare! He will not ask it of men; he can only pray God 


98 DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


to send it. But his faith never falters. A few hours before he 
and his family are to take the train, a friend, Mr. John V. Far- 
well, who knows nothing of his needs, suddenly remembers 
that Mr. Moody will want some money “after he reaches 
England.” He accordingly leaves his place of business, goes 
to say good-bye to Mr. Moody, and while shaking his hand, 

~ leaves $500 in it. . 

Truly Mr. Moody’s faith was rewarded! ‘God moves in a 
mysterious way, His wonders to perform!” 

During this visit to England, Mr. Moody became more and 
more convinced that Great Britain was ready for the most 
wonderful revival it had ever known. Early in the year 1873 
he received an invitation from three workers in England to 
begin meetings there. On receiving the letter, Mr. Moody 
tead it to Mr. Sankey and exclaimed: “You have often pro- 
posed that we should go out evangelizing together. Now go 
with me to England!” Mr. Sankey finally consented and 
preparations were made for the journey, 


CHAPTER X. 


MOODY AND SANKEY’S REMARKABLE WORK IN GREAT 
BRITAIN 


CCORDINGLY, on the 7th day of June, 1873, Mr. © 
Moody, his family, and Mr. Sankey sailed from New 
- York, and ten days later landed in Liverpool. Strengthened 
by all his previous experience, Mr. Moody’s faith was now 
stronger than ever, and he was determined, and prayed that 
as aresult of this visit ten thousand souls might be brought to 
Christ. However, on reaching the other side, a great disap- 
pointment awaited Mr. Moody. He found a letter stating 
that owing to the death of the men who had invited him to 
England it would be impossible to have him make the visit. 
Sankey was dismayed, but Moody was confident that 
everything would come out right in the end. With the let- 
ter still in his hands, he turned to Sankey and said: 
“Sankey, if the Lord opens the door to us, we'll go 
through. If not, we'll go back at once to America.” 
Neither had any money, and the situation was anything 
‘but cheerful. Moody found another letter in his pocket 
which had been handed him before leaving New York, and 
which he had neglected to open. 
Tearing open the envelope, he rapidly ran his eye down 
the letter, and, quickly turning to Sankey, exclaimed: 
“Sankey, the Lord has opened the door. We'll stay!” 
The letter was from a resident of York inviting Moody 
and Sankey to visit his city should they ever come to Eng- 
land. The invitation was gladly accepted, and three days 
later Moody and Sankey were holding meetings in York. 
The attendance was at first rather poor, but Moody’s ser- 
99 


100 : DWIGHT L. MOODY 


mons and Sankey’s hymns soon had their effect, and it was 
not long before the meeting place was too small to accom- 
modate the crowds. 

From that on they met with continued success. 

Mr. Moody’s method of expounding the Scripture attracted 
wide attention; one of the first effects of his ministry being. 
the rousing of believers to more earnest study of the Bible. He 
exhorted them to bring their Bibles to every service, and taught 
them the best methods of Bible study. As a result of this 
Bible instruction there arose such a demand for a certain edi- © 
tion of the Bible, with index and concordance, that the pub- 
lishers were forced to increase their production and were still 
unable to supply the demand without considerable delay. 

Mr. Sankey’s singing was also a surprise and pleasure. Such 
dramatic rendering of Gospel songs had never been heard be- 
fore. Oftentimes his lodgings were in the center of the city, 
and when he would sit down with his harmonium and play — 
and sing for his host and hostess—the windows of the house 
being open—a crowd that filled the street would gather and 
listen most attentively. 

The Moody and Sankey meetings became more and more 
successful as the weeks and months went by. The revivals 
started in local towns soon swept over all of England, Ireland 
and Scotland like a great tidal wave. For two years they 
continued to work in all parts of Great Britain with a success 
never before known. The largest halls in Edinburgh, Glas- 
gow, Dublin, Liverpool and London were engaged and filled 
to overflowing. Ministers of all creeds and laymen of every 
class, from duke to street-sweeper, joined enthusiastically in.’ 
Every day accounts of it filled column after column of the 
newspapers. So great, indeed, was the desire to hear the latest 
tidings concerning it that several extra newspapers were started 
in London, and some of those which had been leading a pre- 
carious life leaped at once into large success. The press 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION tor 


throughout the English-speaking world was discussing the 
merits of Mr. Moody’s preaching and Mr. Sankey’s singing. 
_ Some wondered how the men could do it; others, seeing and 
feeling the Divine mission of the men, thanked God for raising 
them up to reap the remarkable harvest. 
At one meeting, composed of sixty-six young men, who were 
inquiring what they must do to be saved, sixty of them were 
blessed before they left the place. In thousands of Christian 
homes the deepest interest was felt by parents for their chil- 
dren, and by masters and mistresses for their servants, and so 
universal was this that Dr. Horatius Bonar declared his belief 
“that there was scarcely a Christian household in all Edinburgh 
in which there was not one or more persons converted during 
the revival there.” 
While preaching in Edinburgh a noted infidel, chairman of 
-an infidel club, attended the services. He came to the meeting 
intending not only to ridicule it, but also hoping to raise a 
controversy with Mr. Moody and thus practically break it up. 
In this, however, he was unsuccessful, and would have been. 
thrust out of the house if Mr. Moody had not interposed in 
his behalf. He remained after the congregation had been 
dismissed, and Mr. Moody, seeing him, asked him if he wished — 
to become a Christian. He answered that he did not, and that 
he had a poor opinion of Christians. 
“Will you not let me pray for you?” asked Mr. Moody. 
“Oh, yes,” said he. “I have no objection to your trying 
your hand on me, but I do not think it will do the least good.” 
At once Mr. Moody kneeled down beside the scoffer and 
prayed for him earnestly and tenderly; then left him, promis- 
ing to pray for him still further at home. In a few days the 
infidel became convicted of sin, resigned the presidency of the 
infidel club and was happily converted. ; 
At a later meeting held in Edinburgh by the evangelist, it 
-is authentically stated that out of thirty persons seeking the 


University of Southern Californié 


102 DWIGHT. L. MOODY, 


Lord seventeen were members of this infidel club—one of them | 
being its president, the successor of him whose conversion has 
just been related. Finally, and best of all, the infidel with whom 
» Mr. Moody prayed became a successful Gospel evangelist. 

During these two years hundreds of extraordinary conver- 
sions were reported. A workman gives the following experi- 
ence: 

“Several months ago I listened to an address from the text, 
‘Whosoever believeth hath everlasting life.’ I had led a life of 
sin and thought that the words surely could not refer to myself; 
but on retiring that night, during my sleep I dreamt that the 
‘Whosoever’ referred to me. I at once jumped out of bed and 
hunted up the Bible to see ‘Whosoever’ with my own eyes. 
The moment my glance rested upon that wonderful word I was 
changed and at once believed on Christ. On that promise I 
have been resting ever since.” 

Dr. Andrew Bonar writes the following charming domestic 
scene, which occurred at this time. He says: 

“One day I called upon a man and his wife who resided in 
my parish. I said to the woman: ‘I understand you have 
been receiving a blessing at the Moody and Sankey meetings.’ 

““Yes,’ said she, ‘it occurred in this fashion: A few nights 
ago my husband went out early in the evening to attend the — 
revival service. A few moments after he had gone I also 
determined to go to the meeting. I entered the tent, listened 
for a few moments, and received such a blessing that I came 
home and at once, upon my knees, accepted Christ. Strangely 
enough, that same evening my husband was also converted. 
When he came home he entered quietly, took a seat opposite 
me and gazed into my eyes. I also looked frankly and eagerly 
at him. Then I asked: 

““ “Have you got something?” ’ 

“**VYes,” replied he, “have you?”’ 

“*“T have, indeed,” said J.”’ 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 103 
“«°“Well, that was just what I was desiring to tell you 
- about,” said he, “but I scarcely knew how to begin.” 

“‘Oh! T cannot tell you how happy we have both been ever _ 
since that glorious moment,’ said the wife.” 

The following incident of Moody and Sankey’s revival at 
_ Inverness is reported: 

At the conclusion of a service held in the Presbyterian 
Church, a gentleman and his wife, while passing out of the 
hall, were invited to enter the inquiry room. 

“No, we cannot go in to-night,” replied the man, turning 
_ to his wife as he spoke, as if he thought she would not wish 
to go in. 

But the one who had given the invitation, noticing the look, 
said: “By all means bring the lady in also.” 

Mr. Moody at once took them aside into the pastor’s study, 
talked with them a few moments about their difficulties, prayed 
with them, and in a short time both left the hall rejoicing in 
Christ. A very few minutes later the same lady returned to 
tell Mr. Moody that her two sons had been in the inquiry 
meeting held in another room at the same church and that 
both had found salvation. Thus in one night was a whole 
family snatched from darkness and brought into the glorious 
light of the Gospel. 

While working in the city of Birmingham, a young lady 
having been converted was in great distress to know what to 
do concerning her affianced husband. He was a wild young 
man and apparently hopeless, as far as concerned his becom- 
ing a Christian. As he was calling upon her one evening he 
noticed that she was preoccupied. When he inquired what 
was troubling her, she replied that she had given her heart to 
Christ, and was in doubt whether she could be thoroughly 
happy with a man who was an unbeliever. At once the young 
man exclaimed, both laughing and crying for joy: 

“You need not be troubled in the least point, Mary. I also 


104 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


have been to these wonderful revival meetings and have given 
my heart to Christ. One night last week I entered the meeting 
in a spirit of fun, and while there heard Mr. Sankey sing. His 
song so touched my heart that : at once accepted Christ and 
have been rejoicing ever since.’ 

However, in the midst of the young couple’s jubilation, the 
mother of the young lady entered the room, and inquiring 
what they were talking about was told the circumstances. In- 
stead of rejoicing with them she scolded them for frittering 
away their time on such a senseless thing as religion. When 
she had left the room the young people knelt down and prayed 
earnestly for her, and in a few days had the satisfaction of 
seeing her under deep conviction, and finally she, too, found 
salvation. 

During their campaign in Liverpool Mr. Henry Drummond, 
who was following Mr. Moody from town to town assisting in 
the inquiry room, reported the following instance of the con- 
version of a comic singer. He said: 

“As the young man entered the stage of the theater one 
evening he started to sing a comic song. At the same instant, 
however, the verse of a Sunday-school hymn which he had 
memorized in his youth came so vividly to his mind that he 
was utterly unable to think of anything save that single verse. 
‘The comic song he could not sing. After one or two attempts 
he gave up in despair and retired in confusion to the wing. 
Here he was met by the angry manager, who at once dismissed 

him. The young man went out on the street and at once 
plunged into dissipated habits, hoping to drown the memory 
of the tragic occurrence in drink. In the midst of his debauch, 
however, he composed a short comedy, which ended with a 
burlesque upon the way in which Messrs. Moody and Sankey 
conducted their revival services. Wishing, however, to make 
his satire complete in every particular, he decided to attend one 
of the Gospel meetings then being held in Victoria Hall. As he 


‘Uol}eaI0e1 JO sInoy Supp stuus} Surdv[g 


‘STUID AUVNINAS ATHISHLYON 








pry 














— — — ——- -— 


‘sInoy Uolyeadoel SuLinp s}uepnys pjoyyION 


“TIVH GNVNOUOW 























THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION Ne: 


‘I sat. ete one to Chea: an exace report, the Holy Spirit “ 


~ descended upon him with such power that he was convicted of 
his terrible sins before God, and in sorrow and with penitence 
he entered the inquiry room, where he speedily found peace 
and joy in his Savior. Not long afterward he entered a train- 
= cing school to prepare himself for service in the foreign mission Ke 
Meld. no. tal 
While still in Liverpool an incident occurred which showed — 
that Mr. Moody was a man of decisive action and had an ex- 
traordinary genius for organization. The evangelist was con- | 


_ ducting a meeting one night when one of the city preachers who 


spoke declared the chief needs of Liverpool were cheap refresh- 
ment houses to counteract the effect of the saloons. When the, 
speaker finished Mr. Moody begged him to go on for ten min- | 
utes longer. Meanwhile he was busy whispering with some - 
of the prominent citizens on the platform. 

At the end of the ten minutes Mr. Moody came forward 
and announced that a company had been formed to carry out 
this very object. The stock was subscribed on the spot, and 
the “British Workmen Company, Limited,” was thus formed. 
It is still in existence, and has done a vast amount of good, 
and has incidentally paid dividends almost from the start: 

It was during the London campaign, where the services were | 
held in Agricultural Hall, which seated 15,000 persons and was 


- daily filled to overflowing, that one of the most remarkable 


_ conversions of all Mr. Moody’s revival services occurred. 
Years afterward Mr. Moody related the story of this con-- 


-_ version as follows: 


_ “The man was an English race-horse owner. He was de- 
voted tc the track in all that that implies, and had been for 
the biggest part of his life. He was third owner of the Epsom ~ 
race track, and a well-known character in sporting circles. He 
came to the meeting out of curiosity, but his heart was changed 
before it closed, He became a Christian, gave up his sporting 


108 DWIGHT, L. MOODY. 
connections, sold his horses and all his racing interests and 
_, thereafter lived an exemplary Christian life. He had several 
_ sons, all of whom are earnest Christian workers. 

“This was a remarkable case, but there may have been 
others to equal it, although the change does not stand out in 
such strong contrast. I have always felt that I have been well 
repaid for my life’s work if I had accomplished no more than 
the saving of that man.” 

As a total result of the two years’ campaign it is estimated 
that more than 100,000 persons were won to Christ! Thus 
Mr. Moody’s prayer for 10,000 souls was answered ten times 

over! 





CHAPTER XI. 
‘THE WONDERFUL STORY OF THE GOSPEL HYMNS 


“THE world-wide popularity and sale of the Moody and 
; Sankey Gospel Hymns is one of the miracles of latter- ‘ 
- day réligion. We are glad to be able to give the true story of — 

the origin and spread of these books. The facts are as follows: 

Very soon after beginning the revival meetings in England, — 
Mr. Moody sorely felt the need of new songs, to keep up and 
fan still further the flame of revival. He consulted with Mr, 
Sankey, gathered together half a hundred of their most popular 
and effective songs, and decided to have them printed in a 
small book, to use at their meetings. Taking the copy in his” 
hand, Mr. Moody set out, and walked up and down the streets 
of London trying to find a publisher. Up steep and dark stair- 
ways he climbed, only to meet with a polite refusal from the 
manager of the firm. At last, after groping down into a sort 
of underground cellar, he found the manager of an insignifi- 
cant house, who was willing to print a small edition if Moody — 
would put up the money in advance. This was done. But it 
took every cent that Moody and his wife and Mr. Sankey and 
his wife had in the world. The book, however, was an instant — 
success. ‘The first edition was sold out in a few hours, and 
thereafter, although the presses were kept in motion day and 
night, it was difficult to print it fast enough to supply the de- : 
mand. That is the true origin of the Gospel Hymns, which has 
since attained a larger circulation than any other publication 
except the Bible, and is to-day one of the best paying literary. 
properties in the world. 

Mr. Moody returned to Chicago in the fall of 1875. The 
half-built Farson block, at 236 and 252 Monroe street, was 

109 





Ota he. DWIGHT L. MOODY. 





roofed over and turned into a tabernacle for the home-com- 
ing of the evangelist. All winter he preached to audiences 


ranging up to 10,000 persons, among other things raising 


$100,000 to pay the losses incurred by the struggling Young 
Men’s Christian Association in two disastrous fires. : 

The Chicago avenue church was placed firmly on its feet 
with the royalties from the English issues of Mr. Moody’s 
books and the Moody and Sankey “Hymns.” In all Mr. 
Moody devoted $70,000 to the establishment of the Chicago 
avenue congregation. 


“Gospel Hymns and Sacred Songs,” which he compiled with ~ | 


P. P. Bliss and Mr. Sankey, is said to have reached a circu- 
lation of 20,000,000 copies and to have realized $1,250,000 


in royalties. This money was received by a committee, who 
applied it to various religious purposes. None of it went to 


Mr. Moody, who asked no price and would take none for his 
labors. All his royalties for years have been equally divided 
between his various educational institutions. Last year they 
amounted to $20,000 

The story of the origin and evolution of the Gospel Hymns 


would not, however, be complete unless larger mention was 


~ 


made of Mr. Sankey, who was the chief author of the books. 

A short time ago, while attending one of Mr. Moody’s sum- 
“mer conferences at Northfield, it was my privilege to obtain 
_ from Mr. Sankey’s own lips the story of how he became a 
singer; of how he uses his songs to glorify God: and of how 
his most famous hymn, “The Ninety and Nine,” was written. 

I found Mr. Senkey in his room at the Betsy Moody Cot- 
“tage early one morning. He is short and heavy set in figure, 
with full face, snapping eyes; anda hearty, ringing laugh. He 
speaks rapidly and with a nervous energy that characterizes 
all his movements. When I asked for the salient facts of 
his youth, and how he became a gospel singer, he said: 

“I was born on a farm in 1840. Was converted at a very 








o, Ris tae RUE ee 1; 
7 \ 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION. stn 


early age. While still a youth, the family removed to New- 


castle, Pa. In the town I at once began taking an active part 


in the church to which I belonged. I became superintendent 
of the Sunday school, leader of the choir, class leader; also 
_ president of the Y. M. C. A. of the village. 

“When did I begin to sing? I sang from childhood. I was 
literally full and running over with music. Inherited, do you 


ask? No. None of my ancestors were eminently musical. _ 


But I seemed to have been endowed at birth with a musical 
spirit, and by being converted early, my voice was early con- 
secrated to the Lord. I had no special training save that 
obtained by my individual study and practice. Although I | 
studied music in the ordinary manner, I have never sung in 
the usual way, nor do I ever wish to do so.” 

“What chiefly differentiates your singing from that of other _ 


. people?” I asked. 


“Well, in my singing I try to depict the new features in 
each verse,’ said Mr. Sankey. “I endeavor to paint the pic- 
ture in music. I strive to enter into the song with my whole 
heart and mind so that I can get the spiritual meaning out 
of the hymn and present it vividly to the audience.” ery 

Thousands of persons, in America, England and the other 
lands where Mr. Sankey has gone on his unique mission, have © 
been converted through his singing. He has had so many | 
wonderful experiences in the course of more than twenty 
years of singing, that he expects shortly to publish a volume 
_ entitled, “The Story of the Gospel Hymns.” It will contain 
hundreds of cases of answered prayer, and scores of touching 
anecdotes. 

As an illustration of his methods of composing and of how 
God has been with him, he—after considerable urging—nar- 
rated the following story of how he wrote the music for his 
famous song, ““The Ninety and Nine.” 

Mr. Sankey said: “When Mr. Moody and I were holding 


LT OP Ma) AES a5 es\t” ey ea ee 
bio aaa inet! Aco ae oe EON NG tm aN 


112 DWIGHT L. MOODY | 


revival meetings in England and Scotland, I was traveling 
one day from Glasgow to Edinburgh. I was reading a. 
newspaper as the train sped along, when my eye fell on a 
poem about a shepherd and his sheep. I read it through, 
_ and at once felt it would make a great song if it were set to 
music. I tore it out and laid it in my scrapbook, thinking 
that some time I might compose music for it. 

“Next day, the subject of the meeting in Edinburgh was 
‘The Good Shepherd.’ At the close of the meeting, after 
the famous Dr. Andrew Bonar had spoken, Mr. Moody rose 
and said, ‘Mr. Sankey, have you any hymn appropriate to 
the occasion, for a solo?’ I had nothing save the poem I had 
found on the train the previous day. I felt that would be 
exceptionally appropriate, but I was unable to use it, as no 
music had as yet been written for it. Suddenly the impres- 
sion came upon me: Sing the hymn and make the tune as 
you go along. It was almost as if I had heard a voice, so 
vivid was the sensation. I yielded to it, and taking the little 
newspaper. slip and laying it on the organ before me, with 
a silent prayer to God for help, I commenced to sing. 

“Note by note, the music was given me clear through to 
the end of the tune. After the first verse, I was very glad 
{ had gotten through, but overwhelmed with fear that the 
tune for the next verse would be greatly different from the 
first. But again looking up to the Lord for help in this most 
trying moment, He again gave me the same tune for all the 
remaining verses, note for note. The impression made upon 
the audience was very deep. Hundreds were in tears. 

“Mr. Moody left the pulpit and, coming to my side at 
the organ, said: ‘Where did you get that? I never heard 
anything like it in my life.’ He at once closed the meeting 
with prayer—asking God to bring home to the Shepherd’s 
fold many a poor wanderer—and pronounced the benediction. _ 
In such a God-given way was ‘The Ninety and Nine’ born.” — 











| CHAPTER XII. 
GREAT REVIVALS IN AMERICAN CITIES 


CARCELY had Mr. Moody returned to America when 
urgent calls for his services came from three cities— | 

Washington, Philadelphia and Brooklyn. He decided to begin 
work at Brooklyn, where a vast crowd greeted him at his 
first meeting, held on the 24th of October, 1875. The Brook- 
lyn Rink, in which the meetings were held, was capable of seat- 
ing 6,000 persons, and was filled to overflowing day and night, 
the people being extremely anxious to hear the man who had , 
shaken Great Britain as no man had ever done before. The 
great majority of the crowds, however, were Christians al- 
ready. After the meetings had continued a few days, Mr. 
‘Moody exclaimed: ‘I don’t believe I have reached 500 uncon- | 
verted persons in any one of the meetings, unless it was some 
of the night meetings for men.’’ From that time on to the 
conclusion of the meetings, frequent services were held for 
“non-church-goers” only, who were admitted by ticket. 

Of his preaching in these meetings, Dr. Theodore L. Cuyler 
of Brooklyn said: 

“Mr. Moody never in his life preached more eloquently than 
in Brooklyn. Especially his discourses on confessing one’s 
sins, on repenting, and on seeking and saving the lost, were 
ideal in their arousing and searching power. Although the 
critics may say that he says ‘Isrel’ for ‘Israel,’ and though he 
may persist in saying ‘they was’ for ‘they were,’ and ‘done it’ 
for ‘did it,’ this makes in reality no difference whatosever, when 
one remembers the mighty power which follows his words. It 
is a beautiful piece of modesty for Mr. Moody to declare: » 
‘There are plenty of ministers in Brooklyn who can preach far 

113 


pW’ Paste." : ee ert iN Aire ett eu Auber ive 
Le" A Sea eee eES Ses. ate ie enh Wet 


Ye OY 


tig) 0 BRIGHT Le MmOODy ae 





better than I,’ but I for one know not of a minister in this city, | " 
or in any other city, for that matter, who can pack so much 
_ soul-saving truth into concise, portable form and send it home 
to the heart with such effectiveness as Dwight L. Moody.” 

Mr. Charles M. Morton, who was at this time conducting — 
the Mission Bethel of Plymouth Church, Brooklyn, gives the 
following examples of remarkable conversions in an article in 
the IUustrated Christian Weekly. He says: 
“Almost from the beginning, the inquiry meetings have 
been filled with persons of both sexes and of all-ages and con- 
ditions. An old man and his wife, both gray-headed, came > 
forward together to the front seats and prayed for ‘eleventh 
hour’ mercy, and went away rejoicing. Grateful tears coursed 
down the cheeks of each of them. 

“A young man in the employ of a Brooklyn tailor, on his 


way to acustomer with a suit of clothing, just finished, stopped © 


in at the rink for a little while, and went on rejoicing in Christ. 
He will attend to his employer’s business more promptly in the 
future. 

“On one side of a Christian worker knelt an old gray- 
headed man, and on the other a tender girl of seventeen. As 
the tears. coursed down their cheeks the father and daughter 
began the Christian life together. 

“A confirmed skeptic came to the rink to gratify the curi- 
osity he had to hear Moody and Sankey, but could not get in 
on account of the throngs. Wandering over to the Reformed 
Church, he met a Christian acquaintance, who persuaded him 
to remain, and they had a long conversation. The next night 
he came to the same meeting and was among the first to rise 
to be prayed for. Walking home from the meeting he said: 
“Well, I didn’t think the time would ever come when I should 
prefer a prayer-meeting to a theatre.’ That day he had bought 
himself a little pocket Testament, and when his friend marked 
a special verse or two for him he expressed the warmest grati- | 


1 






‘Rs 


lke dP antontcy Seg tea cat hed Mov 
MABE aie Mearibige ey he Set 





THE ‘MAN AND HIS MISSION —_4u18 


Dude: A praying mother whose faithfulness had never waned 
fe had much to do with all this.” 


This campaign in Brooklyn was the real beginning of a 


great American revival, which rapidly spread to New York 
and Philadelphia, and was second only in extent and influence 


to his recent campaign in England. It was known as Ne 
great awakening” of 1875-6. 


The second city visited by Mr. Moody and his assistants was 


Philadelphia, where the services were held in the old Pennsyl- 


vania freight depot, which had recently been purchased by Mr. 
John Wanamaker, in which to locate his new department store, 


and which, in the interim, was placed at the disposal of Mr. 
- Moody. This immense structure in the centre of the business _ 
district of Philadelphia, corner of Market and Thirteenth 
‘streets, was capable of seating 20,000 persons. 


The text of Mr. Moody’s sermon at the opening meeting | 


was: “Say not ye that there are yet four months and then 


- cometh the harvest. Behold, I say unto you, lift up your eyes 


and look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest.” 


F The text was made a rousing bugle call for an advance all along 


the line. “I am going to begin moderately in Philadelphia,” 


said Mr. Moody, in the course of his sermon. “It takes about 


a month to get thoroughly at work. We had to quit Brooklyn 


just as we were beginning to do something, but we are here 
for a long siege.” 

Day by day and week by week the tide of spiritual power 
rose higher and higher. At the end of three weeks nearly 


‘10,000 men and women had inquired the way of salvation. 


A Rarely, if ever, in the history of America have larger, more 


enthusiastic, or more remarkable a series of meetings been 
held than those in the old freight depot in Philadelphia. The 
following statistics of attendance will give an idea of the inter- — 
est and enthusiasm aroused. 

It is stated that the total attendance at the meetings from 


_~— 


16 DWIGHT. L. ‘MOODY fons 





the 2ist of November, 1875, to the Ath of Fehinasty, 1876, 
was over a million people. On a single Sunday as many as 
28,000 different people attended the services. During a single 

week nearly 20,000 tickets were given out for the afternoon 

» meetings held for women only and for evening Sunday services. 
for men—all these people stating that they were not Chris- 

tians. So perfect were the arrangements for handling the 
crowds that the audience was seated at the rate of a thousand 
a minute; and, had necessity demanded, the entire audience 

of 13,000 people could have been passed out of the build- 
ing in four minutes. The average attendance daily was 
22,000. 

Three days later, on tine 7th of February, a similar series of 
meetings were begun in the Hippodrome, New York City. 
‘The wonderful success at Brooklyn and Philadelphia was re-_ 
peated. Multitudes were brought to Christ daily. A notable 
feature of these meetings was the interest they aroused among 
the leaders of wealth and fashion. One society lady anxiously 
inquired of her pastor whether she might not join the band 
of Christian workers at the Hippodrome. “No,” was his” 
reply, “that is not the place for you.” “But what shall I do?” 
she inquired anxiously. ‘I must have a share in the work of 
bringing people to Christ.” “I will tell you what to do,” 
replied her pastor, “take your carriage and go out and mated 
calls among your fashionable friends and talk to them about 
Christ in their own parlors.” Day after day this was done, 
with the most encouraging results, so that several of her friends. 
were induced to go and do likewise. 

Here is an incident which helps to ‘explain the hold Mr. 
Moody secured among people of wealth: 

The child of a wealthy family, living in upper New Yorks 
was very sick, and when the host and hostess where Mr. 
Moody was staying called upon this family they found that 
the doctors had given up all hope of the child’s recovery. 


i 
* 7 
\ 


Fr ta ear 


ER 
Ne 






THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 117 


ik ee Fone with their hearts full of sympathy for their 
stricken friends, they told Mr. Moody of the sad case. 
“Let us all kneel down and pray for the child,” said Mr. 
_ Moody. s 
Then, as they all knelt cosethe Mr. Moody poured out his 
soul i in earnest and trusting supplication to God for the child’s 
recovery. Ina few days the child had recovered so much that 
_ it was entirely out of danger, and its parents, recognizing this 
as a direct answer to the evangelist’s prayer, expressed their 
gratitude to God by giving Mr. Moody $25,000 as a thank 
_ offering at the close of the Hippodrome meetings. 
__ Among the lower classes, also, God’s power was equally . 
- manifested during the great revival. For example, here are 
" seven experiences related at a meeting held for men only. Mr. 
- Moody presided, and called upon the converts one after an- 
; other to tell what God had done for them. 
__ The first speaker was a young man of 28 years of age, who 
had been about to commit suicide on account of his heavy 
_ losses one night in a gambling den. While debating whether 
to shoot or drown himself, he found himself in front of the 
Hippodrome. Hearing the singing, he felt a strange impulse 
- to enter the building. He did so, and before the meeting was 
ended he gave his heart to Christ, all thoughts of suicide dis- 
appeared, and he became one of the happiest men in the build- _ 
ing. A few days later he also had the added joy of seeing his 
wife converted. 

The second testimony came from an Englishman who had 
led a dissipated life in London for ten years, breaking nearly 
every law of God and man, and was at last compelled to fly 
from the country to escape imprisonment. He declared that 
for several weeks before the Hippodrome meetings he had 
been under conviction and had resolved to become a moral 
man. “But,” said he, “as often as I resolved to give up liquor 
and evil I felt the appetite for drink and the power of the 





Sia eililaa Yas HOD AN Jie a RAI task AE IRCA Nee 
118 NS DWIGHT Ee MOODS 6 Son tay tr ken 
devil was stronger than I. At length I determined to try an © 
experiment, and I spoke the name of ‘Jesus’ every time the | 
appetite came upon me, and through His blessed name, though _ 
I spoke no formal prayer, I have been saved from my terrible 
enemy for many days.” 

_ This man was thoroughly converted at one of Mr. Moody’s’ 
meetings a few days later. 

The third speaker was a converted skeptic, who had attended | 
the meetings first out of curiosity, even going into a converts’ 
meeting to see what it was like. Here, however, the simple — 
testimonies of those who had found Jesus made such a deep : 
impression upon him that he speedily became converted also. — 

The fourth man who gave his testimony was one who had | 

_ been led into infidelity through his fondness for religious argu- 
ment. He had taken sides against Christianity “for argument’s 
sake,” till at length he succeeded in convincing himself that 
Christianity was wrong. One evening he strayed into the 
inquiry room and was soon busily engaged in arguing with 
the person who sat next to him, and was feeling very proud, 
having worsted his opponent, when a worker came along, and 
overhearing his declarations of infidelity said to him bluntly : 

“If that is the case, there is no hope for you.” 

That alarmed him. “Do you really think there is no hope 
for me?” he asked. : 

“None at all,” was the reply, “unless you begin to pray.” 

Greatly alarmed, he went home fully convinced of his danger 
and began to pray. Before morning his prayer was answered 
and he was happily converted. 

The fifth man was a converted liquor seller. } 

The sixth was one who had been groping in darkness, but 
had not succeeded in finding his Master until Mr. Moody 
knelt in prayer with him in the inquiry room. Then the light « 
burst gloriously upon him. 

The seventh and last was a besotten drunkard, who had be 









THE MAN AND HIS MISSION. 119 


come so desperate that he resolved to drink himself to death. 
All hope was.gone. “I had an awful appetite,” said he. “I 
_ could not live without liquor, But now that appetite is all 
- gone. For weeks I have had no wish for liquor.” 

__ At the conclusion of the New York services, Messrs. Moody 
_ and Sankey turned their faces joyfully toward Chicago, where 
"an equally marvelous revival quickly sprang up. The meetings 
' were held in the famous tabernacle, capable of seating 7,000 
people. Here, as elsewhere, the revival soon became the most 
_ prominent topic of conversation, and opinions were expressed 
_ by all sorts of individuals. As a result of the Chicago revival 
3 more than 6,000 persons registered their names as having been 
converted, and branch revivals were spread, through its influ- 
ence, all over the North and West. 

_ These three meetings, held in three of America’s largest 
cities during the winter of 1875-6, were but the beginning of 
‘similar services to be conducted by the great evangelist in all 





_ the leading cities of the United States and Canada during the  , 


coming twenty-three years. It is said that in holding special 
meetings for the conversion of his fellowmen, Mr. Moody has 
_ traveled over 1,000,000 miles, has addressed over 100,000,000 
_ persons—25,000,000 of whom were young people—and has 
dealt personally with nearly 750,000 individuals. 





CHAPTER XII. 


MOODY’S EDUCATIONAL MONUMENT AT NORTHFIELD | 


ERHAPS the most remarkable and unaccountable fact 


in the life of this wonderful man was that he, a man — 
almost entirely without education, should have left as his_ 


chief memorial and monument one of the greatest educa- 


tional institutions in America. More and more as the years © 


went on and Moody went here and there over the entire 
world, holding evangelistic services, he realized that man 
must not only be called out from the pathways of sin, but 
he must also be trained, physically, mentally and spiritually, 


for God’s service. With this in view, soon after his return — 
from his great series of meetings in England in the winter | 
of 1875-6, he returned to his native village of Northfield, — 
Massachusetts, for rest and recuperation. Here he built a mod- — 


est frame house within a stone’s throw\of his mother’s house, 
in which he was born. There Mr. Moody spent the summer of 


1875 resting from his great labors of the year previous in > 


England, planning an equally great campaign among Ameri- 
can cities, during the coming. winter. 


But as day after day he worked in the fields and met the : 


bright young farmer boys of the neighborhood, or drove with 
a friend or two to visit the homes of his former friends and 
neighbors, he observed with great pity that there was no open 


door educationally for those bright young men and women 


of scanty means. So touched was he by their lack of oppor- — 
tunity for mental and spiritual growth that he at once started © 
in his own home a small school; chiefly, it is true, for the © 
study of the Bible. Here the students came from the sur- — 
rounding neighborhood each morning, studied with their in- 


120 


/ oe 





| THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 00% aa 





- spiring teacher for several hours, and then rove home i in the 
gathering darkness. i ‘ 

___ A few, however, who lived too far to come and go each day, 
Mr. Moody took into his own home, an addition to the 

_ house being built for their especial accommodation. This | 
_was the beginning of the Northfield schools, which to-day 
owns property valued at nearly half a million dollars, and 

: Phere 1,200 earnest and consecrated young men and women 

are being trained, physically, intellectually and spiritually, for 

- valiant service for God in whatever way their talents may 

~ lead. 

Nor alone in the winter is the educational work carried 
on. But a few years since Mr. Moody started a most unique 
“summer school or series of schools, known the world over 

. -as the Northfield Summer Conference. To these meet- 

_ ings are invited the foremost Christian leaders of the world, 

and to them also come hundreds and thousands of earnest 
_ seekers after the truth as it is revealed in God’s Word. Each 

summer for six weeks these conferences are held. They now 
consist of the World’s Student Conference, the Young Men’ s 

Christian Association Conference, and the General Confer- 

ence for Christian Workers. Each lasts about two weeks, 

each has for its single aim the deepening of the spiritual life. 
Of course Mr. Moody is the pivot point upon which all these 

“meetings hinge. He scoured the earth to secure the best 

speakers on the different phases of the Christian life and 

work. He advertised the meetings far and wide to attract 
large audiences to hear the speakers, then he prayed that the 
Holy Ghost might descend upon each visitor to Northfield, 

| _and he or she might be a messenger to tell the glad tidings 
“to those at home, and thus the whole land be stirred up by 
the influences emanating from the Conferences. 

_ Inissuing a call for a Conference Mr. Moody wrote: “The 

great need of the hour is the preaching of Bible truth in the 


SOUTHERN CALIPORMIA SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


an 
of.) en 


Ue AUS RRS 8 Hoan ake AD 


‘op Biren L. | MOODY 


power of theHoly Ghost. pre ee of negatives neither draws 
men nor builds them up into the likeness of Christ. Let us then 

gather together in Northfield this season for a special prep- 
aration for service; let us be willing to be shown whatever 

is hindering God’s work through us, and then by the study 
of His Word and prayer seek His blessing in our individual 
lives. Northfield students have no theological hobby. As 
in former years the only standard will be the Bible, the revela- _ 
tion of God to His people. It is not time now to discuss the © 
quarrels. We believe the Bible as it has stood for ages. It is 
still the inexhaustible treasure of power to the church. Let 
us then come together this season to gather wheat with — 
which to feed a starving world.” ae 

Among the men who have made these conventions world- — 
famous in the past are Henry Drummond, Rev. Henry Van 
Dyke, President F. L. Patton, Rev. F. B. Meyer, Dr. Andrew 
Murray, Dr. A. J. Gordon, Prebendary Webb-Peploe, Rev. © 
G. Campbell Morgan and Rev. George H. C. Macgregor. 

It was my good fortune to attend a number of these stir- 
ring conferences in Northfield. I found the village to be 
beautiful beyond all expectations. It lies alongside the mean-_ 
dering Connecticut River and is encircled by the hazy foot-. 
hills of the Green Mountains. It reminds one strongly of a — 
big platter in which the village forms the bottom and the 
mountains the edge. It is a far-reaching panorama of green : 
meadow, silver water and fleecy clouds. As I walked about 
the streets and saw the happy groups of people going here — 
and there and heard their joyous conversation about the 
Christ, I was overwhelmed by the physical and spiritual _ 
beauty of the spot that made it appear like nothing so much | 
as Beulah Land. As many as twenty-five meetings were held 
daily during the General Conference. Three times daily the 
Auditorium, seating 2 ,500 people, was crowded with people, — 


2% 


eager to hear of “The Life More Abundant.” As I have said, 


“PIOYYHYON Je eouUcsoyUOO IOUIUINS oY} SULPUS}E O[IYM epNyzr[os Ul e[qig Sly Selpny}s sULAIp WOpuO’T yeoi3 oy} MOP 


‘(TSISHLUYON LV ACNLS AYOOGLNO S.AHAHW ‘d ‘A “AC 








TMs ore s[ojoy oy} USM sjuS} ITeyy youd $00U810}t109 ou 07 ‘S10USIA ary MM 


‘NAVT S.AGOOW NO SDNIdAVO 














THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 125 


Mr. Moody was the mainspring of the meetings. His activ- 
ity seemed endless. He arranged the program, conducted 
the meetings, led the singing, kept the speakers going from 
morning till night, stirred up things whenever things became 
dull, and looked after people and problems generally. I re- 
member hearing Mr. Moody at one of the conferences say to 
the great audience assembled in the Auditorium: “I am tired 
and sick of moral essays; it would take about a ton of them 
to convert a child 5 years old. A man went to a certain 
church once and said he liked it because the preacher never 
_ touched on politics or religion, but just read nice little essays. 
Give the people the Word of God. Some people say the 
Bible is a text book; they get a text and away they go. They 


'. go up in a balloon and talk about astronomy, and then they 


go down and give you a little geology; the next Sunday they 
go on the same way, and then wonder why the people do 
not read their Bibles. Some one has said that there were 
four things necessary in studying the Bible; admit, submit, 
commit, and transmit. First, admit its truth; second, submit 
to its teaching; third, commit it to memory; fourth, transmit 
it. Ifthe Christian life is a good thing for you, pass it on to 
someone else.” 

But what most astonished me at Northfield was the mag- 
nificent system of schools which have sprung up out of the 
ground where the great evangelist was born, almost as if by 
magic. Twenty years ago the land was barren, save for a 
few struggling farm-houses; to-day the spot is covered with 
a chain of Moody schools, consisting of more than twenty 
beautiful brick and stone buildings. There are three large 
winter schools, with an aggregate attendance of 1,200 
students, which are the Northfield Seminary for Girls, the 
Mount Hermon Academy for Boys and the Northfield Train- 
ing School for Christian Workers. The aim of the Seminary 
and Academy is to give poor but earnest boys and girls an 


‘ 


126 DWIGHT L> MOODY 


academic education at one-half the usual cost, or $100 per 
year for board and tuition. The distinctive trait of the schools 
lies in the fact that they do not train the intellectual alone 
but endeavor to develop fully the spiritual as well as the 
mental and physical nature. The Bible is given the prominent 
place in the curriculum, and practical Christianity is incul- 
cated by word and example. 

In view of all the above facts the Moody Schools constitute 
one of the marvels of the age. It is a wonderful example 
of the power of the Holy Spirit to teach even an unscholarly 
man the deepest philosophical truths. Looking at this preg- 
nant fact, while all the old colleges and universities of the 
land have lost sight of the central fact that man is, first and 
foremost, a spiritual being, and that accordingly spiritual 
training should predominate over intellectual and physical, 
here comes an unlettered evangelist and founds an ideal uni- 
versity—for it will be a university ere the twentieth century 
is far advanced. Truly God works in a mysterious way His 

wonders to perform. Northfield is Moody’s immortal monu- 
ment. In future ages he will be as well known as an educator 
as he is to this generation as an evangelist. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
MOODY’S HOME AND DAILY LIFE 


R. MOODY’S home life was ideally happy. Of his 
married life as a whole his sister-in-law, Mrs. William 
H. Holden, recently said: 

“T never met with a happier couple. In every way he 
deferred to her. She answered all his voluminous corre- 
spondence. She was the one to whom he always spoke of — 
his plans and his work. No trouble was too great for him if 
he could save her any bother or every-day, ordinary little 
troubles. They were married in 1862, and Mr. Moody had 
already then started on his missionary work at North Market 
Hall. They were very poor, had hardly enough to live on 
and resided in a little house at Dearborn avenue and Indiana 
street, but they were happy, and this happiness has always 
continued through their lives.” 

Mr. Moody married.Miss Emma C. Revell. For several 
years Miss Revell had been one of Mr. Moody’s Sabbath- 
school teachers. 

As in every step of his life, he married and set up house- 
keeping by faith. His first home was a small cottage, which 
was generally full to over-flowing with visitors. It also over- 
flowed with fun, sympathy and religion. Mr. Moody de- 
lighted to play practical jokes on his wife and guests, and 
would laugh and jump and shout with the children, the 
happiest child of them all. But in the midst of the merriment 
some text of Scripture would flash suddenly upon him, and 
instantly he would cry, “Get out your Bibles,” and lo! in a 
twinkling he would turn the whole household into a Bible 
class, Whatever cares or troubles burdened him during the 

127 


~ 


128 DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


day, he never failed to lay them aside on entering his cheery 
home. 

Three children—two boys and a girl—were born to him, 
and a happier or a more devoted mother it would be hard to 
find. From their earliest years Mrs. Moody taught them 
to pray daily, and instilled into their minds the fact that they 
belonged, soul and body, to Christ Jesus. 

During the early years of his married life Mr. Moody had 
no regular salary. He lived by faith, and this daily trusting 
for sustenance often brought the family into sore straits. 
Never, however, did the mission worker falter. He knew that 
God would take care of them, and his confidence was justi- 
fied, for never was their larder entirely empty. One of the 
pleasantest gifts ever bestowed upon Mr. Moody was the 
present of a new and completely furnished house. It came 
about in this way: 

An old friend of Mr. Moody had just built a row of beauti- 
ful houses. One of these he determined to set apart for Mr. 
Moody free of rent, if other friends of the mission worker 
would furnish it. The others gladly agreed and the under- 
taking was carried through with enthusiasm, the house being 
completely fitted up, from garret to cellar, in almost luxuri- 
ous style. Soft carpets adorned the floors; handsome furni- 
ture was found in the hall and parlor; while on the walls of 
the drawing-room hung life-size portraits of Mr. Moody 
and his wife. In addition, there was a book-case, containing 
a not inconsiderable library. The dining-room and kitchen 
were also completely furnished with all things required for 
housekeeping, and everything was in order for the surprise. 

Early on New Year’s morning Mr. Moody and his family 
were captured and carried off in a carriage—they knew not 
why nor whither. Finally it stopped before a handsome resi- 
dence and they were conducted into the house, which, to 
his surprise, was full of acquaintances and friends. After 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 120 


mutual greetings had been exchanged and he was wondering 
what it could all mean, the Rev. Dr. Patterson, on behalf 
of the company, presented him with a lease of the house and 
the free gift of all it contained, as a token of love and respect 
for his simple and earnest Christian character and of gratitude 
for his heroic labors for the conversion of their city. 

Never was any one more surprised than Mr. Moody. It 
seemed more like a dream than reality. Hand in hand with 
Mrs. Moody, almost speechless with wonder and well-nigh 
weeping for joy, the couple made the round of the beautiful 
rooms—much finer than they had ever expected to enjoy. 
On returning to the assembled friends in the parlor, he tried 
to thank them for their wonderful kindness; but so overcome 
was he with emotion that he could only brokenly express 
‘to them the gratitude which filled his heart to overflowing. 

D. L. Moody was one of the hardest workers of the age. 
Morning, noon and night, for six days out of the seven, 
he worked incessantly, preaching three or four times 
a day, giving interviews to reporters, planning the gospel 
meetings, answering scores of letters, talking individually 
with anxious inquirers for salvation. He slept only a few 
hours, but soundly. Every waking moment he was schem- 
ing, talking or preaching. He used to playfully remark that 
if it was not for his Saturday day of rest he would be in his 
grave in one month. 

During a recent visit to Northfield I visited the home of 
D. L. Moody, saw the study-table where he worked, and was 
given interesting facts about his daily life. 

My guide and informant was Mr. A. P. Fitt, the evan- 
gelist’s son-in-law, a sturdy, handsome Englishman, who 
was, for several years, Mr. Moody’s private secretary. Mr. 
Fitt lives just across the street from his father. He is well 
known as a superintendent of the Bible Institute Colportage 
Association. 


130 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


The large, roomy house of the evangelist, painted white, 
with green blinds, stands on the summit of a hill that 
stretches gently down, like a green carpet, to the Connecti- 
cut River, a mile distant. From the wide front porch a 
scene truly fairy-like greets the eye. First comes a band of 
green sward reaching to the river; then the stream stretches 
lazily out like the proverbial silver cord; then a ridge of hazy 
mountains; while topping these, rises a semicircle of misty 
mountains—a fascinating panorama, from its beginning in 
the grass ten feet away, to its ending in that beautiful peak 
ten miles distant. 

We passed through the large parlor, the equally large liv- 
ing room, the dining-room—with its heavy oak square table, 
easily capable of seating four on each side—up a flight of 
zig-zag stairs, and were, at last, in the great man’s study. It 
overlooks the beautiful expanse of hill and vale just described. 
It has three good-sized windows, and between two of them 
stands his working table—a square oak affair as substantial 
looking as the man who bends over it for two hours each 
morning before breakfast. From floor to ceiling, on two 
sides, the walls were lined with rows of books. They were 
mostly commentaries, with some works on homiletics and a 
complete library of everything Spurgeon ever wrote. 

Mr. Fitt described Mr. Moody’s method of sermon-making 
as follows: 

“The first step consists in choosing a subject, writing it on 
a big manila envelope, putting into it every clipping he 
comes across. Next, he finds a text to fit the subject cho- 
sen. Having this, he goes through Cruden’s Concordance, 
and a Topical Text Book, to find out what the Bible says 
about the theme. 

“Having the subject, the text, and Bible passages relating 
to it, well in hand, the next labor is illustration. He reviews 
his varied career, picking out here and there incidents that 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 131 


fit into the desired niche. He does not hesitate to look 
through dictionaries of anecdotes. In fact, everywhere, 
through history, biography, etc., he searches industriously 
together with his secretary to discover just the right in- 
cident to write up and clarify the topic. Finally he always 
sees what Spurgeon has said about the matter. 

“His sermons are usually preached at first at Northfield,” 
said Mr. Fitt, taking up an envelope having a series of a 
dozen dates on it, showing the times and places that sermons 
have been delivered—the first place named’ being North- 
field. 

As we sat talking in the pleasant study, Mr. Fitt described 
as follows Mr. Moody’s mode of life while he is at home from 
May to October: “Mr. Moody is never idle. Summer as 
well as winter, he works from early morning often till late at 
night. Reaching Northfield in May, at the close of a hard 
winter’s evangelistic campaign, he at once engages in three 
lines of work; gives daily talks to the students in the schools 
at Northfield; superintends the various conferences for 
Christian workers that are held throughout the summer 
months; prepares his sermons for the following winter. This 
summer he has been unusually busy looking after the gospel 
work among the soldiers. 

“His working day is about as follows: -Rises at five 
o’clock A. M.; studies on sermons two hours before break- 
fast. After the morning meal come family prayers, usually 
conducted by Mr. Moody. His prayers are earnest, definite, 
brief. He prays for his family, the Northfield schools, the 
classes (like the soldiers) which are especially on his mind, 
and certain individuals. He is noted for thanking God a 
great deal, for health, for all the blessings he enjoys. 

“From nine o’clock till noon he visits the schools, giving 
helpful talks, and attends to conference matters. He always 

goes about in a single-seated buggy. He drives rapidly, and 


132 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


is, perhaps, the most familiar figure on Northfield streets. 
He knows all the boys and girls and has a nod and smile for 


each. He enjoys this driving about immensely. It is one of - 


his chief recreations. 

“Reaching home at noon, he busies himself for an hour 
in his garden. His exercise 1s obtained chiefly by this means. 
He dearly loves to see things growing. He is fond of ani- 
mals, also. Raising chickens and doves are his hobbies in 
this line. 

“At one o'clock P. M. comes dinner, after which he opens 
his mail, and dictates to his stenographer, and replies to the 
most important letters. An after-dinner nap follows this; 
then more driving, executive work, committee meetings, etc. 

“After tea, at six P. M., he generally attends the services 
in the Northfield Auditorium. If at home, he enjoys a game 
of halma, or croquinole with his wife and son and any friends 
who may have called. In the summer he retires early as a 
rule.” 

I am glad to present another view of Mr. Moody’s home 
life, written by Mr. F. H. Jacobs, who was for a score of 
years one of Mr. Moody’s most trusted singing lieutenants. 
Mr. Jacobs writes as follows: 

When a boy I remember very distinctly how I longed to 
know something of the way Lincoln spent the day. With 
what eagerness I sought any information that might possibly 
come from the conversation of groups of men standing about 
discussing the war and our leaders. And I find that we 
have not changed very much since growing to manhood, 
for the question as to the daily habits of Mr. Moody ‘is 
asked me almost constantly by those who know of my former 
associations with him in his work. I will try and give youa 
glimpse of his daily employment of time. 

Mr. Moody was an early riser. He delighted to arise 
before any one else in the house wakened. The golden hours 


é 





MOODY’S PET DONKEY “DANDY” 


For years “Dandy’’ has been a familiar figure on Mr. Moody’s lawn, keep 
: ing the grass trimmed and beautiful. 


‘o8e sreok o€ yodeq yO Sel peolrey erueslAsuusdg pio 


VIHdTSCV1lHd LV SONLLSXIN TVAIASY S.AGOOW YOd SAALAVNOGVSH 


sItx HEI 


aNNvS BAGO 

















DWIGHT L. MOODY Re 
At the age of 18. 





O 
O 
< 
0 
Ae 
O 
ical 
fH 
fae) 
= 
wn 
WY 
Z 
cal 
MES 
ss 
ea) 
[x] 
aa 
be 
Ir, 
(eo) 
—Y 
a 
Z 
{q] 
a 
= 
ow 
WY 
a) 
Zz 
x 
Y) 
fe 
1] 
Re 
oO 
< 
[x] 
b 
eal 
aE: 
ical 








es Pes a; 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 737 


of the waking day were spent when at home in his study. 


_. It is scarcely necessary to tell you what he studied. Like 


Sir Walter Scott, to him there is but one book. In North- 
field his rising hour was 5 o’clock, and for two hours or moré 
he was alone with his Bible and its Author. No doubt the 
nuggets which so often appeared in his speeches were crystal- 
_ lized during these quiet hours. Here he usually read con- 
secutively the whole book, and it is in thus reading that he 


received the comprehensive knowledge of God’s Word so ~ 


often exhibited in his addresses. But he did not by any 
means confine himself to a general study. He often entered 
into the minutest detail. This is especially exhibited in his 
work on “Bible Characters.” A close observer of his con- 
versation during the day would often detect that his morning 
hours had been spent in the study of Bible heroes or of the 
_ sublimely simple and unparalleled life of the Son of God. 

At 7:30 or 8 o’clock he breakfasted when at home, with 
his family; when away, with his associated workers. At the 
table his conversations were often interspersed with little 
pleasantries, which seemed to add relish to the food partaken, 
and were enjoyed by all present. His tastes were very simple. 
He ate only plain, nutritious food, well cooked and whole- 
some. He seldom drank tea or coffee, but considered ice - 
water one of the greatest luxuries of earth. To his simple 
diet no doubt is due his matchless physical strength to endure 
hard work. There are very few men who could equal him 
- in physical endurance. After breakfast his family or workers, 
as the case might be, joined in morning devotions, A chap- 
ter in the Bible or the “Daily Reading,’ as prepared by 
Major Whittle, was read and then he usually lead in prayer, 
or selected some one for that part of the service. 

Just a word about his prayers at family devotions. Like 
those in public they were brief and right to the point. I 
think I never heard a man pray who could comprehend so 


\ 


pees DWIGHT L. MOODY 


much in few words as he did. His family, his schools, his 
workers, their families, the work in hand, missionaries, minis- 
ters, all forms of Christian work in all places, were remem- 
bered in an incredibly short space of time and brevity of 
speech. You rose from your knees having belted the globe 
with tender petitions for God’s care for His own. 

After prayer, directions were given to his workers for 
special things needing attention, or matters of a personal 
nature were attended to at home and then came his corre- 
spondence, which was very heavy. While a great deal of 
this was done by helpers under his direction, the larger 
portion received his personal attention. A strong point with 
him was his mastery of details connected with his work and 
schools. : 

After his correspondence was finished, which was often 
interrupted by callers, he sometimes went out for a little 
exercise in the open air. When at home he often drove - 
over the farms, attending to some matters needing personal 
supervision in connection with his schools, or he read the 
daily papers, keeping well abreast with the spirit of the 
times. He was a great admirer of strong characters, and 
often in conversation some incident of great courage, or 
bravery, or prowess, came to his mind, and with eyes spar- 
kling with admiration he would relate the incident to those 
who were present. 

His general reading gave him a wonderful fund of available 
information concerning present living leaders in the progress 
of the world. He was a great admirer of Bismarck and 
Gladstone among statesmen, but his acquaintance was not 
limited to these men. He was conversant with leaders in 
every country. Spurgeon among preachers seemed to stand 
highest with him, although he was very enthusiastic over 
the prospective success of young men who are becoming 
prominent in their respective fields of labor. 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 139 
His preparation for preaching was usually by himself. He 
was very careful in the selection of his subjects. Having 
studied large audiences for thirty years he seemed to know 
what was best to preach each successive service, but he did 
not rely on his judgment alone. He invariably petitioned 
for guidance in the selection of texts and sermons. I believe 
it is to these two things: his wonderful judgment and his 
implicit faith in God to guide him, that we may trace the 
widespread success of his work as an evangelist. He almost 
always went to his meeting with a positive assurance as to 
_ what his, message was to be. When on the platform you saw 
him just as he was, with his earnest, intense individuality 
moved by the single purpose of winning souls for Christ. 
Every act of his, every song sung, every prayer uttered, every 
word read was turned into this one profound and overpower- . 
ing desire for conversions. 

As I followed him from time to time, this one master 
motive of his life often wrung from me the words, “O that 
there were a thousand men with the overmastering, burning 
desire to win souls for God!” 

A man under such intense mental and physical strain must 
of course have shown signs of temporary exhaustion. This 
was very often the case when after two and often three 
services in a day-he reached his room completely exhausted, 

_. but always cheerful and alert concerning reports from work- 
ers. He seldom spoke of weariness himself. His workers 
usually gathered in his room before retiring, giving reports 
from different parts of the field. In these meetings, very 
informal and always enjoyable, were often seen some of the 
stronger characteristics of this man of God. How eagerly 
he drank in the report of a successful worker who spoke of 
gathered sheaves for the harvest home. But no less eager 
when after several reports, perhaps there is one who could 
not speak of a successful meeting and had to confess he had 


140 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


met with failure. As some worker rose and reluctantly re- 
lated his seeming failure, I saw Mr. Moody’s face change 
from joy to deep solicitude and sympathy as his eyes became 
suffused with tears, and with one consent all heads bowed, 
while he commended the work and workers to God and 
especially mentioned this one to Him who sees all our work 
and to whom no doubt our successes are often signal failure 
and our failures the highest success. This done, the work of 
the day was dismissed, and for. relaxation the company 
engaged in some pleasant conversation. The thought of 
some prominent author, or the master motive of some great 
man, or the great achievement of some person, or the out- 
come of present great movements in the world were dis- 
cussed. 

There was no man who surpassed Mr. Moody in the 
enjoyment of a good laugh. In fact, he entered as heartily 
into the relation or the perpetration of a manly joke as any 
man I ever saw. And his enjoyment was not confined to 
jokes on somebody else. If there was the least hint of some- 
thing laughable about himself he was the most eager to 
have his associates enjoy it at his expense. 

Time and space forbid my mentioning many interesting 
things that came up in daily contact with this wonderful 
man, but I cannot close without mentioning one more char- 
acteristic. That was his devotion to his friends. He was very 
quick in recognizing sterling worth in men and a kind act ~ 
was never forgotten; on the contrary, it was sure to be 
rewarded. On the other hand, men become devoted admirers 
of him. Only the other day I heard a prominent pastor say, : 
“Moody has won my heart; I love him dearly.” Again and 
again have I heard men say they counted it the privilege of 
their lives to be connected with him in his work in the least 
degree. 

If you were to ask me what most impressed me in his 


- THE MAN AND HIS MISSION | 141 


daily life I would answer, “his unconscious humility and the 
utter absence of selfishness.” This man was honored above 
degree; his name was a household word in all Christian na- 
tions; his works were known around the world; his presence 
was the delight of the humblest cottager, and he was enter- 
tained in the palaces of royalty; and yet his daily life was the 
personification of childlike humility. To me he was a marvel 
of God’s grace. He achieved success seldom attained, but 
had no greater delight than to hear men of strength preach 
the gospel, being a living example of the Scripture injunction, 
“Tn honor preferring one another.” 


CHAPTER XV. 
AT MOODY’S CHURCH—AFTER THIRTY-SIX YEARS 


| 1863 D. L. Moody organized his church in Chicago. A 

few years later he left the institution and went all over 
the world as an evangelist. Thirty-six years later, in 1899, 
I visited this church and found Moody’s influence and spirit 
not a whit less vigorous than on the day he left it. That such 
should be the case is one of the most remarkable tributes to 
the man that can be conceived. Thirty years absent and his 
spirit still ruling every member of his church as surely as 
the day he founded it! 

At 7:55 o’clock—while still a block away—I heard the 
swelling chorus of “A Shelter In a Time of Storm.” There 
was, somehow, something so deliciously joyous in the sound, 
that my pace unconsciously quickened, and I felt a touch of 
that longing for the courts of the Lord described by the 
Psalmist. 


Inside, the large lecture room was already comfortably — 


filled—and new comers were arriving in twos, threes, and 


quartets. Everybody was singing heartily—as though it was — 


a physical culture class for lung development. Everybody 


looked happy: from the leader, Rev. R. A. Torrey, to the 


group of boys in their teens in the front row. The ordinary 
long-faced prayer-meetingey air of solemnity was nowhere 


to be found. The people appeared to be expecting as good — 


a time as though the curtain was soon to rise and the play 


begin. These things I noted as I took a seat in the middle of — 
the room so as to see and hear accurately what was going on. _ 


By the time I secured a book, they were singing with a will: 


“T Will Sing the Wondrous Story”—a boy of fifteen next me [ 


doing his utmost to swell the ringing chorus. 
/ 142 


ot 
lh es ahd dien or 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 143 


_ After another rousing song, Mr. Torrey arose and said in 


his resonant, cheery, hearty tones: “In my early ministry I 


once read a book on “The Improvement of the Prayer Meet- 
ing.’ Various plans and schemes were suggested. But by 
years of experience I have found the best way to improve a 
prayer meeting is to so conduct it that the presence of God 
will be manifest there. That’s what we want to-night. We 
want the Spirit of God to come here in such power that we 
shall be actually conscious of it. Let all bow in silent prayer 
and earnestly ask for this.” 

As the mass of heads bent forward, Mr. Torrey continued : 
“Let each one make it a personal request for God’s presence. 
Now, will some one lead us in a brief prayer?’ The next 
instant a woman’s voice was heard: “Oh, our God, we be- 
seech Thee! Come! Come to-night! Let us feel and know 
that Thou art here in our midst!” 

“Now let all sing heartily: ‘Praise Him, Praise Him: Jesus 
Our Blessed Redeemer,’ ” came the clear tones of Mr. Torrey’s 
voice; ard in response there rose a rolling torrent of praise 
that made the blood tingle. 

“As the keynote for ‘our meeting to-night, I will read the 
65th Psalm,” said the leader. He then read the passage, mak- 


ing short running comments. The entire time occupied by 


the reading and exposition did not exceed five minutes—pos- 
sibly not mare than three. It was an innovation—and one 


as salutary to the life of the meeting as it was upsetting to 


my preconceived notions: for it is not a meeting for praise 
and prayer; wrongly conceived of by some as a forum for 


- dissertation and discussion. 


“After singing a verse of ‘Blessed Assurance, Jesus is Mine,’ 


the testimony part will begin. Let them be personal experi- 


ences and brief,’ said Mr. Torrey. Scarcely had the last note 


of the song died away before a woman was on her feet saying: 
“I praise God to-night for a happy and Christian home. Some 


144 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


time since I wanted to go out and preach the gospel, but God 
showed me that there was a large enough field for preaching 
and practicing, too, right in my own home. Praise Him for 
the conversion of my som!” 

Before this lady had regained her seat another was exclaim- 
ing: “I want to publicly thank God for healing me in answer 
to prayer.” 

Now; two, three and four were on their feet simultaneously. 
A boy of fourteen, on the front row, was the first to catch the 
eye of the leader, and said: “I thank the Lord for curing my 
sister in answer to prayer. She sent a request to this meeting 
for your prayers, and in answer to them has been healed. I 
also want to thank God for saving me three weeks ago. I used 
to go nearly every night to the theater and to shows: I don’t 
go any more. I come to the better show here in the house 
of God.” 

A colored woman with beaming face, cried: “Oh, I am so 
happy in Jesus to-night! I tell youse people it pays to serve 
de Lord. Ise been happier dis week dan ever befo’. I tell you 
dere’s no foolin’ *bout dis business. Get your names right: 
away in de Book ob Life, and make sure ob heaven—Praise 
, de Lord!” ; 

“There is a Land of Pure Delight,” began the leader, and 
the congregation joined in vigorously. At the conclusion 
of one verse a man jumped to his feet and said: 

“I want to thank God that three years ago He picked me 
_ up out of the gutter of deep sin, and has kept me by His power 
ever since—praise His holy name!” 

One of the church workers rose and said: 

“T desire to thank God for a sweet new peace I have been 
enjoying this week. You may not know it, but it is a fact 
that religious work gets monotonous—it gets to be a routine 


sort of thing like all other work—and unless you keep very, 


very close to Christ, you are liable to lose His presence, and so 


fee 


syjuoU’ JowWWINS 94} BuliInp ystjesueao yeo18 ayy JO UOTJVSIOOI OPLIOAVF OY, 


div HSdad dO HLVENE V 














MR. MOODY CONDUCTING AN OPEN AIR GOSPEL SERVICE AT CAMP 


s 


RING THE SUMMER CONFERENCE 


NORTHFIELD DU 








THE MAN AND HIS MISSION tay 
lose the joy, peace an surpassing sweetness of the Christian 
life. At least, I have found it so: and I thank God for a fresh 
baptism of His Spirit.” 

After numerous other testimonies, Mr. Torrey rose and 
‘said: “Now, we will close this part of the service—unless 
there is some one whose heart is so full that he feels he must 
say a word.” Instantly, two persons were speaking at once: 
they gave brief and fervid bits of experience. As they sat 
down, and before Mr. Torrey could speak, four others had 
- arisen in various parts of the room beseeching a word to praise 
—another—still another—truly it seemed that the Spirit was 
- present in power! 

_ Finally Mr. Torrey said: “Now, friends, please bow your 

heads and pray silently for each of these written requests which 
-have been sent me.” Then he read: “Pray for a man who is 
dying of consumption that he may be willing to be talked to 
about his soul and be converted.” 

After the reading of several other requests, Mr. Torrey 
said: “Has anyone present any request?” 

_ “Pray for my sister,” came from a voice in the rear. 
“Pray for my brother that he may be brought to Christ.” 
“Please pray for a sick sister-in-law.” 

From all parts of the room came petitions for the united 
prayer of the mass of bowed heads for the conversion and 
healing of members of families, of friends, of relatives. 

“Pray for God’s blessing upon Mr. Moody and Mr. Towner 
in their revival meetings ina Western state,” said Mr. Torrey. 
“Pray for Evangelist Inglis, of London,” said another—_ 
“Pray for my grandson in the army, that don’t know Jesus.” 
“Pray for God’s blessing upon our pastor and upon next Sun- 
day’s services:” an earnest prayer aloud followed—and this 
feature of the service was over. 

Mr. Torrey said: “Are there any persons here to-night who 
themselves want to find Christ? If so, will you please hold 


148 _ ‘DWIGHT L. MOODY 


up your hands?” In response, one—two—three—four—five 
hands went wp in quick succession. 

Mr. Torrey prayed briefly: he prayed for the complete 
salvation of the inquirers; for God’s blessing upon all the 
activities of the church; that the service would prove a last- 
ing blessing to all present, and God’s kingdom brought nearer 
thereby. 

He then said: “It is two minutes till 9 o’clock. We must 
close. Let us all join in singing two verses of ‘I Need Thee 
Every Hour,’ and after the meeting I will be very glad to 
talk with those that raised their hands.” 

As the strains of the grand old hymn poured out from the 
hundreds of throats and filled the room like sacred incense, 
Mr. Torrey walked down the aisle to the door, where he gave 
each person as they passed out a word of greeting and a hearty 
grip of the hand. 

As I left the room in the midst of:the throng, I could not 
help thinking and exclaiming: “That was an ideal prayer 
meeting.” 





CHAPTER XVI. 
MOODY’S WORLD’S FAIR GOSPEL CAMPAIGN 


HE six months’ series of meetings conducted by Mr. 
Moody in Chicago during the World’s Fair was one of 
the most remarkable gospel campaigns ever conducted. 
It was a huge scheme, conceived, planned and carried 
through victoriously by one man, to offset the materialistic 
spirit of Chicago during the World’s Fair period, and keep 
_ God and His ways before the eyes of the millions of visitors 
_ from every quarter of the globe. 

As soon as it was decided that the World’s Fair was to 
be held in Chicago, Mr. Moody began to gather his forces 
for the coming campaign—which an eminent minister de- 
clared was “the boldest and most daring thing undertaken in 
connection with the Columbian Exposition.” During Mr. 
Moody’s fourteen months’ evangelistic tour in Europe, and 
during his journey to the Holy Land in 1891-2, he perfected 
his plans and obtained the promised. assistance of the ablest 
evangelists of Europe. 

Immediately after he landed in America, Mr. Moody has- 
tened to his home at Northfield and inaugurated a season 
of prayer for the coming work. At Northfield Seminary and 
the Mount Hermon school for boys he gathered the students 
and teachers of his schools about him, at six o’clock in the 
morning, to seek. the anointing of the Holy Spirit, and to 
pray for the work to come. “If you think anything of me,” 
said he, with choking voice and tear-filled eyes, “if you 
have any regard for me, if you love me, pray for me that 
God may anoint me for the work in Chicago. I want to 
be filled with the Spirit, that I may preach the Gospel as 

. 149 


150 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


I have never preached it before. We want to see the salva- 
tion of God as we have never seen it before.” : 

Mr. Moody arrived in Chicago in May, 1893, full of the 
Holy Spirit, and it was in this spirit of prayer and consecra- 
tion that the meetings began, and the same spirit pervaded 
them from first to last. Multitudes from all parts of the 
earth, who had come to the Fair frivolous and gay, seeking 
worldly pleasures only, returned home repentant and prayer- 
ful, to seek the welfare of their fellow-men. 

The late Dr. A. J. Gordon of Boston, after being for a 
month associated with Mr. Moody in conducting the cam- 
paign, gave the following vivid description of it to the 
Boston Watchman. He said: 


“A man’s work often furnishes the best character-sketch’ 


of himself which‘can possibly be drawn. We therefore give 
an outline of Mr. Moody’s summer campaign in Chicago as 
a kind of full-length portrait of the evangelist himself. Let 
the reader be reminded that it is in the months of July 
and August, when many city pastors are summering, that 
this recreation scheme of Mr. Moody’s is carried on after his 
hard year’s campaign in England and America. 

“Four of the largest churches in different parts of the city 
are held for Sunday evenings and various week-evening 
services. Two theaters, the Empire and the Haymarket, 
located in crowded centers, are open on Sundays, and the 
former on every week-night, and they are not infrequently 
filled to their utmost capacity while the gospel is preached and 
sung. Five tents are pitched in localities where the unprivi- 
leged and non-church-going multitudes live. In these 
services are held nightly, and as we have visited them we 
have found them always filled with such, for the most part, 
as do-not attend any place of Protestant worship. A hall 
in the heart of the city is kept open night after night, the 
services continuing far on to the morning hours, while earnest 


SS ie 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 151 


workers are busily fishing within and without for drunkards 
and harlots. Two gospel wagons are moving about dispens- 
ing the Word of Life to such as may be induced to stop and 
‘listen, and the workers estimate that I,000 or more are thus 
reached daily of those who would not enter a church or 
mission hall. 

“Daily lectures are given at the Institute for the instruction 
in the Bible of the students, Christian workers, ministers, 
- missionaries, and others who wish to attend. The large hall 
in which these lectures are given, seating comfortably 350, 
is always filled. During July there were thirty-eight preach- 


_. ers, evangelists, and singers, and other agents co-operating 


in the work, and their labors are supplemented by an endless 
variety of house-to-house and highway-and-hedge effort by 
the 250 students in residence in the Institute. 

“We shall beat the World’s Fair,’ said Mr. Moody good- 
naturedly, as we arrived on the ground. With malice toward 
none and charity toward all, this is what he set out to do, viz., 
to furnish such gospel attractions, by supplementing the 
churches and co-operating with them, that the multitudes 


visiting the city might be kept in attendance on religious 


services on Sunday instead of attending the Fair. So it has 
been. Mr. Moody estimates that from 30,000 to 40,000 
people have been reached by his special Sunday evangelistic 
services. This multiplied by seven days easily foots up about 
100,000 brought weekly within reach of the gospel. The 
World’s Fair has been closed on Sunday for want of attend- 
ance, but the religious services are daily growing. Every 
good opening for the gospel is readily seized. When Fore- 
 paugh’s great circus tent had been set up in the city Mr. 
Moody tried to secure it for Sunday. He was granted the 
use of it for a Sabbath morning service, but as the manager 
expected Sunday in Chicago to be a great harvest day, he 
- reserved the tent on the afternoon and evening for his own 


152 DWIGHT, L. MOODY, 


performances. Fifteen thousand people came to hear the 
simple gospel preached and sung at the morning service. The 
circus, however, was so poorly attended in the afternoon and 
evening that Sunday exhibitions were soon abandoned. More 
than that, the manager said he had never been in the habit of 
giving performances on Sunday and should not attempt it 
again, and he offered, if Mr. Moody would appoint an evan- 
gelist to travel with him, to open his tent thereafter on Sun- 
days for gospel meetings, and be responsible for all expenses. 

“It was the same with the theaters. At first they declined 
to allow religious services on Sunday. Their performances 
on that day not having proved as successful as they antici- 
pated, now Mr. Moody can hire almost any one which he 
wishes to secure. 

“Eulogy and biographical encomiums upon living men are 
undesirable, and the writer has risked the displeasure of his 
friend in putting so much into print concerning him. But 
we hope that what we have written will awaken serious re- 
flections in the minds of ministers and laymen alike con- 
cerning the problem of summer work and summer success 
for the gospel in our great cities. 

“We may also hope that a stronger faith in the divine 
administration and mighty efficiency of the Holy Ghost may 
be hereby inspired. We have no idea that the large and 
extensive religious enterprises which we have been describing 
are due alone to the superior natural endowments of the 
evangelist. For years in his meetings and conferences we 
have heard him emphasize the presence and power of the 
Holy Ghost in the worker as the one and indispensable con- 
dition of success. It must be that where the Spirit has been 
so constantly recognized and honored he has been doing 
invisibly and irresistibly much of the great work which 


human judgment attributes to the man who is the chosen 
agent.” 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION —_453 


No better idea of the spirit of the campaign and the 
- method with which it was carried on can be obtained than 
by giving the story of a typical meeting held in Haymarket 
Theater one Sunday morning. The great auditorium, seat- 
ing 3,000 people, was filled to overflowing an hour before the 
appointed time for service, while it is estimated that three or 
four thousand more came too late to be admitted. An over- 
flow meeting was therefore held in a neighboring theater. 
On the stage in Haymarket Theater, gathered around and 
behind Mr. Moody, were a number of his evangelistic co- 
workers, two quartettes of singers, Mr. D. B. Towner’s 
male choir, a large mixed choir and three of Mr. Moody’s . 
song lieutenants, Mr. George C. Stebbins, Mr. D. B. Towner 
and Mr. F. H. Jacobs. The service opened with an hour of 
song, embracing solos, quartettes, congregational singing 
and choir selections, rousing the people to a high pitch of 
enthusiasm and expectancy. 

Immediately following the song service, Mr. Moody 
rushed to the front of the platform and exclaimed: “We want 
to keep up these meetings. We want to reach and save the 
drunkards, the fallen, the wretched, the lost. We want your 
sympathy and help. Now,” he exclaimed, “all who want the 
theater meetings continued, hold up your hands.” And all 
over the congregation thousands of hands went up. “That 
is very encouraging,” said Mr. Moody. “Now, just put your 
hands in your pockets—for we are going to take up a col- 
lection for the spread of the work.” This witty turn amused 
and pleased the audience. The voters were fairly caught and 
responded handsomely. 

After the collection and another song, Mr. Moody came 
forward and at once plunged into an eloquent address on 
“Overcoming.” 

At the conclusion of this inspiring sermon, hundreds or 





154 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


persons came forward to signify their desire to henceforth 
lead a Christian life. 

The editor of The Boston Congregationalist summed up 
the results of the campaign as follows: 

“Mr. Moody’s six months’ campaign in Chicago has been 
a marvelous success, greater than even he had anticipated. 
Looked at from the human side alone, it has not been any 
less wonderful than the Fair itself and its allied congresses. 
If the display in Jackson Park appealed to the eye and the 
zsthetic sense, the congresses in the Art Palace to the intel- 
lect and the love of knowledge, Mr. Moody’s meetings have 
appealed to the religious sense. Hundreds of thousands from 
every section of the country and from all over the world have 
heard the gospel from the lips of the great evangelist or from 
~ some one of his helpers. 
“The summer campaign in Chicago has shown that people 


are not weary of the gospel, that when preachers present it 


with earnestness they are not unwilling to go into the 
churches to hear it. It has proved, also, that no men are 
more thoroughly in sympathy with the people, or more 
anxious to do them good, or more eager to bring them the 
gospel as it is found in the New Testament, than the pastors 
of the various evangelical churches in our cities. Without the 
aid of these pastors Mr. Moody’s success would have been 
far less than it has proved to be.” 

Mr. Frederick L. Chapman, editor of The Ram’s Horn, 
also eloquently summarized its effect upon the world. He 
said: 

“We have watched the World’s Parliament of Religions 
with wonder, we felt as we might if witnessing some grand 
review of marshaled hosts; but when with intenser interest 
we turned to see this most remarkable battle for truth and 
right and the coming of the kingdom of Christ in our midst, 
it seemed as though we were watching the militant hosts of 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 155 


‘Immanuel moving into action and striking the very strong- 
holds of satanic power, not only in Chicago, but the whole 
world over. As far as our farthest guests shall go to. their 
distant homes will the influences of this wonderful- work fol- 
low and be felt forever.... 

“From the farthest suburbs to the very center of civic life, 
in the most beautiful quarters, along magnificent boulevards, 
to the lowest slums of our city, the effect of this movement 
has been felt. But Chicago is not the only place to be bene- 
fited by this wonderful work. The hundreds of thousands 
which thronged these great gatherings came from every land 
on earth. Every state in the great Republic sent a host of 
representatives. Returning to their homes over the whole 
wide world, they have taken with them the influences of the 

‘lessons to which they have listened, the songs they have 
heard, and the enthusiasm here inspired. 

“To sum up the results of such a work is impossible for 
man. It cannot be measured in time, for eternity alone can 
tell, and God alone knows how many hundreds of thousands 
of hearts have been and will be reached.” 


CHAPTER XVII. 
MOODY’S WORK AMONG PRISONERS 


URING the last few years of Mr. Moody’s life he be- 

came intensely interested in the prisoners throughout 
the world, Like a mother, he longed to lighten their weary 
hours; and like his Heavenly Father, he longed to redeem 
_ them from their ways of sin. Mr. Moody himself tells how 
he became interested in this work, as follows: 

“In 1895 I heard to my amazement that no less than 
three-quarters of a million men and women in this country 
belong to the criminal class; that is, the number in and out 
of our jails and prisons. It was an astonishing statement. I 
could hardly believe it, until I had made investigation. 

“TI began to visit the jails and prisons in every state I went 
to, and I found that the county jails in most places were 
entirely neglected. Here and there were Christian people 
who took an interest in the county jails. In the state peni- 
tentiaries they have libraries and reading matter, but a great 
many jails that I visited—and one jail in Texas I found 
with no less than three hundred prisoners—had not a solitary 
thing to read. When I asked the prisoners if there was 
anything I could do for them, they said if they had something 
to read it would help them to kill the time. I asked them if 
they would read sermons or religious books. They said, yes. 

“I sent some books into that prison. There were some 
prisoners who could not read, and they insisted upon the 
men who could read, reading aloud to them. They read 
Spurgeon’s and other sermons that I sent in. Before long 
I began to hear of men being converted. Then I sent Testa= 


ments, and became so interested that I began to write to the 
156 





EIA RS ods “irae 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 187 


sheriffs of all the different counties. There are two thousand 
seven hundred counties in this country, and nearly all of 
them have a county jail. Out of all the letters that we have 
written to those sheriffs, only one has written back a saucy 
letter.” : : 

Seeing’ the great need, Mr. Moody began to devise ways 
and means to meet it, and finally evolved a definite plan of 
campaign. He conceived the great ambition of placing one 
of his Colportage Library books in the hands of every pris- 
oner in the penitentiaries of the United States. To this end, — 
as he went about the country holding evangelistic services, 
he solicited from every source money for what he termed his 
“Prison Fund.” As a result of these efforts up to the 15th 
of November, 1899, a total of 316,331 copies of these books 
had been distributed in penal institutions—including county 
jails, United States jails, city jails, district jails, penitentiaries, 
prisons, workhouses, houses of correction, convict camps, 
prison stations, bridewells, chained gangs. Of this gratifying 
result Mr. Moody recently said: 

The work in these jails and prisons has been about the 
most encouraging thing I have done outside of regular 
evangelistic work. Hardly a day passes without my hearing 
of definite cases of conversion and blessing through the read- 
ing of these books. I believe that many a man will rise up in 
eternity and thank God he was in prison, because there he 
met Christ. We hear of many who now, like Peter and Paul, 
are praising God though still in bonds.” 

Only a few months before his death, while at East North- 
field, Massachusetts, Mr. Moody wrote out the following 
story of the remarkable conversion of Mr. Valentine Burke. 
It is one of the evangelist’s last appeals to Christian people: 

“When I was holding meetings in St. Louis, Mo., in 1880, 
the Globe-Democrat published verbatim reports of my ser- 
mons every day. 


bards LE AES aL ow fae, Site ao oho Lg i eS 


bee DWIGHT L. MOODY 


“One night I preached on the Philippian jailer and next 
morning the paper came out with a sensational headline: 
‘How the Jailer at Philippi Was Caught.’ A copy of the 
paper was carried into the city jail and fell into the hands 
of a notorious prisoner named Valentine Burke. 

“This man was one of the worst characters known to the 
St. Louis police. He was about forty years old at that time, 
had spent about twenty years in jail, and was then awaiting 
trial on another serious charge. 

“As Burke glanced over the morning paper the headline 
caught his eye. Thinking it was some jail news, he began to 
read it. He was anxious to see hojw the jailer was caught. 
He had once passed through a town called Philippi in Illinois 
and supposed that this was the place referred to. 

“Every now and then he came across the words—‘Believe 
-in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.’ That 
text was quoted nine times in the sermon. God used it to 
convict him, and after reading the sermon through, a sense 
of his responsibility before God rushed upon him. There in 
his cell at midnight he prayed to God for the first time in his 
life. On the following Sunday he talked with the friends who 
held service in the jail and was led into the light of the gospel. 

“From that night Burke was a changed man. The sheriff 
thought he was playing the ‘pious dodge’ and had no con- 
fidence in his professed conversion. But when he came to 
trial, the case against him was not pressed and he escaped 
through some technicality. 

“For some months after his release Burke tried to find 
work, but no one would take him, knowing his past history. 
He thought perhaps it was because of his ugly face, and he 
prayed God to make him good-looking. He went to New 
York and was taken in by a member of the police force, who 
knew him and who told him that he would shoot him dead if 


he abused his confidence. Being unsuccessful in New York, 





~ 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 159 


Bae a vi FT cai a Pie NE GS IRL ich SMR Se atari ate. pans 
Bere RAE SAAT ES 2% F . 


he returned to St. Louis, where, finally, the sheriff sent for 
_ him and told him he had had him shadowed ever since he left 
jail, and that he was convinced at last that he was sincere 
and he made Burke a deputy-sheriff. 

“That was in 1880. When I was preaching in Chicago in 
1890 Burke, who had not been off duty for the ten years, 
came up to see me. During all that time there had been 

many changes in the administration of the sheriff’s office and 
they had changed every deputy but him. Finally they ap- 
pointed that ex-convict treasurer of the sheriff’s office. 

“I preached in St. Louis again in 1895. A short time 


_ before my visit an evangelist was called away in the middle 


of revival meetings. The committee wanted Burke to come 
and preach in his absence, but the sheriff said he had just 
levied on a jeweler’s store and had not had time to take an 
inventory, and Burke was the only man he could trust to 
put in charge of it. 

“This incident shows what the grace of God can do for a 

hardened sinner. Not only can it save him, but it can keep 

him. Valentine Burke lived an active, consistent Christian 
life in that public position until God called him home in 
1895. . | 
“T believe that in all our jails and penitentiaries there are 
just such rich jewels that will one day sparkle in our Saviour’s 
crown if we will only arouse ourselves to put the way of life 
_ before them. The conversion of such men as Valentine 
Burke and Jerry McAuley ought to stir us all to do some- 
thing definite for prisoners. Facts like these led me in the 
spring of 1895 to start the Prison Fund in connection with 
The Bible Institute Colportage Association, Chicago, which, 
with the aid of kind friends, has been sustained since, al- 
though the fund usually and especially now is in pressing need 
_of donations. 

“Here is a class numbering many thousands to whom 


ot 
160 ? Hig aeeehs L. MOODY; 


Christian people certainly ought to minister the gospel of 
Jesus Christ. The need of such work is very great and ex- 
perience has shown that it is a kind of Christian labor that 
‘is frequently overlooked. Every earnest effort put forth to 
provide good or better reading matter for the prisoners has 
been very much appreciated by them. 

“Tt should be remembered that very few jails have any 
chaplain in attendance, which leaves the work of reaching 
these unfortunates to the local Christian worker, if there are 
such in the vicinity who are interested. With such conditions, 
of what inestimable value is a good book placed in the hand of 
the prisoner at an opportune time! 

“There is almost no way of reaching very many of this 
class for God except by means of good literature. The in- 
mates of these penal institutions are constantly changing and 
fresh supplies of books must be frequently provided. 

“Will not our Christian friends give the necessary funds — 
that this good work may go on? Ten thousand books are 
now needed and called for.” 





CHAPTER XVIII. 
OMR. MOODY’S LAST SERMON 


WHY NOT BE A CHRISTIAN? 


“And they all with one consent began to make excuse.” 
Luke xiv:18. 


[Delivered in Convention Hall, Kansas City, on Thursday night, No- 
vember 16, 1899, to an audience of 15,000 people. The next 
day Mr. Moody was stricken with heart disease 
and was hurried home in a private car.] 


OME people are always making excuses for not doing 
their duty, and especially for not coming to Christ. If 
I asked you to come to Christ, you would be ready to give 
some reason for not accepting the invitation. I never saw 
an unsaved man in my life but had some excuse—never! and 
if you don’t have one ready, Satan will be right by you to 
help you to make one. He is good at that sort of thing. 
That has been his occupation the last six thousand years— ~ 
helping men to make excuses. 

Just bear in mind, these men were invited to a feast, and 
not toa funeral. They were not invited to go to prison. They 
were not invited to a hospital, or to a madhouse; but they 
were invited to a feast. Now, when a man prepares a feast, 
there is a great rush to see who will get the best seats; but 
when God prepares His feast, the chairs would all be empty, 
if His disciples did not go out to compel people to come in. 
No sooner did the King send out His invitations than the’ 
excuses began to rain in. “And they all with one consent 
began to make excuse.” 

All at it, and always at it. Did you ever stop to think, my 

161 


“aes 


162 -. 'DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


friends, what would take place if God should take every man 


at his own word who wants to be excused? If He were to say, 
“I will excuse you,” and. with the next breath take them all 
out of the world? If every one in this audience should be 
taken at his word, who makes excuses in this respect, and if 
God should say, “Cut him down, let him cumber the ground 
no longer, hew him down,” there would be a very terrible state 


of things in Kansas City. If every man in Kansas City, and — 


every woman, who wants to be excused, and is saying so,— 
if God should take them at their word, and say, “I will excuse 
you,” oh! my friends, there would be a great many shops not 
opened to-morrow. The saloons, for instance, would be 
closed; for I never saw a saloon-keeper in my life but what 
wanted to be excused. He knows he cannot go on with his 
hellish traffic, if he accepts this invitation. He would have 
to stop that at once. There would be a great many of your 
princely merchants that would be gone. They do not want 
to accept the invitation, because they think, if they do, they 
cannot make money so fast. They are carrying on some 
business which would then have to be stopped, because they 
accepted this invitation. There would be a very sad state 
of things taking place. Those that were left would have to be 
_ busy burying the dead. It would be a very solemn time, if 

God should take men at their word, and just excuse them. 


You let some terrible disease lay hold of a man, and half his 


excuses are gone at once. 

Every kind of excuse is given; but that man does not live 
who can give a good excuse. 

Let any man get an invitation from President McKinley 
to go down to the White House to some banquet; and there 
is not a man but would consider it a great honor to receive 
such an invitation. But only think of the invitation that I 
bring to-night! It comes from the King of kings. The mar- 
riage supper of the Lamb is going to take place, and God 


oe 

















MOODY AND SANKEY LEAVING ENGLAND 





ANOd AYVNOISSIW SIH GNV AGOONW Sind . 























SraF ciate 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 165 


_ wants every man in this assembly to be present. I cannot 


speak for the rest of you; but if I know my own heart, I would 
rather be torn limb from limb—I would rather have my heart 


- torn out of me—than be absent from that marriage supper. 


~ 


I have missed a good many appointments in my time, but, by 
the grace of God, I mean to make sure of keeping that one. 

These men ail began to say, “I pray thee have me excused.” 
Let us take up that first man’s excuse. What wasit? He had 
bought some ground, and he must needs go and see it. Why 
did he not, if he were a good business man, go and look at the 
ground before he bought it? It was not going to make the 
ground any better for him to go and look at it. He had not 
made a partial bargain and might withdraw. He was not 


afraid that some one might step in ahead of him and get the 


ground from him, and so he would lose it; it was not any- 
thing of this kind; but he had bought the ground, and must 
needs go and see it! It is a strange time to go and see 
ground, just at supper time! I think the ground would have 
looked all the better after he had been to the feast. But the 


- fact is, my friends, he did not believe it was a feast; and that 


is the trouble to-day. Men do not believe the Gospel is a 
feast. 

The second man is approached by the messenger, who says, 
“My lord has made a great feast, and he wants to have you 
come to it.” “Take back to your lord the message that I 
cannot be there. I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I have 
got to go and prove them.” Why did not he prove his oxen 
before he bought them? That is the time to prove oxen; 
but now he has bought them, let them stand in the stall. The 
trade is already closed; the bargain is already made; the oxen 
are bought. They are his, and now he can go and prove them 
at any time. A queer time to prove oxen, at supper time! 
He had better have proved them in the morning, and so have 
been ready to go to the feast in the evening. 


166 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


_ The third man had married a wife, and therefore he could 
not come. Why not take his wife along with him? A young 
bride likes to go to a feast—no one better. He might have 
taken her; and if she was not willing, then let her stay at 
home. You smile, you laugh at this, but you can see plainly 
what these excuses were. They were simply falsehoods, just 
manufactured to ease their consciences. That boy down in 
the audience sees how absurd these excuses were; for the fact 

_was, they did not want to go to the feast; and it would have 
been a good deal more honest for them to have said: “I don’t 
want to go to your lord’s feast, and I will not go.” 

Now, I would just like to take up some of the popular ex- 
cuses of the present day. I do not doubt but there are hun- 
dreds of you who say to-night: “If I could accept that invi- 
tation, Mr. Moody, I would like to be a Christian; but, I have 
tried, and I find it isa very hard thing.” Well, now let us look 
at that excuse. Do you mean to say that God is a hard Mas- 
ter? Do you say it is a hard thing to serve God? and do 
you say that Satan is an easy master, and that it is easier to 
serve him than God? Is it honest,—is it true? If it is, then 
I must confess that I have not read my Bible right; because 
I read it this way: “The way of the transgressor is hard.” 

You go over to the Tombs in New York city and you 
will find a little iron bridge running from the police court 
where the men are tried right into the cell. I think the 
New York officials have not been noted for their piety in 
your time and mine; but they had put up there in iron 
letters on that bridge: “The way of the transgressor is hard.” 
They know that is true. Blot it out if you can. God Al- 
mighty said it. It is true. “The way of the transgressor 
is hard.” On the other side of that bridge they put these 
words: “A bridge of sighs.” I said to one of the officers, 
“What did you put that up there for?” He said that most 
of the young men (for most of the criminals are young men, 





NY 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION’ 167 


“The wicked don’t live out their days”—put that in with it)— 
he said most of the young men as they passed over that iron 
bridge went over it weeping. So they called it the “Bridge of 
Sighs.” “What made you put that other there: ‘The way 


of the transgressor is hard?” “Well,” he said, “it is hard. 


I think if you had anything to do with this prison you would 
believe that text, ‘The way of the transgressor is hard.’ ””. 
One of the greatest lies that has come out of the pit of hell 
is, that Christ is a hard Master. It is a lie, and has been so 
from the foundation of the world. Oh, young man, I beg of 
you, do not believe the devil when he says that God is a hard 
Master. It is false, my friends; and to-night let me brand 
that excuse as one of the devil’s own lies, that he has been 


retailing up and down the earth for six thousand years. Look 


how poor Adam suffered, because he believed the devil’s lies! 
Look at poor Judas! Did he find the devil an easy master? 
See him throwing down the thirty pieces of silver! Why, 
he got so tired of the devil’s service that he hanged himself 
twenty-four hours after he entered it. 

Then there is another very popular excuse. I can imagine 
a good many would say: “Well, Mr. Moody, the fact is, I 
want to be saved.” Of course you do! You would not be 
coming here at this time—at some inconvenience, many of 
you—if you did not want to be saved. But you say: “The 
fact is, Mr. Moody, I don’t know that I am elected. If I 
thought I was elected I would come. I know that I cannot 
come unless I am elected; and I really want to come very 
much, but I don’t know that I am one of the elect.”” Now, 
I have heard that till I have got sick and tired of it. I want 
to say to every unconverted man in this hall to-night that 
you have no more to do with the doctrine of election than 
you have with the government of China. I am not saying’ 
this in haste; I weigh well my words. I say that no uncon- 
yerted man has anything to do with the doctrine of election. 


= & She ee Spon wn Os Pg Pah inns Ak ei Toe ae 
See “8 4 S Part 4 aye ae) * 
‘ Ze aby « 


168 | DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


You have to do with the word whosoever. Now, the invitar 
tion is, “Whosoever will, let him come to this feast.” To- 
night, my friends, let me say that you are invited, every one 
of you; and if you don’t come, it will be because you won’t,. 
not because God does not want you, or has not given you 
the power to come. With the invitation there comes the 
power. Christ said to the withered man, “Stretch out thy 
hand.” The man might have said that he had not the power; 
but with the invitation there came the power. And so it is 
here. Suppose I walked up the street to-night, and I stepped 
up to the door of this Convention Hall to go in, and a man 
stopped me, and I said to him, “Why not let me in?” 
“Where’s your ticket?” “I have got none.” “But no one is 
admitted without a ticket.” “Then I cannot go in, I sup- 
pose?” “No; it is for a certain class—those that have got 
tickets.” I go along farther—up to a club-house. I step 
in, and a policeman pushes me back. I say, “I want to go 
in;” and he says, “You cannot go in here unless you have got 
a ticket. None but members can be admitted to-night.” I 
do not happen to be a member of the club, and I cannot go in. 
I go along a little farther, and come to another meeting; and 
there, perhaps, they are Quakers. The policeman stops me, 
and says, “Nobody admitted but Quakers.” I am not a 
Quaker, and cannot go in. Farther on I find a soldiers’ 
meeting. I cannot go in because I am not a soldier, and 
none but soldiers are admitted. But I go farther on, for I 
find written up in great big letters, “Whosoever will, let him 
come in.” In I go; that means me. Now God has headed 
His invitation with whosoever, in great burning letters; and 
if you will go in, God will receive you to-night. He wants 
you to come this hour—this very minute. “Whosoever will, 
let him take of the water of life freely” I have an idea that 
the Lord Jesus Christ saw how men were going to stumble 
cver that doctrine of election; for, after He had been back in 





te este ies = 


2: fe ) 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 169 


heaven for thirty or forty years, and John was in the Spirit 
on the Lord’s Day, in the Isle of Patmos, Jesus came to him 
and said, “John write this,” and he wrote. Again He said: 
“John, before you close the book, put in this—The Spirit 
and the Bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, 
Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever 
will, let him take the water of life freely.” That forever has 
settled in my mind, the doctrine of election. 

Another excuse is: “I can’t understand the Bible. Men 
are giving that as the reason why they do not accept the in- 
vitation to be at the marriage supper of the Lamb. Now, I 
want to say I never met a sceptic or infidel who had read the 
- Bible through. I heard a man say the other day to another 
man, “Have you read such a book?” “Yes.” “What is your 
opinion of it?” “Well, I only read it through once, and I 
would not like to give my opinion without reading it more 
carefully.” But men can give their opinion about God’s 
Book without reading it. They read a chapter here and there, 
and say, “Oh, the Book is so dark and mysterious!” and be- 
cause they cannot understand it by reading a few chapters, 
- they condemn the whole of it. The Word of God tells us 
plainly that the natural man cannot understand spiritual 
things. It is a spiritual book, and speaks of spiritual things; 
and a man must be born of the Spirit before he can under- 
stand the Bible. What seems very dark and mysterious to 
you now will all be light and clear when ye are born of the 
Spirit. 

You say, “If that is so, how am I to understand how to be 
saved?” I will tell you. When God puts salvation before a 
sinner, He puts it so plain that a man who runs can read, and > 
a wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein. There 
are a great many things in the Book which are dark and mys- 
terious; but when it comes to the plan of salvation, God has 
put it so plain that that little girl ten years old can understand 


170 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


it, if she will. You understand what it is to come. “Come 
unto me, all ye that labor.” You know what it is to take a 
gift. “He came unto His own, and His own received Him 
not. But as many as received Him, to them gave He power 
to become the sons of God.” “The wages of sin is death, but 
the gift of God is eternal life.’ You know what it is to 
believe in a man. Well, “believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and thou shalt be saved.”” You know what it is to put trust 
and confidence in a man. Now, put your trust and confi- 
dence in the living God, and you are saved. You are saved 
by casting yourself unreservedly upon the Lord Jesus Christ. 
When God puts salvation before a man, He puts it so plain 
and simple that if he is willing to come as a little child, he 
can come. 

Suppose I should send my little boy, five years old, to 
school to-morrow morning, and when he came home I should 
say, “Can you read, write, spell? Do you understand all 
about arithmetic, geometry, algebra?’ The little fellow 
would look at me, and say, “Why, Papa, why do you talk that 
way? I have been trying all day to learn the A BC.” Sup- 
posing I replied: “If you have not finished your education 
you need not go to the school any more”—what would you 
say? You would say: “Moody has gone mad.” Well, there 
is about as much sense in that as in the way that infidels talk 
about the Bible. They take it up, read a chapter, and say: 
“Oh, it is so dark and mysterious, we cannot understand it” 
This blessed Book is given to be a lamp to our feet and a light 
to our path, to guide the way to those eternal mansions. It 
never was given to keep men out of the kingdom of God. 
That is the devil’s work—trying to make you believe the 
Word of God is not true. I tell you the only way we can 
overcome the enemy of our souls is by the written Word of 
God; and the devil knows that, and so he comes up, and 
says: “It is full of lies; it is dark and mysterious; it contra- 





‘THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 171 


dicts itself; don’t you believe it.” He knows the moment a 
man goes to the Word of God and believes it, he finds lib- 
erty to his soul, and gets beyond Satan’s reach; he gets a 
weapon in his hand with which to conquer the devil; he over- 
--comes the enemy of his salvation. The devil does not want 
you to find that out, and whispers this lie; and you believe 
it rather than the Word of God. Young man, your mother 
is right; the Bible is true, and you had better accept it. 

Keep this in mind; you will never stand up before the bar 
of God, and say, the Bible kept you out of the kingdom. It 
may sound very well here, now; you may be satisfied to give 
that for an excuse down here, to-night; but you will not be 
satisfied to give it in the Courts of Heaven—you will not 
stand up in the great Judgment Day, and say the Bible kept 
you out of the kingdom. 

Then there is another class. Some people say: “I haven’t 
any doubt about the Word of God; but the fact is, there are 
some men in the Church who are hypocrites; therefore I 
don’t purpose to go into the Church.” I am not asking you 
to come into the Church—not but what I believe in churches 
—but I am asking you to the marriage supper of the Lamb; 
I am inviting you to this feast; we will talk about the Church 
by-and-by. We want you to come to Christ first; then we 
will talk to you about the Church. But you say: “Here are 
some hypocrites.” So there are; and I can imagine you say- 
ing: “Oh, yes—there is a man up here in one of the churches 
that cheated me out of $25 a few years ago; you are not 
going to catch me in the company of such hypocrites.” Well, 
my friend, if you want to get out of the company of hypo- 
crites, you had better get out of the world as quick as you 
can. I'll find a hundred hypocrites in the world to where 
you'll find one in the church. Of course there are hypocrites 
in the Church, the tares and the wheat grow up together. 
But if you stay out of the Church because there are hypo- 


”~ “ -¥ = Fre BO ea we 


172 “DWIGHT “L, “MOODY 


crites in it why don’t you quit your business because there 
are hypocrites in that? -Are you a grocer? There are fac- 
tories in this country grinding marble to put into sugar. 
Are you a lawyer. Are there no hypocrites among lawyers? 
Are you a doctor? Are there no quacks among doctors? 
Are you a Republican? Are there no hypocrites there? Or 
a Democrat? “But,” you say, “I don’t belong to either; 
I’m a Prohibitionist.” Are there no hypocrites in the Pro- 
hibition party? 

Oh, I’m getting tired and sick of people trying to live on 
the faults of others. You can’t get very fat on that. Look 
out for the men who are always howling about hypocrites. 
They are usually hypocrites themselves. 

One of the twelve apostles turned out to be a hypocrite; 
and there is no doubt there will be hypocrites in the Church: 
to the end of time. But “what is that to thee?” says Christ 
to Peter: “Follow thou Me.” We do not ask you to follow 
hypocrites, we ask you to follow Christ; we do not ask you to 
believe in hypocrites, we ask you to believe in Christ. An- 
other thing—if you want to get out of the company of hypo- 
crites you had better make haste and come to Christ. There 
will be no hypocrites at the marriage supper of the Lamb; 
they will all be in hell, and you will be there with them if 
you do not make haste and come to Christ. That excuse 
_ would sound strange, would it not? We very often hear 
men give it down here, but it would sound very strange before 
Jehovah—a man saying: “I know You invited me to be at 
the marriage supper of Your Son, but I did not accept it 
because I knew there were some hypocrites that professed 
the Gospel.” 

There is another class who say: “I know there are hypo- 
crites, but they don’t have any influence over me.” If I 
could go to the door as you go out to-night, and take you 
by the hand and say: “My friend, why not accept of the invi- 





¥ recive oF 
Sar A. ok = 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION — . 173 


tation to-night?” you would say: “I pray to be excused to- 
night; I have not time. I have got some very pressing busi- 
ness to-morrow morning to attend to, and I have to go home 
to bed as quick as possible, to get my night’s rest. You will 
have to excuse me.” And the mothers here would say: “I 
have to go home and put the children to bed; you really 
must excuse me;’—‘very pressing business;’—‘“‘no time.” 
Thousands of men in Kansas City say they have not time. 
Thanks be to God! it don’t take time; it takes decision. 
But what have you done with all the time God has given you? 
Your locks are turning gray, your eye is growing dim; and 
that temple of your body is coming down; what have you 
done with all those years? Is it true you have not time? 
What did you do with the three hundred and sixty-five days 
last year? No time?—what have you done with it all? Have 
not you had time to accept of this invitation? Why, men 
spend fifteen or twenty years to get an education, that they 
may go out to earn a living for this frail body that is soon 
to be eaten up with worms; or five years to learn a trade, 
that they may earn a living; and yet they have not five 
minutes to seek their souls’ salvation! You “have no time.” 
Is it true? You know it is a lie; and if you go out to-night 
unsaved, it will not be because you have not time, but because 
you won’t accept the invitation. God says, “Seek first the 
‘kingdom of God.” That is the first thing to do. Supposing 
you do not get so much money to-morrow, and get Christ, 
is not that worth more than money? Better for a man to be 
sure of salvation than to have the wealth of the world rolled 
to his feet! 

But there is another excuse coming up from some one in 
the gallery. A man-says, “My heart is so hard.” Well, that 
is just the very reason you ought to come. If you had not a 
hard heart you would not need a Saviour. Can you soften 
your heart? Can you break your heart? Did not God invite 


174 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


the hard-hearted? Did not Christ come to seek and to save 
that which was lost? It is just because men’s hearts are hard - 
that they need a Savior. That is no excuse at all. God in- 
vites you, and you won’t stand up and tell the Great King 
you did not accept His invitation because you had a 
hard heart. He invites “whosoever”; and you can come 
along with your hard heart. 

In one of my meetings there was a minister talking to a 
man in the inquiry room. He said, “My heart is so hard, it 
seems as if it was chained, and I cannot come.” “Ah!” said 
the minister, “come to Christ, chain and all;” and he. just 
came to Christ and Christ snapped the fetters, and set him 
free right there. [f you are bound hand and foot by Satan, 
that is the work of God to break the fetters; you cannot 
break them. Thanks be to God! He can break the fetters 
and set the captive souls free to-night. I do not care how 
hard the heart is: the Lord can save to the uttermost; He 
bids you come just as you are. Oh, this old excuse—“I am 
so bad!” Away with it! 

Paul said he was the “chief” of sinners; and if the chief has 
gone up on high there is hope for everybody else. The devil 
makes us believe that we are good enough without salvation, 
if he can; and if he cannot make us believe that, he says, 
“You are so bad the Lord won’t have you; and so he tries to 
make people believe, because they are so bad Christ won’t 
have anything to do with them. God invites you to come 
just as you are. I know a great many people want to come, 
but they are trying to get better and to get ready to come. 
Now mark you, my friend, the Lord invites you to come 
just as you are; and if you could make yourself better you 
would not be any more acceptable to Him. Do not put these 
filthy rags of self-righteousness about you. God will strip 
every rag from you when you come to Him, and He will 
clothe you with glorious garments. When our war was 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 175 


going on, we would sometimes go to the recruiting office and 
see a man come in with a silk hat, broadcloth coat, calfskin 
boots—his suit might be worth $100; and another man 
would come in whose clothes were not worth $5.00; but they 
both had to strip, and put on the uniform of the country. And 
so when we go into Christ’s vineyard we must put on the 
livery of heaven, and be stripped of every rag of our own. 
However bad you are, come just as you are, and the Lord 
will receive you. 

Some say: “I would like to become a Christian; but I have 
a prejudice against revival meetings, and against a layman 
too. If it was a regular minister, if it was our regular min- 
ister, I would accept the invitation.” If that is your difficulty, 
I can help you out of that. You can just get up, and go out 
of the hall, and run right over to your minister, and have a 
talk with him; your minister would be most glad to see and 
talk and pray with you. And if you say you do not want to 
be converted in a special meeting, there are regular meetings 
in all the churches throughout Kansas City. But if you say: 
“There is a great awakening here in Kansas City,” and you 
do not want to be converted in that way; then jump into a 
train, and go to some town where there is no revival. We 
can find you some place where there is no revival, and some 
church where there is not much of the revival spirit. If you 
really want to go, don’t give that for an excuse. How wise 
the devil is! When the church is cold, and everything is 
dead, men say, “Oh, well, if there was only some life in the 
Church I might become a Christian—if we could only just 
have a wave from heaven!’ Then when the wave does come 
they say, “Oh no; we are afraid of excitement, and afraid of 
these special meetings. We are afraid there will be some- 
thing done that won’t be just in accordance with our ideas 
of propriety.” My friend, it is God who is working. He 
prepares the way. 


iO DWIGHT L. MOODY 


There is another class here who say: “I would like to 


come; but then I do not feel.” That is, I think, the very 
worst excuse, and the most common excuse we have. I wish 
sometimes the word could be abolished—feel! feel! You go 
into the inquiry room. “Well, Mr. Moody, I do not feel this 
and that.” Why, supposing my friend Mr. Stone should 
invite me to go to his house to-morrow to dinner, and I say 
to Mr. Stone, “I should like to go very much, but I don’t 
know that I feel right.” “Well,” he says, “what do you 
mean? Do you mean you don’t want to go to my house?” 
“Oh no, I want to go.” (That is what men say: “Oh yes, we 
want to be saved.”’) “What do you mean, Mr. Moody? Do 
you mean that you do not know you will be well to-morrow? 
Do you think you will be sick?” “Ohno, I expect to be well 
to-morrow, if I live.” “Well, what do you mean by feeling?” 
‘Well, I do not know just how [ll feel. I would like very 
much to go to your house to dinner to-morrow, but I don’t 
know that I will feel just right.” “I don’t understand you, 
Mr. Moody; I am not talking about feeling; I invite you to 
come to my house to dinner.” “Well, I would like to come 
very much, but the fact is, I do not know how I will feel 
to-morrow.” I can imagine my friend saying, “What has 
come over Moody? I think the fellow has gone mad. I 
asked him to my house to dinner, and he says he would like 
to come, but he does not know that he will feel right; he 
talked about feeling all the time.” Of course you would say 
he has gone mad. But that is the way people talk now. You 
speak to them about coming to the kingdom of God, and 
they say: “I do not know that I feel just right.” Away with 
your feelings. God is above feeling. We cannot control 
our feelings? If I could I would feel good all the time—never 
catch me feeling bad at anything! I am sure if I could con- 
trol my feelings I never would have any bad feelings; I would 
always have good feelings. Bear in mind, Satan may change 





Se oe 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 177 


your feelings fifty times a day, but he cannot change the 
Word of God; and what we want is to build our hopes of 
heaven upon the Word of God. When a poor sinner is cotn- 
ing up out of the pit, and just ready to get his feet upon the 
Rock of Ages, the devil sticks out a plank of feeling, and 
says: “Get on that;” and when he puts his feet on that, down 
he goes again. Take one of these texts—“Verily, I say unto 
you, he that heareth my word and believeth on Him that 
sent me hath everlasting life, and shall not come into con- 
demnation, but is passed from death unto life.” My friend, 
that is worth more than all the feelings that you can have 
in a whole lifetime. I would a thousand times rather stand 
on that verse than on the best frame of feeling. I took my 
stand there twenty years ago. The dark waves of hell have 
come dashing up against me; the waves of persecution have 
surged around me; doubts, fears, and unbelief have assailed 
me; but I have been able to stand right there. It is a sure 
footing for eternity. It was true eighteen hundred years 
ago, and it is true to-night. That Rock is higher than any 
feeling. What we want is to get our feet upon the Rock, and 
then the Lord will put a new song into our mouths. 

There is another class who say they cannot believe. Not 
long ago a man said to me: “I cannot believe.” I said, 
“Who?” “Well, I- cannot believe.” I said, “Whor’ He 
stammered and stuttered, and I said: “Who cannot you be- 
lieve—God?” “Oh yes, I believe God: I cannot believe my- 
self.” “Well, you do not want to believe yourself. Your 
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. 
Put no confidence in the flesh. Don’t believe yourself; call 
yourself a liar, and let God be true. Believe in God, and say 
as Job said; ‘Though He slay mel will trust Him.’ ” Some 
men seem to talk as if it was a great misfortune that they 
_ do not believe. Bear in mind, it is the damning sin of the 
world, “When He, the Holy Ghost, is come, He will reprove 


178 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment; of 
sin, because they believe not on me.” That is the sin of the 
world—“because they believe not on me.” Why, that is the 
very root of sin—the very tree, and all the fruit! This is the 
tree that brings forth this bad fruit—it is the tree of unbelief. 


I wish I had time to go on with these excuses; for they are _ 


as numerous as the hairs on our heads. But if I could go on 
and exhaust them all, the devil would help to make more. 
You can just take them, tie them up in one bundle, and mark 
them lies—the whole of them. Not one of them is true. If 
your excuse is a good one, if it will stand the light of eternity, 


do not give it up foranything I have said. Hold it firm, take . 


it to the bar of God, and tell it out to Him. But if you have 
an excuse that won’t stand the piercing eye of God, I beg of 
you, as a friend, give it up—let your excuses go. Let them 
go to the four winds of heaven, and accept of the invitation 


now. It is a very easy thing for a man to excuse himself into 


hell, but he cannot excuse himself out. 


I wish I had time to call your attention to who will be at 


the marriage supper of the Lamb. Lift your eyes heaven- 
ward to-night, mothers; you have loved children that have 
gone on before you; they will be at the marriage supper of 
the Lamb; they will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob, in the kingdom of God; will you be missing? Fathers 
and mothers who have loved ones that have gone on before 
you! if you could hear them, they are shouting from the 
battlements of heaven; “Come this way.” Young man, you 
have a sainted mother there—a loved father there; they are 
beckoning you heavenward to-night. They have been gath- 
ering from the time the holy Abel went up; for six thousand 
years, gathering out of the four corners of the earth. The 
purest and best of earth are here; they are in heaven; and God 
wants you and me to be there. Blessed is he that shall be at 
the marriage supper of the Lamb! 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 179 


Dare you make light of the invitation? Suppose one of 
these reporters should write out an excuse to the King of 
- Heaven: “While sitting in the convention hall November 16, 
1899, I received a very pressing invitation from one of Your 
messengers to be present at the marriage supper of Your 
only-begotten Son. I pray Thee have me excused.” Would 
you come up and sign that? Would you take your pen and 
put your name down to that excuse? I can imagine you 
saying, you would let your right hand forget its cunning, 
and your tongue cleave to the roof of your mouth first. I 
doubt whether there is a man in this room who could be made 
to sign this excuse; but what will you do? Many of you 
will get up and go out of this hall, making light of the 
preacher, laughing at everything you have heard, paying no 
attention to the invitation. I beg of you, do not make light 
of this invitation. It is a loving God that invites you; but God 
is not to be mocked. Go, play with the forked lightning, 
trifle with any pestilence, any disease, rather than with God. 
God is not to be trifled with. 

Just let me write out another reply: “To the King of 
Heaven: While sitting in the convention hall November 16, 
1899, I received a pressing invitation from one of Your ser- 
vants to be present at the marriage supper of Your only- 
begotten Son. I hasten to reply, By the grace of God I will 
be present.” Who will sign that? Who will set to their seal 
to-night that God is true? Make up your mind now; do not 
go away till the question of eternity is settled. 

[As the great evangelist finished, he asked all who were 
willing to sign the invitation to stand up. Half a dozen arose 
in different parts of the hall. Then as many more. As_ 
Mr. Moody continued to urge a decision they arose in groups 
over the hall until half a hundred were standing, signifying 
their acceptance of the Great Invitatien.] 


CHAPTER XIX. 
THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF DWIGHT L. MOODY © 


[This is probably the most authentic account of Dwight L. Moody’s 
death and burial that has appeared in print. It is written by Mr. John B. 
Devins, for ten years one of Mr. Moody’s warmest friends, managing 
editor of the New York Observer; staff correspondent of the New York 
Tribune.] 


D WIGHT L. MOODY’S death was as calm and peaceful 

as his life was strenuous. The passing of his spirit 
from the body, which had been tortured with pain for some 
weeks, to the beautiful beyond, was as gentle as could be 
wished for. ; 

On the 22d of December, 1899, Dwight L. Moody, th 
greatest evangelist of the century, the most unique religious 
figure of the age, fell asleep in death at his home at North- 
field, Massachusetts, just before noon-tide. His family were 
gathered at the bedside, and the dying man’s last moments 
were spent in comforting them and in contemplation of that 
reward for which he had so long and earnestly labored. He 
knew that death was near, but its sting to him was lost in the 
victory of his future life. Besides the family, there were 
present also the Rev. Dr. Schofield, the pastor of the village 
Congregational church, and Dr. Wood, the family physician, 
and the nurse. 

Early in the day Mr. Moody realized that the end was near 
at hand, and talked with his family at intervals, being con- 
scious to the last, except for a few fainting spells. Once he 
revived, and with a wonderful display of streneth in his 
voice said in a happy strain, ‘“What’s the matter; what’s 
going on?” One of the children replied: “Father, you have 


not been as well, and so we came in to see you.” 
180 


QTHH HadM SHOIAUNS TVAHNNA 
S:AGOOW ‘YIN SYHHA GTHISHLYON LV HOUNHO HHL dO AOIdHLNI 


wetnerincatel \xiettemmpineemmcnniene 











THE MALE CHOIR AT MOODY’S CHICAGO AVENUE CHURCH 





> 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION | 183 


A little later Mr. Moody talked quite freely to his son: “J 
have always been an ambitious man; not ambitious to lay up 
wealth, but to leave you work to do, and you are going to con- 
tinue the work, and the schools at East Northfield and Mount 
Hermon at Chicago.” Once the stillness of the chamber was 
broken by the anguished cry of Mrs. A. P. Fitt, his daughter, 
in the words: “Father, we cannot spare you.” His reply was 
characteristic of the man: “J am not going to throw my 
life away; 1f God has more work for me to do I will not die.” 
As the noon-day hour drew near the watchers at the bed- 


side noted the approach of death. Several times his lips” 


moved as if in prayer. Once, coming out of a sinking spell, 
he rallied visibly and said: “Jf this 1s death, there is no 
valley. This is glorious. I have been within theegates and 
I saw the children, Dwight and Irene.” (His two grand- 
children who had died recently.) 

Shortly before the end, Mr. Moody, again waking, as if 
from slumber, said with joyousness: “Earth is receding, 
heaven is approaching. God is calling me.” 

These have been currently reported as his very last words. 
They were indeed among his last words, but those spoken 
last related more especially to his wife and children. Once 
he said feebly: “J think it is time I made my will now. 
Will, you may have the Mount Hermon School to look 
after. Paul, you may have the Seminary when you are fitted 
for it. Emma, you and Percy (her husband) take care of the 
People’s Institute in Chicago.” “What about mother?” 
asked one of the children. “Oh, she is like Eve, she is the 
mother of us all,’ replied he, with his old-time smile. Then 
he placed his hand affectionately in the hand of the noble 
woman, who has been, in very truth, a helpmate for nearly 
forty years. “You have been a good wife to me.” 

As the doctor saw him about to faint again, he went to 


his bedside and gave him a hypodermic injection. “Is there 


/ 


184 _ DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


anything gained by this?” asked Mr. Moody. “Nothing, 
except to give you strength and relieve your sufferings,” 
replied the doctor. “Then,” said he, “I think we will stop, 
for it is only prolonging the sufferings of those who are 
dear to me;’ and with this consideration for his wife and 
children he passed away. But to us, his own words concern- 
ing the beyond, spoken just a few months ago: “He has gone 
_ up higher; that is all; gone out of this old tenement into a 
house that is immortal; into a body that touch, that sin can- 
not taint, a body fashioned like unto His own glorious 
body.” | 

On the following Tuesday, December 26, 1899, the most 
remarkable funeral was held. It was truly a Christian burial 
service: 

The key-note was struck when Dr. C. I. Schofield, the 
pastor of the Congregational church in East Northfield, said, ~ 
at the opening of the services: “We are not here to mourn 
a defeat, but to celebrate a victory.” 

Mr. Moody died as he lived, a victor. He was buried as 
he died—a victor; there was, indeed, no martial music, nor 
stately parade following a plumed hearse, In fact, there was 
neither hearse, nor funeral music, nor tolling bells, nor crape, 
nor veils to hide faces suffused in tears. Tears there were 
in the eyes of every one of the large congregation present. 
But there was no weeping, and the calmest faces in the church 
were those of the immediate family. The resignation mani- 
fested by Mrs. Moody was that of one whose husband had 
entered unto joys unspeakable, which await her also, and 
which she is to share with him. “I hope no one will speak of 
me as fatherless,” said the daughter in the morning, to a 
friend. The clear voice of the elder son’s wife was heard in 
the Gospel Hymns, manifesting sweet resignation; there was 
no suggestion of the death of two children, the serious ill- 
ness af her father or the death of her devoted father-in-law, 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 185 


all within a year. The sons were as interested as if they 
were attending a meeting led by their father. The entire 
family were wonderfully sustained. 

The day of the funeral was a perfect day. “One of the 
Lord’s own days,” a visitor called it. The sun rose clear 
over the mountain, at whose feet Northfield nestles. In the 
distance, on the foothills of the Green Mountains, patches of 
snow appeared. The morning was frosty, but in the after- 
noon, as the friends gathered for service, the temperature had 
risen several degrees. Large parties from Boston, New 
York and other cities arrived soon after noon. A special 
train from Brattleboro, Vt., brought many friends. There 
were many well known clergymen and laymen present in 
addition to those taking part in the services. Besides Ira D. 
Sankey, Mr. Moody’s associate for nearly thirty years, ac- 
companied by his wife, there were three of Mr. Moody’s 
singers in the audience—George C. Stebbins, D. R. Towner 
and F. H. Jacobs. 

Passing Mr. Moody’s house in the afternoon, a stranger 
would not have thought that death had been a recent visitor. 
No signs of mourning appeared. No crape was seen on the 
door. The window blinds were all open. People entered 
the house as if going to a reception. Inside, after the ser- 
vices, they sat in the library and parlor chatting cheerfully. 
Their conversation was mainly about Mr. Moody, recalling 
incidents in his eventful career, helpful words which he had 
spoken and deeds of kindness which he had done. 

At ten o’clock, Dr. Schofield and Dr. R. A. Torrey, the 
pastor of the Chicago Avenue Church, and superintendent 
of the Bible Institute of Chicago, conducted a service con- 
sisting of Scripture selections and a prayer. Then the body 
was carried to a church a half a mile distant, on a bier, by 
thirty-two students from the Mount Hermon School. At 
2:30 P. M., the public service began. At the right of the 


186 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


middle aisle sat the present head of the family, William R. 
Moody. Next to him was his mother, then in order the 
daughter and son, Mrs. A. P. Fitt (Emma Moody) and 
Paul Moody; Mrs. W. R. Moody (Mary Whittle) and A. P. 
Fitt. Behind them sat other relatives, including brothers 
and sisters of Mr. Moody, and their families. 

Christmas greens festooned the galleries of the church, 
while on the coffin and about it were appropriate floral trib- 
utes from the trustees, faculties and students of the several 
institutions in Northfield and Chicago. At the head rested 
a floral pillow, in which a crown had been worked in white, 
attached to it were purple streamers on which appeared Mr. 
Moody’s own words, “God is calling me.” 

An open Bible, rested at the foot, with the words “Victory. 
I Corinthians, XV, 55-57,” on the left hand page, and “II 
Timothy IV. 7, 8,” on the opposite. Palms, ferns, laurels 
and violets, cut flowers and callas were placed about the 
pulpit. When the lid of the cloth-covered coffin was re- 
moved, the face and hands were plainly visible from every 
_ part of the church. As the sun was setting, a single ray 
passed through a blind and rested upon the coffin. Gradu- 
ally it rose until it reached the face of the friend so dearly 
loved by a multitude of people. With evening coming on 
and with the shadows deepening in the room the effect of 
this stray sunbeam seemed like a light sent from “Within 
the Gates,” 

Dr. Schofield had charge of the services which began with 
the hymn, “A Little While,” composed by Major Whittle and 
James McGranahan. The following is the first verse: 


“A little while! and He shall come: 
The hour draws on apace, 

The blessed hour, the glorious morn 
When we shall see His face; 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 187 


How light our trials then will seem! 
~ _ How short our pilgrim way! 
Our life on earth a fitful dream, 
Dispelled by dawning day!’ 


Chorus: 


Then come Lord Jesus, quickly come, 
In glory and in light! 

Come, take Thy longing children home, 
And end earth’s weary night. 


After the hymn, Dr. Schofield offered the invocation, Dr. 
Arthur T. Pierson read the Scripture lesson and Dr. George 
Needham prayed. “Immanuel’s Land” was the second 
_ hymn. 

Dr. Schofield then spoke as follows: 

This is not the place, nor am I the man to present a study 
of the life and character of Dwight L. Moody. This will fol- 
low. But some things at least press to be said. Some things 
are so sure that no lapse of time, no quieter afterthought can 
unsettle them. No one will ever question that we are to-day 
laying in the kindly bosom of the earth the mortal body of a 
great man. 

Whether we measure greatness by qualities of character, 
by qualities of intellect, or by things done, Dwight L. Moody 
must be accounted great. The basis of Mr. Moody’s character 
was sincerity, genuineness. He had an invetcrate aversion to 
all forms of sham, unreality, and pretense. Most of all did he 
detest religious pretense, cant. At this point he held high 
and stern opinions. But nowhere did he apply them so relent- 
lessly as in the sphere of his own life. In no morbid sense an 
introspective man, he was yet always testing his foundations 
at this point. Along with this fundamental quality, Mr. 
Moody cherished a great love of righteousness. His first . 
question concerning any proposed action was, “Is it right?” 


188 DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


But these two qualities, necessarily at the bottom of all noble 


character, were in him suffused and transfigured by divine ~ 


grace. Sensitive beyond most men upon the point of right- 
eousness, Mr. Moody never doubted the power of God’s grace 


to reconstruct the most defective character; and where he © 


could see in any man a longing for this, his patience was in- 
exhaustible. Besides all this, Mr. Moody was in a wonderful 
degree brave, magnanimous and unselfish. We are not here 
to extol Mr. Moody after the flesh. Doubtless, this unlettered 
New England country boy became what he was by the grace 
of God. But the law of the bestowal of the talents is clear: 
“To every man according to his several ability.” 

The hiding of Dwight L. Moody’s power lay in five things. 
First in a definite experience of Christ’s saving grace. He had 
passed out of death into life, and he knew it. The new birth 
was to him a subjective certainty. The Spirit witnessed with 
his spirit that he was a son of God. That delivered him from 
lust of earthly things, from deference to the great. The 
humblest of Christians, he yet could conceive of nothing more 
exalted than divine sonship. Secondly, Mr. Moody believed 
in the Divine authority of the Scriptures. The Bible was to 
him the voice of God, and he made it resound as such in the 
consciences of men. Thirdly, he was baptized with the Holy 
Spirit and knew that he was. It was to him as definite an 
experience as his conversion, and when he preached he ex- 
pected the Spirit to convert and convict men. Fourthly, he 
was a man of prayer. He believed ina living and unfettered 
God. It never occurred to him that the Almighty had tied 
His own hands by natural laws. He believed in the super- 
natural as available. The mountain about him was always 
filled with horses and chariots of fire. But fifthly, Mr. Moody 


believed in work, in ceaseless effort, in wise provision, in the | 


power of organization, of publicity. He expected the super- 
natural to work but through the natural. He hitched his 


ys 
Ae 
. Pore? 


Cee. on fe Cur A le ae Sen ie ee ae 
ye 3 , x eit 4 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 189 


_ wagon to a star, but always kept his wheels on the ground 


and the axles well oiled. — 

President H. G. Weston of Crozer Theological Seminary 
followed Dr. Schofield. In closing his beautiful tribute to 
his friend, he made the statement deliberately that if Jesus 
Christ had been born in the present century, with Mr. 
Moody’s mind and body, he believed that he would have 
done just about as Mr. Moody did. Dr. Weston said in part: 

I count as one of the greatest blessings of my life my ac- 
quaintance with Mr. Moody, the influence he has had on me, 
and the privilege of studying God’s methods in his life and 
work. We instinctively attribute the success of every man 
who is eminent in attaching and influencing others to some 
special natural endowment, to education and training or to a 
peculiar magnetic personality. Mr. Moody had none: of 
these, yet no man has surpassed him in the power of his 
attraction and influence, both over masses of men and over 
individuals of strong character, of executive ability, of great 
resources, whom he fastened to himself with hooks of steel, 
making them not only his lifelong friends, but his constant 


‘partners in all his good works. This marvelous power wielded 


so many years undiminished to the end we cannot explain by 
bestowment of any one peculiar natural gift. He had none 
of them. 

What had he? He had life. I do not mean the manner 
of living, but what the Bible means by this word—what 
Christ means when he declares the purpose of his coming; 
I am come that they might have life, and have it abundantly. 
God gave him life, made him a partaker of the divine nature; 
and from the moment he received it the development, growth 
and manifestation of that life became the whole object of 
his existence. To it he devoted every power of his being, 
and that devotion kindled into intensest activity every latent 
energy of his nature, and made him the complete, round- 


FO eS Woe tae ete | ee ae 





190 DWIGHT S “MOODY. 
sided, full- orbed man that he was, of instinctive ‘nA and | 
tact, and gave him his wonderful mastery of man. 

Then he nourished and strengthened that life by devotion 
to God’s Word. He prized it as the treasure by which his 
life could be enriched. He realized to the full Christ’s words: 
“Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God.” That word he hid 
in his heart, as the seed is hidden in the earth that it may swell | 
and grow. He hid it there, ready for use on every occasion 
and in every emergency. It was sweeter to him than the 
honey in the honeycomb. His mind and heart were given to 
the study of the Word of God. 

But his life, like that of Christ, was for others. He did 
not search the Bible to add to his knowledge, but to save 
men from sin. His first and dominant purpose was to have 
every man receive. that life of which he had been made a 
partaker; to this his sermons were devoted; he counted every- 
thing but loss unless this were attained, and then he coveted 
for all the means of developing and utilizing that life. The 
sight of poor girls and boys deprived of the means of educa- 
tion would not let him rest until he had provided some — 
method by which their lives should be enriched and made 
more in accordance with Heaven’s designs in conferring on 
them spiritual life. He dotted this fair plain with houses 
that young men and young women should have the means 
of so enlarging their lives that they might be useful to their 
fellows. His work was in the line of Christ’s miracles, which 
never enriched the object with bounties of land or money or 
resources, but always gave power to life, making the dead 
eye to see, touching the dead tongue, the dead ear, the dead 
limb. And in his highest miracles speaking of the dead to life. 

This likeness to Christ, this knowing the power of his 
resurrection and conformity to his death, was the reason 
that when he spoke every man gave him credit for the utmost 


Un cts Rae NS a er 2 Nig Rar AON, ee ae A Sy on ee oe er a Pe a > Sey 
Ea NIRS eles Sap teed oo ett ee YE fe SY tes Pears Si 


' THE MAN AND HIS MISSION. 191 
, : oc 





sincerity. It was the reason that men listened to him and 
believed in him, and were influenced by him as individuals. 
They saw not the man, but the truth he spoke. He had that 
wonderful egotism by which he could constantly speak of 
himself and yet never draw attention to himself. Men saw — 
in all that he was and did, the truth as it was in Jesus. I 
believe that if Jesus had been born in this century, and in 
this town, with Mr. Moody’s mind and body he would have 
lived and done about as Mr. Moody did. 

And so because Mr. Moody could in his measure use those 
great words of Christ, “I am come that they might have life 
and that they might have it abundantly,” because these words 
expressed his whole being, I loved and honored and valued 
him, and because of what he was, and, therefore, of what he 
did, I say to-day, I had rather be Mr. Moody dead, lying 
there in his coffin, than any living man on earth. 

Dr. Torrey then made an earnest address, calling upon 
those present and Mr. Moody’s friends everywhere.to go for- 
ward in his work. 

In his address he said: It is oftentimes the first duty of a 
pastor to speak words of comfort to those whose hearts are 
aching: with loneliness and breaking underneath the burden 
of their sorrow, but this is utterly unnecessary to-day. The 
God of all comfort hath already abundantly comforted them 
with a comfort wherewith in coming days they will be able to 
comfort others. I have spent hours within the last few days 

' with those who are nearest to.our departed friend, and the 
- words that I have heard from them have been words of rest 
in God and of triumph. As one of them has said: “God must 
be answering the prayers that are going up for us all over 
the world, we are being so wonderfully sustained.” Another 
has said: “His last four glorious hours on earth have taken 
all the sting out of death.” And still another: “Be sure that 
every word to-day is a word of triumph.” 


nr 


192 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Two thoughts has God laid upon my heart for this hour. — 
The first is found in the words of Paul in I Corinthians — 


xv:10: “By the grace of God I am what I am.” God has 
wonderfully magnified His grace and love in D. L. Moody. 
God was magnified in his birth. The babe that was born 
sixty-two years ago on yonder hill with all the possibilities 
that were wrapped up in him was God’s gift to the world. 
How much that gift meant to the world! How the world 
has been blessed and benefited by it we shall never know this 
side the coming of our Lord. God’s grace was magnified in 
his conversion. He was born in sin as we all are, but God 
by His providence, by the power of His Word, by the regen- 
erating power of His Holy Spirit, made him the mighty man 
of God that he became. How much the conversion of that 
boy in Boston forty-three years ago meant to the world no 
man can tell; but it was all God’s grace that did it. God’s 
love and grace was magnified again in the development of 
that character that has made him so loved and honored in a!l 
lands to-day. He had a strength and beauty of character 
possessed by the few sons of men; but it was all from 
God. To God alone was it due that he differed from 
other men. 

The other thought is found in Joshua, i:2: “Moses, my 
servant, is dead; now, therefore, arise, go. over this Jordan, 
thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to 
them.” The death of Mr. Moody is a call to go forward. A 
call to his children, to his associates, to ministers of the Word 
everywhere, to the whole Church. “Our leader has fallen, 
let us give up the work,” some would say. Not for a minute. 
Listen to what God says: “Your leader is fallen, move for- 
ward. Moses, my servant, is dead; therefore arise, go in and 
possess the land. Be strong and of good courage, be not 
afraid. As I was with D. L. Moody, so I will be with thee. I 
will not fail thee nor forsake thee.” 


Rear 
Pane Ce 





‘THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION —_—_193. 
oS Bishop W. F. Mallalieu of the Methodist Episcopal Church, 
~ who had known Mr. Moody since 1875, said: 


“Servant of God, well done; 
Thy glorious warfare’s past; 

The battle’s fought, the race.is won, 
And thou art crowned at last.” 


I first met and became acquainted with him whose death 
we mourn, in London in the summer of 1875. From that 
day, when he moved the masses of the world’s metropolis, to 
the hour when he answered the call of God to come up 
higher, I have known him, esteemed him and loved him. 
Surely we may say the world will endorse the affirmation 
that in his death one of the truest, bravest, purest and most 
influential men of this wonderful nineteenth century has 
passed to his rest and his reward. With feelings of unspeak- 
able loss and desolation we gather about the casket that con- 
tains all that was mortal of Dwight L. Moody. And yet a — 
mighty uplift and inspiration must come to each one of us as 
we think of his character and his achievements for he was 

“One who never turned his back, but marched breast for- 
ward; 

“Never doubted clouds would break, 

“Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would 
triumph.” 

In bone and brawn and brain he was a typical New Eng- 
lander; he was descended from the choicest New England 
stock; he was born of a New England mother, and from his 
earliest life he breathed the free air of his native hills and was 
carefully nurtured in the knowledge of God and the holy tra- 
ditions and histories of the glorious past. It was to be 
expected of him that he would become a Christian of pro- 
nounced characteristics, for he consecrated himself thor- 
oughly, completely and irrevocably to the service of God and 


194 DWIGHT L. MOODY 7 4 


humanity. The heart of no disciple of the Master ever beat 


with more genuine, sympathetic and more utterly unselfish 
loyalty than did the great, generous, loving heart of our 
translated friend. 

Because he held fast to the absolute truth of the Bible, and 
unequivocally and intensely believed it to be the inerrant 
Word of God, because he preached the Gospel rather than 
talked about the Gospel, because he used his mother tongue, 
the terse, clear, ringing, straightforward Saxon; because he 
had the profoundest sense of brotherhood with all poor, un- 
fortunate and even outcast people: because he was unaffect- 
edly tender and patient with the weak and the sinful; because 
he hated evil as thoroughly as he loved goodness; because 
he knew right well how to lead penitent souls to the Savior; 
because he had the happy art of arousing Christian people to 
a vivid sense of their obligations, and inciting them to the 
performance of their duties; because he had in his own soul 
a conscious, joyous experience of personal salvation, the 
people flocked to his services, they heard him gladly, they 
were led to Christ, and he came'to be prized and honored 
by all denominations, so that to-day all protestantism recog- 


nizes the fact that he was God’s servant, an ambassador of 


Christ, and indeed a chosen vessel to bear the name of Jesus 
to the nations. We shall not again behold his manly form 


animated with life, hear his thrilling voice, or be moved by- 


his consecrated personality; but if we are true and faithful to 
our Lord, we shall see him in glory, for already he walks the 
streets of the heavenly city, he mingles in the songs of the 
innumerable company of white-robed saints, sees the King 
in His beauty, and waits our coming, May God grant that 
in due time we may meet him over yonder. 

Dr. Pierson, a friend of long standing, referred to the death 
of four prominent persons in the last few years—C, H. Spur- 
geon, in London; Adoniram J. Gordon, in Boston ; Catherine 


a 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 195 


_ Booth, the mother of the Salvation Army, and George Muller, 
in Bristol—and added that Mr. Moody’s death was a greater 
loss than any of the four mentioned. Mr. Moody was a great 
man, he said, having the greatness of goodness. Everything 
that he touched succeeded. The speaker estimated that Mr. 
Moody had addressed audiences aggregating one hundred 
million people during his public life. His books have also. 
gone into all the world; he has erected a score of buildings in 
Europe and America, besides carrying on for twenty years 
his great educational institutions. 
Dr. Wharton, a fellow-evangelist, said, among other things: 
I would lay the fairest flowers of our Southern land upon 
the bosom of our dear friend. No man did so much as he 
to bind together the sections of our great country, the differ- 
ent denominations of the Christian religion, the countries of 
the world. He belonged to all the world, and his loss is felt 
in every nation of the globe. I know it is better for him, 
and his triumphant entry into the beautiful city has made all 
Heaven glad, but we shall miss him more as the days go by. 


_ This calm, sweet day is a fit token of his glorious departure. 


When he went “inside the gates” they were left open, and the 
light streams through upon us all to-day. “He was a burn- 
ing and a shining light.’ With unflagging zeal from the first 
to the last, he wore his life out in his Master’s service, and 
the great, loving, tired heart ceased to beat. His light made 
every life brighter, every home happier. It has not gone out; 
it never will, but will shine on through ages.- His life was 
like the morning star, which goes not down behind a dark 
horizon, but melts away in the opening day, and into the 
- brightness of the rising sun. We will now say good-bye, 
dear one, but only until the morning. 

“T have three children, and the greatest desire of my life is 
that they may be saved,” said Mr. Moody in a sermon on 
“Heaven,” “that I may know that their names are written in 





196 «DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


the Book of esa may be taken from them early; I may 


leave them in this changing world without a father’s care; 
but I would rather have my children say that of me after I 
am dead and gone, or if they die before me, I would rather 
they would take that message to the Master—that ever since 


they can remember I have tried to lead them-to the Master, — 


_than to have a monument over me reaching to the skies.” 

As Dr. Wharton sat down, William Moody rose and re- 
quested permission to add a word. This was his brief tribute 
of a loyal son to a loving father: 

“As a son I want to say a few words of him as a father. 
We have heard from his pastor, his associates and friends, 
and he was just as true as a father. I don’t think he showed 
up in any way better than when, on one or two occasions, 
in dealing with us as children, with his impulsive nature, he 
' spoke rather sharply. In every case he would come to us 
and say: “My children, my son, my daughter, I spoke quick- 


ly; I did wrong; I want you to forgive me.’ That was D. L. ~ 


Moody as a father. 

“He was not yearning to go; he loved his work. Life 
was very attractive; it seems as though on that early morn- 
ing when he had one foot on the threshold, it was given him 


2 
te 
_— 


) 
ee a ee 


FE ee ee eT ae 


tet 


for our sake to give us a word of comfort. He said: ‘This _ 


is bliss; it is like a trance. If this is death, it is beautiful.’ 
And his face lightened up as he mentioned those whom he 
saw. 

“We could not call him back;. we tried to for a moment, 
but we could not. We thank God for his home life, for his 
true life, and we thank God that he was our father, and that 
he led each one of his children to know Jesus Christ. Father 


has crossed the bar; thank God he was homeward bound 


and went in under full headway.” 


John Wanamaker, of Philadelphia, also added a word of | 


testimony to the memory of his close friend for many years, 


Pine 
, omar TL 





Bate a ere ee 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION ‘197 


and then the Mount Hermon Quartet, whose singing was such 
_ a treat to Mr. Moody, sang, “The Hope of the Coming of 
_ the Lord,” a new hymn by Major Whittle, to which his 
daughter, Mrs. Moody, wrote the music: 


A lamp in the night, a song in time of sorrow, 

A great glad hope which faith can never borrow, 

To gild the passing day with the glory of the morrow, 
It is the hope of the coming of the Lord. 


Chorus: 


Blessed hope, blessed hope, 

Blessed hope of the coming of the Lord; 
How the aching heart it cheers, 
How it glistens thro’ our tears, 

Blessed hope of the coming of the Lord. 


A star in the sky, a beacon bright to guide us, 

An anchor sure, to hold when storms betide us, 

A refuge for the soul where in quiet we may hide us, 
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord. 


Chorus. 


A word from the One to all our hearts the dearest, 

A parting word to make Him, aye, the nearest, 

Of all his precious words, the sweetest, brightest, clearest, 
Ig the hope of the coming of the Lord. 


Chorus. 


_ After the public services the coffin was carried again 
_by the Mount Hermon students to Round Top, the Olivet of 
Northfield, just at the crown of the little hill, where many 
of the best meetings are held every year. Mr. Moody thought 
that the Lord might return while he was living, and he had 
been heard to say that there was no place on earth that he 
would prefer to be when that eventful hour dawned than on 


198 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Round Top. His remark was recalled after his death, and no 
other place was even mentioned. At the grave those gath- 
ered sang “Jesus, Lover of My Soul:” 


“Jesus, Lover of my soul, 
Let me to Thy bosom fly, 
While the nearer waters roll, 
While the tempest still is high; 
Hide me, oh, my Savior hide, 
Till the storm of life is past; 
Safe into the haven guide, 
Oh, receive my soul at last. 


“Other refuge have I none, 
Hangs my helpless soul on Thee; 
Leave, oh, leave me not alone, 
Still support and comfort me; 
All my trust on Thee is stayed, - 
All my help from Thee I bring; 
Cover my defenceless head 
With the shadow of Thy wing. 


~“Thou, O Christ, art all I want; 
More than all in Thee I find; 
Raise the fallen, cheer the faint, 
Heal the sick and lead the blind; 
Just and holy is Thy name 
I am all unrighteousness; 
Vile, and full of sin I am, 
Thou are full of truth and grace, 


“Plenteous grace with Thee is found— 
Grace to cover all my sin; 

Let the healing streams abound ; 
Make me, keep me, pure within; 

Thou of life the Fountain art, 
Freely let me take of Thee; 

Spring Thou up within my heart, 
Rise to all eternity,” 


dyININNS NI SONECISHA S:ACOOW “AI... Bias! 











GROSSLEY+H 


ALL—MOUNT HERMON SCHOOL FOR BOYS 








THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION Fh BOTS, 


as the Secs ‘of the singing Dr. Torrey offered 
“prayer and Dr. Schofield pronounced the benediction. After 
the friends had withdrawn, the family gathered about the 
coffin, the cover was raised, and a last look was taken of the 
face of the husband and father. The cover was replaced, 
and the coffin with its precious burden was lowered into the 
box resting in the simple brick vault. From this resting 
place one may see his birthplace, a little more than a stone’s 
throw to the south; his own home for the last quarter of a. 
century, about as far to the west; the seminary buildings, © 
~gome of them a minute’s walk to the north; the last two 
buildings erected at Mount Hermon, the chapel and Over- 
toun Hall, four miles distant, appear across the beautiful 
Connecticut River Valley. To the north six miles, Hinsdale, 
in New Hampshire, is plainly seen, while the hills about 
Brattleboro stand out in bold relief. 

At a meeting of Mr. Moody’s friends, held in the evening 
after the funeral, it was decided to make a public statement 
regarding the institutions founded by him. These consist of 
the Northfield Seminary and the Northfield Training School 
for Young Women, the Mount Hermon School for Young. 
Men, and the Bible Institute at Chicago, for both men and wo- 
men. The Northfield plant consists of 1,200 acres of land and 
thirty buildings. With its present endowment it is valued 
at $1,250,000 and is practically free from debt. At Chicago 
the buildings, land and endowment exceed $250,000 in value. 
The Northfield schools have about nine hundred students, 
who are charged $100 a year for board and tuition; the actual 
~ cost is $200. At Chicago the amount required approxi- 
mates $150 each for three hundred students. In other words 
$125,000 annually is required to maintain the work begun 
by Mr. Moody of offering young men and women of limited 
means an opportunity to secure an education that will thor- 
oughly equip them for Christian life and service. This sum . 


if ae B aio 


d of $3,000,000, the interest on wl 


mee: oy 


pee ee of his work in all its present Prosi 





PART II. 


A LIFE IN CHRIST. 


By REV. HENRY VAN DYKE, D. D., 
Professor elect at Princeton University 


DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Sn Christ 
His life was a good fight of faith. 
His work was a long labor of love. 
His death was a full triumph of hope. 
His memory is a strong inspiration to service, 
His reward is an inheritance of glory 


With Christ. 


New York, N. Y. 





PART II. 
CHARACTER SKETCHES AND TRIBUTES 


ti 


MR. MOODY’S THRILLING CAREER AND MESSAGE 
BY REV. N. D. HILLIS 


[Copyright 1899 by George T. B. Davis.] 


HEN long time hath passed, some historian, recalling 

the great epochs and religious teachers of our century, 

will say: “There were four men sent forth by God.” Their 
names, Charles Spurgeon, Phillips Brooks, Henry Ward 
_ Beecher and Dwight L. Moody. Each was a herald of good 
_ tidings, and each made a permanent contribution to the Chris- 
tian church, while of all it may be said their sermons were 
translated into many tongues and their names known in every 
town and city where the English language is spoken. _ For. 
our instruction, rebuke and inspiration, God hath raised up 
other preachers, representing a high order of intellect, marked 
eloquence and permanent influence, but as to the first order 


of greatness, there have been perhaps these four—no more. 


God girded each of these prophets for his task, and taught him 
how to “dip his sword in heaven.” 

In characterizing the message of these men we say that 
Spurgeon was expositional, Phillips Brooks devotional, Henry 
Ward Beecher prophetic and philosophical, while Dwight L. 
Moody was a herald rather than a teacher, addressing himself 
to the common people—the unchurched multitudes. The © 
symbol of the great English preacher is a lighted lamp, the 


205 


#92065 2. DWIGHT L. MOODY 


symbol of Brooks a flaming heart, the symbol of Beecher an _ 
orchestra of many instruments, while Mr. Moody was a trum- 
pet, of narrow range perchance, but sounding the advance, ~ 
sometimes through inspiration and sometimes through alarm. 

And our sorrow to-day is the more in that the last of these 
giants has gone down to the valley and disappeared behind the © 
thick shadows. Oft in hours of gloom and doubt, full oft in 
days when wickedness seemed enthroned in high places, 
and the poor without an advocate in high places, when good 
men seemed weakness and leaders a lie, in our depression 
we have turned our thoughts toward the three prophets in the 
[english tabernacle, in Trinity and in Plymouth, or toward the 
evangelist and friend of the common people, and have been 
comforted by the mere thought that things were a little safer 
because these four men were in their appointed places. 

The first three were commanders, each over his regiment, 
and worked .from a fixed center, but the evangelist was the 
leader of a flying band, who went everywhither into the 
--enemy’s country, seeking conquests of peace and righteous- — 
ness. Be the reasons what they may, the common people 


_ gladly heard the great evangelist. In his death the unchurched 


classes have lost their best friend. Fallen now their tower 
of strength. Changed, too, the very face of our moral land- 
scape. For nearly forty years the multitudes have pressed 






and thronged into the great halls and churches to hear this 


herald speak of duty, sin, salvation, and God’s love in His 
great Christ. But disappearing from our sight he is not 
dead. While life continues, for multitudes he will remain a 
cool spring flowing in a desert, the covert of a rock in time 
of sorrow. 

For the republic the roll call of self-made men is long and 
brilliant. Orators like Clay come in from the corn fields, 
statesmen like Webster come from the bleak hillsides of New — 
England, Presidents like Lincoln come forth from the univer- 






THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 2 207 : 


sity of il: “splitting: the en tors Merchavts and editors come 


¥ 


in from rural districts and villages, and all are the architects of 


their own fortuies. But among all this group of men whose Pay 


life in low estate began on a simple village green, none is 
more thrilling in its struggles, more picturesque in its con- 
trasts and more pathetic in its defeats and victories than a 
of the great evangelist. 

- An orphan at 4, one of the props of the faniiy at g, at liga 
clerk in a shoe store of Chicago, at 23 the founder of a Young © 
Men’s Christian Association, where he slept on the benches 
because he had no bed, and bought a loaf at the bakery because — 
he had no money for board. At 24 the superintendent of a 


Sunday school in a deserted saloon, where his pupils were 


drunkards, tramps, ragamuffins, mingled with street waifs and 


te boys from a newsboys’ home; at 40 the most widely talked 


about man in Great Britain, where his friends were college 


presidents and professors, authors, editors, statesmen, scien- 


tists like Drummond and Lord Kelvin. 

Returning home, in Philadelphia he found that merchants © 
had erected for his meetings a building seating 10,000 people, | 
an event that was repeated in New York, Boston, Chicago and 
many other great cities in our land. At 53 he founded a 
training school for young men and women in Chicago that 


has sent out 1,500 workers, a school for young men at’ East 


Northfield and for young women at Mount Hermon, insti-. 
tutions that now have for their work more than a score of 
great buildings. Thrilling, indeed, this story. It repeats 
the experiences of young David, to pass from the sheepcote 


to the king’s throne and the scepter of universal sway. 


“Where were the hidings of his power?” you ask. From 
nothing, nothing comes. Blood tells. A great ancestry ex-— 
plains a great man. The time was when men thought God calls 
the prophet. But when God wants a John the Baptist He calls 
not the son, but the father and mother, and they ordain the 





208 DWIGiZT L. MOODY | 


child in the cradle and before the cradle. When the Hebrews — 


were in bondage in Egypt one mother there was brave enough 
- to dare the king, and hide her babe in an ark, amidst the bull- 
rushes, and the mother’s courage repeated itself in the great- 


est of jurists, Moses. Hannah was a dreamer who loved 


solitude, and walked the hills alone with God, whose eyes 
“were homes of silent prayer,” and her religious genius re- 
peated itself in her son Samuel, one of the greatest of the 
judges. What was unique in Timothy, Paul tells us, was 
first of all unique in his mother, Lois, and his grandmother, 
Eunice. And the greatest evangelist since Whitfield had his 
_ power through the ordainment of a great ancestry. He was 
of the best old New England stock. His father had the fine 


old Puritan fibre, and his mother, widowed with her little : 


flock about her, exhibits almost unparalleled heroism, courage 


and hope in the hour of suffering and trouble. For the tides 


of power in this man flow down from the ancestral hills. 





_ Among his birth gifts was the gift of perfect health and — 


a perfect body—with stores of energy that seemed well- -nigh 
inexhaustible. His, also, was the gift of common sense, a 
mind hungry for knowledge, a reason that saw clearly or saw 
not at all; moral earnestness, sincerity, self-reliance, courage, 
wit, humor, pathos, an intuitive knowledge of men, the genius 


for organization. Like Isaiah, he had a quenchless passion for _ 


righteousness. Like Daniel, he had the courage of his con- 
victions in the face of fierce opposition. Like Paul, his en- 
thusiasm for men made him the herald of righteousness to 
foreign nations. Like Bernard, his was the crusader’s heart, 
organizing his hosts against passion, ignorance and sin. 
Without the eloquence of Spurgeon, without the fine cul- 
_ture of Phillips Brooks, without the supreme genius of Mr. 
Beecher, Mr. Moody was a herald, a man sent forth from God, 
who called the unchurched classes to repentance, who- flamed 
forth on them the love of God in Christ, For nearly six 


a a a ttt 





ee ge ee ne Bet te es A 


FES 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 209 


| “years, it is said that Mr. Moody’s audiences averaged 5,000 


each afternoon and evening, a record that has never been sur- 


_ passed in all the history of evangelism. ‘Our bishops,” said ’ 
e) the London Telegraph, “have back of them a state income, 
great cathedrals, a small army of paid helpers and musicians, 

_ but where our bishops have reached tens this man has reached 


hundreds.” 
If preaching is man-making and man-mending, then Mr. 


Moody was a veritable prince among preachers. In view of 


the great audiences of 15,000 people that thronged into or 


about the hall in Kansas City, where he preached his last ser- 
mon, all must confess that no preacher in the land since Mr. 


Beecher’s time was comparable to Mr. Moody in personal pop- 


ularity, or in the power to hold the masses. Any student 
skilled in the art of reading human nature, and, while listening 


- to his words, has noted their effects upon the faces of the vast 


audience before him, must make haste to affirm that Mr. 


_ Moody knew the human mind and heart as a skillful musician 


knows his instrument, and sweeps all the banks of keys before 


him. In the addresses that were given no element of great 


speech was lacking. The way in which Mr. Moody moved 


his audience from tears to laughter reminded us of Mr. 


Beecher’s assertion that if he could make a pan of milk slop 
over on one side he was always sure he could make it slop 
over on the other. 

Life is determined by the emotion of the heart, quite as 
much as by the arguments of the head. No matter how scholar- 
ly or intellectual the preacher may be, he is at best a second-rate 


; preacher whose truth burns with a cold white light. Truth in 


a 


the hands of an intellectual philosopher, who has found his 
way into the pulpit, cuts with a keen edge, indeed, but truth 
in Mr. Moody’s hands has been heated red hot, and the edge 
of his sword burns as well as cuts, like the word of God, 


“ Wee SAA US Die oy ag a Ge ae A Bee) Ob Seas) eee 
PNY S ATEN NAY Tas RUE PND tee etn, OSE URANO MD aT Es Rae ; 


rite tine 


210.) DWIGHT L. MOODY.” 


dividing between the joints and marrow, and separating the ; 


sinner from his evil deeds. 





{ 
| 


No misconception can be greater than to suppose that Mr. ‘iat 
Moody succeeded in spite of his lack of theological prepata- 
tion. My old professor of dogmatic theology criticised me — 


harshly during my student days for going to hear Mr. Moody 


on Sunday morning. Because the great evangelist was a lay- . 


man and unordained, this distinguished theologian said that 
he declined to attend: any of Mr. Moody’s meetings during his 
great campaign in a city in which this professor had formerly 
resided. | 

It is true that Mr. Moody had never crossed the threshold of 


_ college or theological seminary. Moreover, in his enthus- 


iasm he often used the vernacular homely idioms, and in every 
sermon broke some of the laws of grammar or of rhetoric. 
But nothing is risked in the statement that it was a great good 
fortune for him that he never found his way into a theological 
seminary. Nevertheless, he was a past master in his chosen’ 
art—he reached men, not because he knew so little about 
preaching, but because he knew so much. Could some scholar 
_take a volume of Mr. Moody’s sermons and condense his 
thoughts, methods, appeals and illustrations into a volume of 


homiletics, the book would be so large and comprehensive © 


_ that the ordinary work on the art of preaching would not make 
an introduction thereto. 


Taken all in all, for the work of an evangelist, this man 


represented more culture and more thought about the methods 
of reaching the common people than any other man in his 
generation. To him it was given to meet all the great preach- 
ers of the day and to work with them. He had also the power 
of selection from each Spurgeon, or Maclaren, or Brooks, or 
Beecher, of his special gift and excellence, Having spent 
eight months of each year in working with the foremost pas- 


tors at home and abroad, he had four months in summer for — 






hte TER: MAN AND HIS MISSION. 211 





they could not hope to equip their students as well as experi- 
ence with men had equipped Mr. Moody. 


Perhaps of all the arts and occupations in our age not one is 


} comparable to the art of preaching. It demands the highest 


talent, the deepest culture, tireless practice and complete con- 
 secration. And happy the generation to whom God gave this _ 
herald of good tiding, this friend of the common people, this’ 
- messenger to the unchurched multitudes, who followed him as 


their leader along those cogs that lead to prospeny and 
peace, to Christ, the sole man’s Savior, to God, man’s Father. 
ae Newett Dwicut Hits. 


; Plymouth Church, Brooklyn, N. Y. 





tidy sae Ponietence Those who have seen Mr. Moody’s — 
library know that this man was a ‘student of books as well 

as men. Superficial indeed the judgment of those who think | 
that Mr. Moody was without education, or training, or logic, 
or knowledge of preaching as a science. With him preaching — i 
was a fine art, an art that conceals the art. Did our theo-. 
logical seminaries multiply their three years of study by two_ 








if. 


A NATURAL PRINCE AND LEADER 
BY REV. F. B. MEYER, OF LONDON, ENGLAND 


O have known D. L. Moody, and come within the range 

of his strong personality, has been to many men one 

of the most influential factors in their character and life- 

work; and it is not easy for such to imagine a world from 

which the inspiration of his presence has been withdrawn. 

It is still less easy, under the immediate sorrow of such a 

bereavement, to characterize this natural prince and leader 
of men. 

He had a marvelous power over others. You cannot read 
the biographies of Dr. Andrew Bonar, of Dr. A. J. Gordon, 
of Professor Drummond, or of Dr. Dale, men as far as pos- 
sible removed from each other in many respects, without 
encountering the same tribute to the spell which this strong, 
tender, intense nature exerted over them. There was some-. 
thing magnetic about him. ‘Whoever was speaking at the 
Northfield Convention, it was the fact that Moody was pres- 
ent—though only as a listener, sitting, probably, off the plat- 
form, under the deep gallery on the right—which gave the 
session importance, and the speaker’s words weight. Even 
when men have not agreed with him, and have seriously 
antagonized his positions, they have acknowledged the abso- 
lute sincerity and nobility of his character. 

I met him first in York in 1873, on his arrival with Mrs. 
Moody and his two eldest children. Accompanied by Mr. 
and Mrs. Sankey, they had come to our country, as it ap- 
peared, by a Divine prompting, and had just landed at Liver- 
pool. Some time before, the secretary of the Y. M. C. A, 

212 








THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION —_—_213 
had impressed on him the two words, “Bennett, York;” and 
not knowing where else to turn, two of his friends having 
suddenly died, Moody telegraphed to Mr. Bennett, saying, 
“T will be in York to-night.” This was Saturday. On the 


. following day he preached at the chapel, built for Rev. James 


-Parsons, and then occupied by Rev. John Hunter (now of 
Glasgow). During the following week he held evening ser- 
vices in the old Lendal Chapel, and noon prayer meetings at 
the Y. M. C. A. After two or three more days with the 
Wesleyans, he came to the Baptist chapel, of which I was 
minister, and conducted meetings there for about a fortnight, 
with ever-increasing numbers and marvelous results. He 
and Mr. Sankey have often spoken of that little vestry, where 
we three spent much time in prayer, little weening that the 
earnestness of our desires and intercessions were the travail 
pangs of so great a spiritual movement as followed. 

These were the days when the “Sacred Songs and Solos” | 
had not been compiled, and we used a number of fly-sheets 
with paper covers. But the main lines of Moody’s char- 
- acter and work were already laid. He said to me once, allud- 
ing to academic degrees, “I want to be D. L. Moody, O. O.” 

_And on my asking him what the letters stood for, he said: 

- “Why, of course, Out-and-Out.” | | 

He liked nothing better than to get a Bible student alone, 
and ply him with questions as to what he knew of the Bible, | 
or any fresh light he had recently received. He was always 
collecting incidents, illustrations, witty and wise sayings, 
which he placed in large envelopes, on which were written 
the key-words of addresses in course of preparation. He was 
»not so familiar with his addresses as he became afterwards, 
for one afternoon, having come in to tea, he hastened away 
suddenly to cross to the other side of York, to the house of 
Dr. Kitchen, with whom he was staying, to get the notes of 
his address on “Heaven.” 


~ 








4 eh STE MF, vc ns Lakes 
H} Ne any i ‘i Shee 
" \ ‘ ia 


ferg Ce DWIGHT LL. Moopy 


The first all-day meeting he elds in acted was varaneces 






by us as we walked up and down Coney street, and it was at | 


my instance that the evangelists went on to Rev. A. A. Rees, 


at Sunderland, who first coined the announcement, which be- — 


came so widely known, and, indeed, carried Scotland, not- 
withstanding the prejudice against the solo singer, and his 
“kist o’ whistles,’ that “Mr. Moody would speak, and Mr. 
Sankey sing, the Gospel.” 

This was, of course, not his first introduction to Great 
Britain, or to wide and extended work. He had first made his 
mark in Chicago, in an old shanty lighted by tallow candles, 


which had been abandoned by a saloon-keeper, though his — 


own education was then so imperfect that he is said to have ~ 


been obliged to skip some of the longer words as he read the 
Bible to the children. His brushes with the saloon-keepers; 
his efforts for all outcast and neglected souls; his indefatigable 
labors in connection with the Y. M. C. A. at Farwell Hall; 


his herculean exertions for the soldiers in camp and on the © 


field of battle, as a delegate of the Christian Commission, dur- 
ing the Civil War; his journeyings in all parts for Sunday- 


school conventions, had given him an amount of experience, — 


and created a wealth of resource, which were only waiting 
for the open sphere and conspicuous platform that opened 
before his labors in England. 

His two previous visits to our country had been for the 
purpose of observation, and of coming in contact with lead- 
ing Christian men. He always spoke with gratitude of the 
impulse he had received in the direction of Bible study from 
a Mildmay Conference, and described as one of the most 


‘important seed-germs of his career a sentence which he over- _ 


heard from the lips of an eminent servant of God, in the course 


of a conversation with a friend: “The world has yet to learn 


what God can do by a man wholly devoted to Him.” 
All who have heard him will recall the quiver in his voice 





nthed he tod some pene story; but I never guessed the 
intensity of his tenderness till I saw him with his grandchil- 
dren. He used to drive them about in his carriage, or carry 
them in his arms. One of the most striking incidents in my — 
memory was when he stood with them beside his mother’s 
grave, in a summer sunset, and asked us to pray that they 
ii oe be in the coming century what she had been in this. 
_ And when little Irene was dying, he used to be on the watch 
~ below her window to keep all quiet, would steal down from | 
- the meetings to hear the latest news, would be the nurse and © 
playmate of her little cousin, that all might devote themselves 
~ to the chamber of sickness. So touched, because a little child 
had sent the invalid a pet lamb! How moved he was, as we 
saw it together! | 
He was absolutely fearless. I remember one occasion, 
_ when he felt it laid on his heart to speak some unpalatable _ 
truths to a number of ministers and others. Before me, as 
I write, is the large circle that sat around his spacious dining- 
room in the summer evening, the monument of ice-cream 
_ which he carved with such precision; and then the direct 
~ unvarnished words, which wounded deeply, that a better con- 
2 dition of soul- life might be induced. Whether in a crowd, 
_ or with an individual, he never swerved a hair’s breadth from ; 
- what he thought right, to win a smile, or avoid a frown. 
’ _ As a conversationalist he was charming. He would sit in 
_ the porch of his unpretending but comfortable house, over- 
_ looking the lovely landscape, telling story after story of mar- 
_yelous conversions. One day, for instance, a young man 
_ drove up as we were talking, and he told me that he had won © 
| _him to Christ when quite a lad by a conversation on the roof 
of a Chicago hotel, that being the only quiet spot he could 
find for his purpose. Or he would recall reminiscences of men 
whom he had known. He had a great fund of information 
about agriculture; had traveled widely and observed shrewd- 


| 














7 nket 
‘ 


216 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


ly; was in keen and close touch with the great religious move- 


ments of the time; and was specially fond of asking questions — . 


of anyone who seemed likely to communicate reliable informa-— 


tion. He was always hungry for facts. 


. The most extraordinary contrasts met in his nature. His- 


external appearance was rough, and his manners. brusque; 
but he had one of the tenderest hearts that beat. His 


scorn and hatred of anything wrong and mean were with-_ 


ering; his pity for the erring, unlimited. Having been 
debarred from the benefits of early education, yet—in his 
magnificent institution at Northfield, where: 700 young 


men and women are always under training, and in the-— 
great Bible Institute at Chicago—he has probably done more — 


in the cause of learning than any other single man in America. 
Unable to sing a note, he has promoted a college of sacred 
singers. Outside the ministerial ranks—and yet he spent his 
life to help ministers and churches to do their work more 
efficiently, 

He was absolutely loyal to church organization, always 
making it his aim to vitalize and quicken church life, and in-. 
crease the efficiency of existing institutions. . | 


Towards the end of his life he was greatly impressed by the 


movement for the promotion of a deeper spiritual life. I in- 


duced him to come to Keswick, which he greatly enjoyed, 


and he wrote to me saying: “I am going to do all I can to 
get the Christians to get a higher stand, and to get 


4 = 


them together.” Of course, he was well aware of the 


perils attending all such movements, but he was more: 
than ever persuaded that nothing but a quickened spiritual 
life would meet the requirements of the American church at 
this juncture; and nothing that I can remember filled him 
with greater glee than when, last August, two-thirds of the 
New York Presbytery spent ten days at Northfield for the 

















DR. NEWELL DWIGHT HILLIS 


Beecher’s successor as Pastor of Plymouth Church Brooklyn. 











et ee 





5 Pe ee etiam ar tine si when 


nn, At arial 
LT th Ang te 











" THE MAN AND HIS MISSION ang 


purpose of investigating and receiving teaching concerning 


_ the deepest phases in the soul’s development. 


He died triumphantly, we learn, conscious to the last, and 
bearing testimony to the Gospel he had preached. The great 
institutions which he created and fostered; the colportage 

“work; the colleges at Chicago, and Northfield, and Mount 
-_ Hermon; his books—these will be the works that will follow 
him. He discovered men, knew how to bring the best quali- 
ties out of them, found them spheres, and gave them back to 
themselves. Men like Mr. Mott and Mr. Speer, of the Stu- 
dent Volunteers; like Mr. Baer, of the Christian Endeavor; 
_ like Dr. Wilbur Chapman, the well-known evangelist; to say 
“nothing of hundreds besides, who have passed through his 
colleges or been influenced by his missions, will perpetuate 
in the coming generation something of the influence and 
_ power he wielded in this, through the grace of God, 
He never wavered in his attachment to the great funda- 
mentals of the Gospel. His sermons on the Blood, the Holy 
Spirit, the Love of God in Jesus Christ, were great testimonies 
- to the mighty truths which have been the theme of every re- 
vival of evangelical religion. There was no uncertain sound 
in the Gospel as he preached it, and it was the Power of God 
unto salvation to tens of thousands. 
| What a welcome he must have received as he entered 
heaven! Surely an abundant, a choral, entrance must have 
_been ministered unto him by myriads who are there, because 
of the message uttered in burning accents by his lips. May 
God comfort his noble wife, the confidant of his secrets, the 
_ partner of his anxieties and toils; and grant that his children 
' may be enabled to maintain the work which he has left them 
as a sacred legacy and charge. 


> 








III. 


DWIGHT L. MOODY—A CRITICISM AND AN 
APPRECIATION 


BY REV. GEORGE F. PENTECOST 
[Copyright 1500 by George T. B. Davis.] 


O write of D. L. Moody and his work one would better 
be content to do it in a paragraph, unless he were per- 


mitted the limits of a book. I am not to write of his work 
—that is known and read of all men the whole wide world 


over; but a little of the man himself as I have more or less 
intimately known him for the past twenty years; and that 
little [ am writing here in Northfield, where the spell of his 





great personality is still upon me—for we cannot yet realize 


that we shall see his face and hear his voice no more. Had 
he lived in the early days of Israel’s trials in the land the 


Lord God gave them he would have “judged Israel” and de- 


livered them out of the hand of their enemies. He was a 


man of the stamp and character of Gideon; whose latent pow- 


ers were known only to God; who, when called and chosen, 


knew only to believe, to obey, to dare, and to do, He was - 


judge, prophet and preacher to the people of God during the 
latter thitd of the closing century. By him and his crude and 
sometimes rude, but always eloquent, speech God in our day 


waked up a sleeping church as truly as he did in the days of 


Luther and Wesley. Moody’s name will go down bracketed 
with theirs in all coming time. 


ae ee ee ey eee 


7 rear 
ne ae Pon, ee 


- Mr. Moody was one of the most widely and best known 


men of his generation, yet the world, and even the church, 


nay, many of those who counted themselves his intimate — 
friends and were closest to him in his work, only knew the © 


220 


~_— 








3 cide of the | man, or at least nT that which lay a little 
e below the surface of his personality. For, in spite of all his 
- brusque, hearty and frank ways, Mr. Moody was the most 
reticent man I ever knew. Not Cromwell himself more per- 
~ fectly concealed himself from those about him than did Mr. 
_ Moody. It was here in Northfield, which he loved better 
than any other spot on earth, in the seclusion of his own home, 
that he was best known, and only so far by those whom he 
- admitted to the privacy of his home life. To them he would 
talk of the beauties of this place, of his plans for future work; 
_ with them he would read and study the Bible; talk of other 
~ men and workers, but of himself, never. To his fellow towns- 
~ men, with whom from a poy he was brought up—being but the 
_ son of a poor, struggling widow—he was ever the kind and 
thoughtful friend, but never the familiar companion. In early 
_ life he was to them “Dwight Moody;” for 25 years past he 
has been Mr. Moody, only and always. For 25 years past 
_ few, if even one of them, have ever familiarly laid hand upon 
_ his shoulder. 
His deep and real piety, his utter consecration to God and 
the work which he conceived himself called of God to do, 
no one who at all knew him for a moment doubted. With all 
this being true, it is equally true—and I say it as one who 
has known and loved him long—that in some of the sweeter 
and gentler aspects of a saint’s life he was singularly and, I 
believe, unconsciously deficient. Sensitive as a woman to any 
_ slight or lack of consideration from others, he was too apt to — 
_ forget that “‘others,” even his closest friends, were men of like 
_ passions and sensitiveness with himself. I have seen him cry 
like a child under the sting and smart of some real or fancied 
slight or wound received in the house of his friends, but I have 
_ seen and known many of his friends cry with bitter pain of 
_wounds inflicted by Mr. Moody’s treatment of them. 
In many ways Mr. Moody was the kindest and tenderest- 


222 DWIGHT L. MOODY 





hearted man I ever knew, nor dol believe he ever intentionally 


wounded anyone—he simply lacked pec Eee and did not — 


know how to put himself in another man’s place. 
- His absorption in his work, his habit of going straight to 


the end of his purpose and never ceasing or turning aside till — 


he reached his goal, regardless of whoever might for the mo- 
ment be in his way, may in part account for this trait in his 


character. To him the King’s business demanded haste, nor | 


~ would he pull up or stay his hand though a friend were under 
foot. He did nothing out of personal consideration. His 


rule was to estimate and value men for their availability in his — 


work. If they were useful to him he used them, and so long 
as he used them he was always kind. The moment they ceased 


to be useful or were in his way he dropped them, and even : 


flung them away. This, I think, was the most serious blemish 
on his otherwise fine character. To those who gathered about 


him—drawn by the irresistible magnetism of his personality— _ 


he was at times brusque to the point of rudeness. On account 
of this characterisic, many prominent and able men, especially 
ministers, who would have been through life his attached and 
loyal helpers, have turned away from him, hurt to the quick, 
and indignant at what they esteemed unwarrantably rude and 
discourteous and unbrotherly treatment. But in this way he 


was impartial, being no“respecter of persons.” AnEnglish gen- | 


tleman once said to me, “Well, you know, we are all his lack- 
eys, ready to fetch and carry as he may direct. He may make 


doorkeepers of us, or even door mats, if he likes, we will still 4 


love him and do what is in our power to serve and help him in 
his work.” If this seems to be a record of fault in Mr. Moody’s 
character, at the same time it certainly is a tribute to his tremen- 


dous personality and his magnetic power over men. Perhaps — 


eee oe tae 


a pidit 


; 
biagistioddlviay 


this peculiar and, I cannot but feel, most regrettable and unfor- 


tunate trait in Mr. Moody’s character, may best be set forth in 
a remark I once heard made by one of his truest and most loyal 








CUD ey ead We aera eA SiS oa DMEAT oe ay Re 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 223 


: friends, who yet has for some past years dropped out of the 


mat 


- “inner circle:” “Dear old Moody! We all love him, but some > 


of us do not like him.” 
It may seem ungenerous and ungracious on my part to 
write such things in the foreground of this sketch, and yet it 


is done while my heart is still quivering with the sense of 


personal loss in his death—whom in life I loved, and in death 


_ I mourn. And now, having truthfully said this, let me write 


of other things more consistent with my own feelings—even 
though in my brief space I can only rapidly and imperfectly 


indicate some of the more prominent traits of his great 
_ personality. 


One of the marked characteristics of the man was his strong 
practical common sense, and, in the main, fine and quick knowl- 
edge of men. He would instantly detect a “crank,” though he 
sometimes failed to discern a true, helpful man or woman under 
a modest exterior. He lived in almost mortal terror of being 
imposed upon or of having people, men or women, fasten them- 
selves upon him with axes to grind. Once, in the Boston Tab- — 


~ ernacle, while sitting in his private room, just before going 


onto the platform, an usher came in and said, ‘“There is a man 
without who wishes to see you.” “Well,” said Moody, “I have 


~ notime to see him now.” “But,” replied the usher, “he says he 


must see you on very important business.” “What kind of a 
manishe?” “Oh, heisa tall, thin man withlong hair.” “That 
settles it,’ said Moody; “I don’t want to see any long-haired 
men or short-haired women.” He rarely made a mistake in se- 
lecting his lieutenants, though he often dropped them for no 


apparent reason, and always without explanation. He simply 


ceased to call upon them for service. In the management of 
meetings he was without a peer. He almost instantly knew 
whom to shut off, and, with a shrewd remark or pointed story, 
how to tide the course of an open meeting over shoal places 
without disturbing the harmonies. In the organization of 





great meetings or campaigns he was a past master. Nothing 
escaped him; and he knew how to hold his lieutenants re- 
sponsible for attention to details upon the carrying out of a 
which much of his success depended. q 

In action—i. e., in the thick of a great religious campaign, a 
he was something of a martinet. I remember a little scene _ 
between him and the able secretary and manager of his Lon- — 
don committee, Mr. Robert Paton. It was 11 o’clock on a 
Saturday morning. Mr. Moody had suddenly changed thes 
plan of campaign for the following week, and he wanted fresh 
tickets ready in time to distribute to his five thousand work- 
ers who would assemble early the next (Sunday) morning _ 
at the 7 o’clock workers’ meeting. ‘‘Paton,” said he, inform- 
ing him of his change of plan, “I want 50,000 new tickets 
(handing him copy) ready for the workers’ meeting to-mor- 
row morning.” “Impossible! said Paton. “Why impossi- 
ble?” asked Moody. “Why,” replied Paton, “this is Saturday S 
and 11 o'clock. All the printing establishments close down 2 
work at noon to-day, and even if they did not, 50,000 tickets _ : 
could not be prepared in half a day.” They argued the pointa _ 
few minutes, and then Moody turned upon his heel with the _ 
remark, “Paton, it must be done.” Mr. Paton-looked blankly 
for a moment at the huge retreating figure, and then went 
out of the room like a shot; and in two minutes he was in a 
cab tearing down to the printing establishment. I do not a 
know how it was managed, but the 50,000 tickets were dis- 
tributed the next morning to his 5,000 workers. Thus it 
ever was with Moody. Once in a critical time, during the 
early building operations up here, Mr. Marshall, his general 
superintendent, said that it was absolutely necessary before 
the end of the week that a large sum of money be had. That 
afternoon Mr. Moody took train for New York. He came 
back the next day with the money. He did not borrow it! 
Moody, of all men I ever knew, could do things, and he did — 









_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 225 


them. As I heard only yesterday one of his close friends 
_ say, “He always got there!” “And Abraham went forth to go 
into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan he 
came.” ‘That was characteristic of Mr. Moody. What he 
went forth to accomplish, that he accomplished. 3 
_ Mr. Moody’s reverence for all things sacred or divine was 
almost extreme. I never heard him so much as make a play 
_ upon Bible words or phrases, nor would he tolerate such use — 
— of God’s word in his presence. A Bible conundrum or ap- 
plication of Scripture to point a jest or joke was absolutely 
_tabooed with him. He once rather sharply rebuked: me for 
naming Peter as the “shortest”? man in the Bible because he 
_ confessed that “silver and gold have I fone.” He was a 
_ Puritan of the Puritans in respect of the “Sabbath.” He 
would not ride on a street or steam car, even to go to a 
_. meeting at which he was to speak. Large, and unused and 
_ disinclined as he was to walk, I have known him to walk 
miles, at great cost of strength, rather than even to be driven 
- in a private carriage. And yet he would send his “gospel 
wagon” scouring all over the Northfield hills on a Sunday 
morning, to bring the poor farmers and their children to 
church. In this he did not impose his own conscientious 
scruples upon others. 
: It goes without saying that he had no sympathy with or 
even toleration for the “higher criticism.” To George Adam 
_ Smith, two summers ago, when that distinguished scholar 
- was his guest up here at his Northfield convention, he said, 
“Smith, what is the use of talking to the people about two ° 
Isaiahs when not half of them have yet discovered that there 
- isso muchas one?” That was a shrewd and practical remark, 
and illustrated his point of view. “I believe in the old Bible 
as it is—from back to back,’—was a common saying of his. 
In the hours of his relaxation, and especially in his vaca- 
tion time, he was as jolly and genial as any man | ever knew. 











226 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


He had a strong vein of humor in his composition. This. 


appeared in his public speech, and often served him well; but 
in the quiet and retirement of home and in the social circle 
it came out strongly. Intensely fond of a good story—pro- 
vided it was clean and sweet—I have seen him laugh until 
the tears would run down his cheeks and his sides ache with 
pain; and he would have his favorite stories told again and 
again for his own and his friends’ delight. He was fond of 
play and sport, especially with young people, and as far as his 
rather unwieldy bulk would allow he would join in with them. 
He never wearied, and spared no expense to provide all his 


young people—the boys and girls of his schools—with all 


forms of healthy play and amusement. He even liked a prac- 
tical joke, provided it was not played at his expense. He 
drew the line there. 

I have already spoken of his tender-heartedness and un- 
bounded personal kindness to those in sorrow or need. He 
mourned and sorrowed like a father for his children when 
at different times two or three boys and some girl pupils in 
the schools up here were drowned while in swimming and 
killed in a carriage accident. All the passion and kindness 
of a strong and tender nature went out to the poor and for 
_ those for “whom nothing was provided.” For men, and es- 
pecially boys and girls, who had not what he thought “a fair 
chance” to get on in the world, he had a passionate longing— 
perhaps born of his own early experiences. It was this com- 


passion and his intense appreciation of the advantages of an — 


education which inspired and led to the foundation of the 
Northfield schools, which will forever remain his best and 
greatest visible monument. 

Mr. Moody was a man of the simplest habits and tastes. 
He spent money lavishly upon others and in his work, but 
little upon himself. He was not a lover of money, and only 
coveted it for the good it might be made to do in his work, 





eR aA Pee un ae 


BN Lg erie Es 





_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 227 
-. and, latterly, especially in connection with his schools. He : 
might easily and rightfully have been a rich man, but like 
_ Samuel and Paul, he “coveted no man’s silver or gold.” Of 
all the vast royalties that the hymn books have yielded, and 


of which he might rightly have possessed himself, I have every | 
“Treason to believe he has never touched a penny for his 


own personal use. On the subject of money for himself I 


have never heard him speak, nor would he allow the sub- 
ject discussed in his presence. 

His power over men and women was most remarkable. Not 
himself a man of culture or skilled in drawing room manners 
or etiquette, he drew and attached to himself men and women 
of the highest social position, of largest wealth, and of great 
intellectual ability and acquirements. Men like G. A. Smith 
and Henry Drummond were his greatest admirers. It is a 
well known fact that when Lady Stanley (the wife of the 
famous Dean of Westminster) was dying she sent for Mr. 
Moody to minister to her the comforts and hope of the gospel. _ 
In the old country he was ever the honored guest of the high- 
est in the land, and the same was true in his own country. 
The proverb concerning “a prophet” being “without honor 
in his own country” did not apply to him. 

I shall close this brief and hastily written sketch of “Dear 
Old Moody” by a reference to him as the world’s greatest 
evangelist, a place which he easily held. I think it cannot 
be controverted that he has influenced more people, turned 
more men and women from sin to God, set more Christians to 
work for their Master, and stirred the whole Christian church | 
more deeply, than any man in modern times. In saying this, 
I do not forget Wesley and Whitfield, Edwards or Finney. 
He founded no sect—that was ever farthest from his thought 
—for he lived and labored for the whole church and sought — 
the spiritual welfare of “all that in every place call upon the 
name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.” He 


228 ae DWIGHT L. MOODY 


was not a theologian, but easily the greatest preacher since 


the days of Luther. Had he been a theologian he would not 





_ have given himself up so entirely, as in his later years, to the — a 


“Keswick movement.” His gospel. was the simple one of 
I Cor. 15: 1-4. His method was not that of the logician, 
much less that of the rhetorician; but that of passionate appeal 


to the hearts and consciences of men. He was not a great 


reader of books, except the Bible, | may say hardly a reader 
of them at all. He was too impatient of long sentences and 
logical processes to read. He read men; and when he found 
a full man he would suck or pump him dry. An anecdote or 


incident was more useful to him than an argument. His 


ability to re-mint other people's gold was phenomenal. He 
would get an anecdote or illustration from an other man and 
use it with an aptness and power that the originator never 
dreamed of. A story or illustration that would halt in the 
telling by another man would fly from Moody’s lips like an 
eagle or a dove and burn from his telling like red hot iron, 
or go straight to the mark like a rifle shot. He would con- 
dense a long argument or statement gathered from his living 
library of men into an epigram that would make its pointed 
_ and solid way to the heart or the conscience of his hearers. 
He was equally ready to seize a sling and stone from the hand 
of David, an ox-goad from Shamgar, a lamp, pitcher and 
trumpet from Gideon, or a sword from the fallen Goliath, or 
_ the jaw bone of an ass, and able to use either or all of them, 
as occasion required or opportunity offered, with the skill of 
the original possessors of the weapons, and always with the 
impression left on his hearers that he was the original fash- 
ioner of them all. 

As a preacher he was vehement, passionate and pathetic by 
turns. He played upon his audiences as a skilled musician 


upon an organ. They would laugh and cry and tremble as” 
his words flowed on torrent like or rippled and murmured — 





oe THE MAN AND AIS MISSION Fae 229 


softly with the sound of deep emotion and tears. Gen. Swift, 
a worldly man and astute politician, who was converted during 
the great Boston meetings, said to me, that “the most un- 
_ comfortable seat he ever sat upon was an old wooden chair 
in the Tabernacle, during a sermon, every word of which went 
through me like a bayonet charge.” His sermons were not 
logical in their construction, not always consecutive in their 
arrangement of thought; but they were always charged with 
tremendous power and burst over and upon his audience like 
liddyte shells. The secret of his power was (humanly speak- 
ing) in his personality more than in his words or thoughts. 


~ Tt was the living preacher. Anyone who has heard Moody 





preach and then read the same sermon afterward must have 
been struck with what has seemed the strange lack in the 
printed page. In this he was more like Whitfield than any 
other great preacher of whom I know. I have often been 
asked what was Moody’s greatest sermon. It would 
be difficult to answer that question; but I think I may safely 
say that his two greatest sermons were those on the two 
texts, “God is love,’ and “Whatsoever a man soweth that 
shall he also reap.’ These two sermons illustrate the two 
sides of the message he had to sinners. 

Of his work it must be truly said that it was the greatest - 
of its kind ever wrought by man since the gospel began to 
be preached. It was good, with as little possible bad in it as 
can be imagined. It will last—not as an organized move- 
ment, as Methodism has lasted—but as good blood infused 
into the life and body of the whole Church of God, throughout 
the world. All Protestant bodies have felt the stimulus of it, 

~ and so has the Episcopal Church in both England and America. 
~ Eyen the Roman Catholic Church has felt the power of it. 
IT even go so far as to say that Mr. Moody is the real father 
of the Salvation Army, though the rearing and training of 
that religious prodigy were taken in hand by others and 


230 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


directed in a way that Mr. Moody would not have suggested. 

The question has been asked: ‘‘Who will be Moody’s suc- 
cessor?” The answer is: “He has not, and never will have 
a successor.” We might as well ask who was Moses’s suc- 
cessor, or Isaiah’s, or Jeremiah’s, or Paul’s, or Lincoln’s, or 
Grant’s. God’s great servants never have successors. “To 
every man his work.” Those who come after do not succeed 
either to the power or personality of those who have fallen 
and passed away. Even Elisha was not Elijah’s successor. 
God will raise up other men to do His work, but no man will 
be Moody’s successor. Mr. Moody’s son is understood to be 
his father’s chosen agent for the general management of the 
Northfield schools, but his successor he can never be. 

Peace to the ashes of this great and good man; rest to his 
great soul! We shall never on this earth see his like again. 

GrorcE F. PENTECOST. 


‘Northfield, Mass. 








IV. 
INGERSOLL AND MOODY—A CONTRAST 


BY BISHOP JOHN H. VINCENT 


[Copyright 1900 by George T. B. Davis.] 


KNEW Dwight L. Moody in 1857. It was at a Sunday- 

school convention in Clark Street Methodist Episcopal 
Church in Chicago that I first met him. He was then about 
twenty-one years of age—short, stout, bustling, ardent, shak- 
_ ing hands with everybody, smiling, happy, hearty—an em- 
bodiment of genuineness and good-will. I crossed the Con- 
tinent with him in 1871 to attend the California State Sunday- 
School Convention. He was interested in Sunday-school - 
work in those days, but it was chiefly on the evangelistic side. 
He tried to gather in the waifs and get them “converted.” 
-He was an incarnation of Sunday-school, Young Men’s Chris- 
tian Association and Evangelistic endeavor. I met him the 
next year in London, and with him spent several days over. 
at Booterstown, Dublin, with dear old Mr. Bewley, who was 
a sturdy Calvinist, a ‘““Plymouth Brother,” an earnest, hos- 
pitable, philanthropic soul, who was the pocket-book and 
promoter of the Dublin “Tract Society.” 

In Mr. Bewley’s fine mansion several of us spent three ve 
together in spiritual conversation, seasons of silent prayer and 
Bible study, and in projecting plans for Mr. Moody’s evan- 
gelistic work. It was on the occasion of that visit that I at- 
tended the most remarkable “Prayer and Bible Study Service” 
I ever knew. It was held in a hall in Dublin. The “Plymouth 
Brother” element dominated it, but it was a most spiritual 
and uplifting meeting. 

Since that Dublin meeting I have met Mr. Moody fre- 

231 





232 | DWIGHT L. MOODY. | 


quently in New York, Brooklyn, Chicago, Buffalo and else- 2 
where. Our lines of religious effort diverged, but for him 
TI have always had the most profound respect. He was aman — 
of great courage, of utmost fidelity, free from self-seeking 
and self-consciousness. He had unlimited faith in the power 
of an immanent and loving God. He had persistency, wisdom 
-and the art of winning men to the approval and support of his 
schemes. He was uneducated after the manner of the schools. 
But I once heard Dr. John Hall-of New York declare that 
“it was not fair to call Moody uneducated—for how can a 
man be called uneducated,” said the Doctor, “who has spent 
twenty-five years in the constant, careful, devout and practical 
study of that greatest English classic—the English Bible?” 
Mr. Moody was a master of the Word, and had rare knowledge 
of human nature, and knew from personal experience, pro- 
longed and profound, what the grace of God can work through 
_the acceptance of the truth of God by a trusting soul. The 
scholars “took” to Mr. Moody. Henry Drummond ‘and George - 
Adam Smith, able students, independent thinkers, bold and 
brave as they were competent, believed in Dwight L. Moody, 
consulted and communed with him, honored him in manifold 
ways, and gave him high place as a man of native mental 
force, profound insight into human nature and gifted with 
spiritual vision before the open Word. 

Moody was aggressive in his religious efforts. He never 
knew what it was to be afraid of mortal man. He dared to 
do things. that were unpopular. He usually made such things 
popular. His faith was unwavering. He was never troubled 
by doubts. He held the essentials of the “orthodox faith,”’ 
and he held them with his whole soul. His positiveness of 
conviction and expression paralyzed other men’s doubts. He 
was open to conviction. His earlier views were gradually 
and greatly modified by his contact with the broad men whom _ 
he was glad to enroll on his list of devoted friends. He was. 






THE MAN AND HIS MISSION — "253-7 


singularly free from dogmatism and had no faintest trace 


ES of bitterness in him. He believed that “‘God is love.’”? And 


he loved. He was free from all religious affectation—he was 
the very soul of guilelessness and naturalness. He worshiped 
God, the infinite Reality. And he was “real.” 

Robert G. Ingersoll and Dwight L. Moody died within the 
same year. They were nearly the same age. They lived 
through the most important part of the most wonderful cen- 
-. tury the world has ever known. They were fine specimens 
of physical manhood. They were both men of exceptional 
intellectual endowment. Both were gifted with high im- 
aginative power. Both were masters of the “pictorial” art. 
Both were remarkable platform orators—able to attract and 
to hold the “crowd.” Ingersoll was brilliantly rhetorical. 
Moody was direct, clear and simple. The former was a color- 
ist. The latter a sharp, clean-cut delineator. Both had power 
of caricature. But in Moody’s use of this gift there was rarely 
any scorn or sarcasm, 

In attempting a comparison of the two men I make no 
report concerning, or reflection upon, the great Agnostic’s 
moral character. I assume that he was an upright man, a 
true American citizen, a loyal, loving husband and father. 
Both men were married. Ingersoll’s wife, I am told, defends 
and exploits her husband’s doubts and denials. The wife of 
Mr. Moody is a sweet and consistent Christian woman, a 
faithful mother and a remarkable helper of her husband 
through all the years of his evangelistic labor. The Outlook 
for December 30, in an appreciative notice of Mr. Moody, 
says: “Mrs. Moody, who survives her husband, has always 
been an efficient and faithful help to him in all his under- 
takings, and he is quoted as saying, ‘When I have an especialiy 
hard case, I turn him over to my wife; she can bring a man 
to a decision for Christ where I cannot touch him,’’” What 


234 ~~ +DWIGHT L. MOODY 


a difference it makes with a man and his influence on which 
side his wife stands! 

Both Mr. Ingersoll and Mr. Moody were distinctively re- 
ligious teachers. Whatever Mr. Ingersoll may have con- 
tributed to political success, to national loyalty, or to Shakes- 
perian literature, his renown was derived from his lectures and — 
writings on religious subjects. He stands for religious Denial. 
He represents Agnosticism. He aimed to shake the faith of 
men, old and young, in the teachings of the Holy Scriptures. 
His influence at best was negative so far as all positive re- 
ligious conviction is concerned, and positive, with an awful 
emphasis, in its repudiation of all that the Christian heart 
holds sacred. He ridiculed the faith of the Christian church — 
and held up to scorn before great audiences of American 
people the sweet assurance of life eternal in Christ our risen 
Lord. And he died leaving no sign of change in this convic- 
tion. How unutterable the pathos of the end of such a-life, 
and of wife and children clinging to the dead body with no 
faith in the life to come—and apparently submissive to this 
awful necessity! 

Over against all this hear the dying Moody, his face radiant, - 
exclaiming, “Earth is receding! Heaven is opening! God 
is calling me!” 

Who will not cry out in the presence of this great contrast: 
“Let me die the death of the righteous and let my last end 
be like his!” 

Joun H. VINcEnT. 


Episcopal Residence, Topeka, Kansas. 











REV. GEORGE F. PENTECOST 


One of Mr 


H 
aoe 
oO 
pws) 
icv) 
£ 


s and Co-workers 


iend 


st Int 


s mo 


’ 


Moody 














BISHOP JOHN H. VINCENT 
Bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church, Founder of the Chautau 


qua 


Summer Assembly, etc, 





| 24 
THE SECRET OF MOODY’S POWER 
BY DR. P. S. HENSON 


[Copyright 1900 by George T. B. Davis.] 


WIGHT L. MOODY’S name will ever shine resplendent 

/ in the annals of the modern church. Let us seek to dis- 
cover, if we can, wherein his great strength lay that we may 
learn to follow him.as he followed Christ. 

There were certain things that distinguished him by nature. 
In the first place he was a man of magnificent physique. He~™ 
was built upon a broad pattern and endowed with a common 
sense as robust as his body. This nature gave him, or rather. , 
the God of nature, and you will notice, that when the Lord 
is minded to select a standard-bearer—a great leader to meet 
a great emergency—he commonly selects a man who by nature 
is a stalwart—a man like Moses, or Samuel, or Martin Luther, 
or Jonathan Edwards, or John Knox, or Dwight L. Moody, 
so that grace may have a good foundation to build on, some- 
thing sturdy-on which it may get a grip. That mag- 
nificent physique, now cold in death, that robust common sense 
that so marvelously distinguished our beloved brother, are 
~ not possessed by all the saints, nor are they to be had for the 
asking. But there were things that pre-eminently distin- 
guished him which may also distinguish us,—if we are only 
willing to pay the price. 

Six things I wish to mention especially, and these six things 
go far to explain the masterful sway exerted by this man while 
he lived, and which he will continue to exert through all the 
years of coming time. First of all, he was a converted man. : 
It is not for any one of us to judge another. God knoweth 
the heart and we can never tell just how many have heen truly 

bladder) 237 - 





238 Pisa DWIGHT: L (MOODY on 


converted until we shall all be a manifest before the judg- 


ment seat of Christ. But it is a great thing to be converted. 


I fear that too many who profess Bodies have only a form 
thereof. Even in the early church there were some of these. 
There were such men as Judas Iscariot and Simon Magus— 
names synonymous with hypocrisy and treason. There were 
professors of religion that were anything but Christians, and 
that at a time when it cost men something to be professed 
followers of Christ; and if then, much more now, when suc- 
cessive tidal waves of revival have swept into the church, not 
only much that has mightily enriched the. church but much 
of flotsam and jetsam, some of which we have reason to fear 
is even cluttering up the pulpit to the infinite detriment of the 
cause of Christianity. It is not for me to bring a railing 


accusation against ministers of the Gospel or to charge them — 


with hypocrisy and mercenary meanness of motive. I will 
not allow myself to believe that there are many deserving of 
such characterization though ever and anon some clerical mon- 
ster is publicly exposed, to the great delight of a mocking 
world who drag him about with ribald shouts like another 
Hector around the walls of Troy. But I should be sorry to 
suspect that there were many such. On the contrary, I am 
ready to believe that many of the men that stand in the pul- 
pit and preach the Gospel by rote, but not by heart, are sin- 
_ cere in their way, and are trying as best they can to do their 
duty; but never having had any personal experience of grace 
they come to think that nobody has had any more experience 


_than themselves. They drift into utter disbelief in the super- . 


natural and become mere formalists and rationalists and 
apostles of ethical culture instead of genuine evangelical re- 
ligion. | 

Dwight L. Moody was a converted man. That was one 
reason why he had such anchorage of faith. If aman has had 
genuine experience of the grace of God that bringeth salva- 











tion. the Pedountable champions. of infidelity may, pile objec- 
tions to Christianity mountain high, but the inner citadel of 


the soul where the spiritual fortresses are can never Po 


stormed. 
Dwight L. Moody had an indubitable experience. The world 


‘is tired of theorists—and even of so-called scientists. It wants ~ 


to hear somebody that knows something. What a privilege 
to have met Moses coming down from the mountain with. his 
face all radiant with the light of glory, or to have conversed 
with Peter, James and John, or Paul or anybody who had 


veg9. 





really seen Jesus!) Dwight L. Moody had seen God and knew ( 


God, and that made him such a power as a preacher. 


Not only this, he was a consecrated man. There are many - 


people that are converted that are not consecrated. You know 


that they are not. You can judge before the judgment that 


they are not consecrated from the way they use their bodies, 
from the way they use their time, from the way they hold back 


their money when the Lord’s cause is in sore distress for _ 


means to prosecute it, and from the way in which they pros- 
titute their talents. They may have a genius for business, 
for medicine, for law, for many another sphere of earthly 
action, but as to helping the Lord’s cause they are no better 


than dumb dogs. Moody was a consecrated man and yet he — 


was not a fanatic, nor a perfectionist. I never heard him lay 
claim to what some call “the higher life,” but I believe that 
Dwight L. Moody laid himself and all that he was on the 


altar of the Lord. Moody was only a clerk when he conse- : 


crated himself to Christ, but he was a climbing clerk, and I 
believe that with his sturdy common sense, his marvelous tact, 


his instinctive knowledge of men, his superb power of general- 


ship—if he had pursued a business career he would have 
amassed a magnificent fortune; but what there was of earthly 
promise he surrendered utterly. Right here in Chicago that 
surrender was made and he lived like a rat on what he could 


s 


ar 7! Vl OO We ae ee eee, Shao Pet ee 

i : = ees ere i 
¢ BT 
\ { ) 


ip DWIGHT L. MOODY, 





find, and would have starved had it not been for direct help 
from heaven. - 

I have heard criticisms of Moody. I have heard people 
| complain of his syntax, but I never yet met with any man 


~' that doubted his sincerity. He practiced what he preached, 


and people listened, not merely because of what he said,— 
though what he said was well worth hearing—but because 
of the man that said it. They believed in the man, and there- 
fore they listened as though an angel was speaking to them 
out of heaven. 

He was not only converted, not only consecrated, but con- — 


- centrated! I believe that most of the failures in life are due 


to downright dissipation. If Christians fail at all—as. most 
Christians do—they do not fail for lack of opportunities. 
Neyer were so many doors open as to-day, and any man that 
wants to find a field of labor can find it anywhere. Nor dc 
they fail for lack of ability. There are very few men but 
what have in themselves possibilities of power that would 
enable them to shake the entire church of God and the world 
outside if the power were only converged to a point. There is 
a mighty difference in powder. Let the grains of powder be 
loosely laid out and touched with fire,—there is only a flash 
and a harmless puff of smoke; but let that same powder be 
rammed down the throat of a gun, and its explosive force dis- 
charged in a single line, and you have a winged thunderbolt. . 
The ordinary Christian is a puff of smoke. Dwight L. Moody 
“was a thunderbolt. He was a man of one idea,—call it 
narrowness, if you please—but I think he was the broadest 
man that I have ever known. He had an ideal, and that ideal 
was to glorify God in the salvation of the world. Yonder 
is a man that is whittling sticks, and weighing out mint and 
anise and cummin, and toying with all the technicalities of 
the “ologies,’—and he imagines himself broad! But here 
is a man that covered the world with his glorious evangelism, 







Jae Nt hes HAS NES Re aii dian : ete 
ss THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 24t 
_ whose voice sounded out to the ends of the earth, who had 
no less an object than the conquest of all the kingdoms of 
the earth for Christ. If that is not broad—in the Lord’s name — 
what is? 
-He was a converted man, a consecrated man, and a con- . 
centrated man. | 
He was a man full of faith. He believed in the personality 
of God—and that is a great matter in these times when you 
hear so much about nature, the powers of nature, and the 
laws of nature, that the God of nature is receding to the van- 
ishing point. “He that cometh unto God must believe that 
he is and that he is the rewarder of those that diligently seek 
him.” Dwight L. Moody believed in God. The trend of | 
cur time is in the direction of a belief that this universe is a 
great organism, grinding out results in an automatic way. 
Dwight L. Moody believed in no such automatic organism, — 
but that God is over all and that he ruleth all things after 
the counsels of his will, and that he could go to God as a 
child to his father and get what he wanted if it were a good | 
thing to have. He had not only faith in the personality of 
God; but in the Word of God. A great many people pro- 
fessing to be Christians have come to think lightly of this 
old Book, as an instrumentality for this world’s conversion. 
They regard it as an interesting collection of Jewish folk- 
lore and that may still be studied with profit, but their 
thought is that we want modern weapons to meet modern 
conditions. But Dwight L. Moody believed in the old Book. © 
He believed there is enough in it to serve all purposes of a 
pulpit text-book. Dickens and Thackeray and Kipling were 
never substituted for it in his ministry... Nature and art and 
history and literature might help to illustrate his texts, but. 
he always found his text in The Book. This was the weapon 
on which he relied, and he never got so far away from it 
that he could not clutch it. He never had time to do such 


4 





242 DWIGHT L. MOODY 





work as is so much delighted in by the higher critics. Iam “A 


saying nothing against the men that occupy themselves with 
such critical investigations. I am only saying that Dwight 
L. Moody never felt that he had time for that sort of thing. 
The battle was upon him, he was in the thick of it. And what 


concerned him was, not so much how the sword was made, — 


as how to handle it, and he handled it right royally and thrust 
and parried with such masterly skill that the slain of the Lord 
-were many and the sound of his victories rang round the 
world and up to the gates of heaven. 

Oh if I could only get the ear of the poor, despairing 


preachers that are pining for congregations to fill their empty _ 


houses! I would like to tell them over Moody’s coffin how 
that great man did it. Moody stuck to the Bible, and there- 
fore the people stuck to him. His home was right here in 
Chicago, and yet he never came to Chicago when he could 
“finda place big enough to preach in. He concerned himself 


simply with the Bible, and the hungry multitudes crowded to. 


hear him. There are scores of ministers that concern them- 


selves with everything under heaven except the Bible—and_ 


as a consequence they preach to a beggarly amount of empty 
pews, and the people are none the worse off for staying away. 
Moody was not only full of faith but full of works! A man 
may be full of faith and yet it may be a preposterous faith 
that savors only of presumption. Moody had faith, but he 
believed in the vigorous use of means—he believed in the 
printing press, and he used that mighty lever and used it 
for God’s glory; he believed in money, and with marvelous 
tact he gathered it in for the founding and fostering of great 
Christian enterprises; he believed in education and was not 
the apostle of ignorance as has been absurdly represented, 
and his dying solicitude was for his great schools in North- 
field and Chicago. He believed in the use of food if a man 


was hungry—of medicine if he was sick, He believed in sum- 


ae 


— ee ee ee 


= ae 


SE ae Oy ee ee ES ie eRe 


ee 












Veo THE MAN AND | HIS. MISSION 6 243 


“Moning a surgeon to set a broken bone, or to tie up a severed | 


artery. He believed that God had not only provided food 
for man’s sustenance, but remedial agents for the curing of 


_ diseased conditions, and he did not hesitate in either case to 
_ employ God’s gifts. Aye, aye, says the incorrigible and un- 


kind fanatic, but consider that Moody resorted to drugs and 


the doctors, and he is dead! Well, my dear brother, I have — 
only to say that you will be dead too some day even though % 
_ you trust in the Lord and abuse the doctors. We shall all 


be dead some time, but as to when is the best time to go 
God only knows. But the Lord expects us in the treatment 


of our bodies to use our common sense, and the means which | 
he has graciously provided for their sustenance in times of — 


health and their recovery from disease. Moody believed in 
God, but he believed in the use of means such as have been 
blessed of God for accomplishing good results. 

And, finally, he was a man full of the Holy Ghost. He did 
not, indeed, dwell so incessantly upon the Spirit’s work as 


the manner of some is, and this perhaps because he pro- 


- 


foundly realized, as some do not, that the work of the Spirit 
is not to call attention to himself but to take of the things 
of Jesus and show them unto us. And that brings to mind 
a beautiful thing that Meyer tells, of a dear good woman in 


his congregation whose saddened countenance he one day 


noticed and was led by noticing it to inquire what was her 
trouble. She said she had long been longing for the fullness 
of the Spirit. She said that she had resolved to devote the 


very next day to prayer and fasting for filling of the Spirit, 


and she wanted him to join with her in prayer that the coveted 
blessing might be hers. He promised. When next he saw 


her he inquired as to.the result. “Well,” she said, “pastor, ° 
-T have been disappointed. I did not get what I desired.” 
“But,” said Meyer, “how does Christ seem to your” “O, 


“never so precious.” ‘Well, then,” said Meyer, “you have 


244 DWIGHT L. MOODY 
got the blessing.” And Moody undoubtedly had the fullness 
of the Spirit. Beyond any man I think I ever knew he had 


the faculty of taking of the things of Jesus and showing them — 


unto us even as the Spirit had first shown them unto him. He 
was in touch with the very throne of God, and like a live 
wire all who came in touch with him felt the thrill of that 
power. 
_ Thousands of Liliputian critics with their little stepladders 
were always trying to climb up to his shoulders to look into 
_ his eyes to discover, if they could, wherein his great strength 
lay. The secret of his power is not far to seek. It lay not 
in his mental make-up, nor in his methods, nor his manner, 


nor his matter, but in the fact that he had power with God, - 


and therefore he swayed so imperial a scepter over man. He 
stood so solid on his feet before the world because he had 





_bowed so low on his knees before God. While he lived, with. 


trumpet tongue he proclaimed the glorious gospel of the 


blessed God, and proved as no man has done in this age of 
doubt that the old gospel, the ever lasting gospel, is still the 
power of God unto salvation. We call him dead—but though 
dead he yet speaketh—and though he rests from his labors, 
his works follow him. 

PoINDEXTER S. Henson, 
First Baptist Church, Chicago. 


= . 


- Ec . : s : 
Fg Ce he en a ee ee Re a Pe oot ees 


<@ 


Ae 
ee eee 





AT; 


A MAN WITH A MESSAGE 
BY DR. FRANK CRANE 


[Copyright 19C0 by George T. B. Davis.] 


/ 


HERE was once upon a time a man hoeing potatoes. His 
back hurt because he had to bend over, his hands were. 

sore from friction with the hoe handle, and his clothes were wet 
with sweat, for the sun beat down hot upon him. Two or 
three well-dressed gentlemen sat upon the fence and watched 
him work. They did not altogether like the way he did its 


They suggested, one to another, that the laborer was not 


properly clothed, that he thrust his hoe into the earth with 
a sort of a northeast motion, whereas he should have thrust 
it in a south-by-southwest direction ; and, besides, he gath- 
ered the potatoes together into piles as he went along, instead 
of waiting until he got to the end of the row and then gather- 
ing them all into one big pile. So they smoked cigarettes and 
agreed that the man with the hoe was doing a very poor job. 
Meanwhile the latter went on getting out potatoes the best 
he could. ) 

Dwight L. Moody was a man who knew what he wanted 
to do and did it. He was concerned about results, not methods. ' 
He wanted to induce men to become Christians, to get con- 
verted and to take up the religious life. At this he went in 
the most direct way. He did not do anything else. All the 
force of his nature was leveled at this object. He had no 
time for theological speculation, for discussing current events, 
for matters of church government and the like. So he hoed 
away at his potatoes. Some clergymen did not like his style. 
Others besides clergymen objected to his faulty grammar. 

245 


Neo a ee Oe 
ria Sem 


| 246 - DWIGHT L. MOODY 


They criticised this and that. But the workman pursued his _ 


task until the very quantity of the results made the critics 


climb down off the fence. The great public compared the — 


laborer and the critics and decided that criticism was very 
interesting, but it didn’t produce any potatoes. 

Then the critics went away and climbed on another fence 
where they could watch other laborers and berate them because 
they did not do as Moody had done. 

Mr. Moody was a man who did things. He was a mighty 
Doer. He was no Thinker, nor Speaker, nor Logic Monger, 
_nor Dreamer. He did not bother his head about theology; 
_ he just took what theologic ideas the people had on hand, as 

Jesus did, and went to work to get men to live up to them. 
He did not “orate nor elocute;” he was simply a great soul 
intense with a message to other souls; he spoke his message 
with clearness and with feeling; so the people believed in 
him and said: “We will go with you to your God.” 

His favorite instrument of speech was the Story; as was 
the case also with His Master. He did not push the mind; 
he illuminated the heart. He was shrewd enough to see that 
not one man in a thousand ever changed his opinion because 
of reason or logic, but that what alters all men’s notions 
about things is the fact that they come to occupy another 
point of view. With his naive stories he slipped around 
behind the stubborn intellect, flanked the line of doubts and 
occupied the heart. He was a great general. When you 


capture a man’s heart, his intellect comes in next day and 
surrenders. 





He knew what was essential and what was non-essential. 


When a man knows that he may be great; if he does not 
know that, he can not be great. The essential thing is to 
surrender the will to the highest ideal. The man who does 
that is saved; the man who will not do it is lost. All other 
matters are entourage. 


a 










‘THE MAN AND ‘HIS MISSION’ 247 
FCbusedtianily. one aad of theolosic cine is quite as 
good as another. He took what the churches happened to 
have. He was orthodox because it is a waste of time and 


“energy to be anything else, in the case of a man who is try- | 
‘ing to save people from their sins. He quietly assumed the 


_ doctrine of God, of special providence, of answered prayer, 


; of conversion, of heaven as a big, bright city, of hell asa | ae 
_ chamber of horrors, of the church as the place where a good | 
man ought to belong. What’s the good of arguing about 


: these things? Most folks believe them, and for them argu- 


) 
i 


ment only unsettles; some do not believe, and argument only 


renders them more settled in their unbelief. The main thing 


is: Are you going to give yourself up to what you know to 
be right or not? All debate about other questions than this 


| " 





is a frittering away of time for a man like Moody. ih 


He assumed everything. Then he talked to you in his) | 


straightforward, easy way, and the love of God beamed _ 
through his talk, and his quaint stories touched your senti- 
ment, and before long you had forgotten your old trivial 
debate as fully as he had, you found yourself squarely on 
Moody’s view-point. 

Mr. Moody was not a priest nor a prophet. He did not 
smell of incense. He had no great unfolding thought, as 


a layman. He was an intense executive. His whole aim was 
to arouse conscience to act. Throwing his:entire force into 
this one channel, he was fortunate enough to gain public favor. 

Many an earnest, effective man has worked all. his life faith- 
fully, unnoticed and obscure. Moody could have done so. 

But popularity caught him and tossed him high. This was 
a sore temptation, but he was true. He stuck to his last. He 
carried with him to the end of life the same sweet simplicity, 


the same calm common-sense, the same wholesome sanity 


A chal 


had Bushnell and Robertson and James Martineau. He was _ 


here who are road diougt to respect Paes ae rm 
him honor. 








VIL 


THE GREATEST MAN OF THE CENTURY 


BY PRESIDENT RUSSELL H. CONWELL 


ET us look upon the life of Mr. Moody, and notice the 

lessons the world will naturally draw from it. The first - 

one is in the encouraging fact that an ignorant man, advanced 

in years, may secure an education to fit him for public life 

if he will. You know the history of Mr. Moody. You know > 
that he did not learn much in school, and that he went into 


_ business unfitted for it. He was an ignorant | Boy, and until 


twenty-three years of age could not use ordinary good gram- — 
mar. Yet after that he became one of the skiiled scholars 


‘of the world, both through the use of books ait home and 


studying as he traveled, carrying books in his pocket. That 


lesson the world ought to heed. Grown men and women 
who are in ignorance, and whose lives might be so much 
more useful if they only had the higher forms of education, 
should heed the encouraging thought, that no matter how 
advanced in years you may be, you may be much wiser Af you 
will. 

_ Mr. Moody.was an ignorant boy. Theworld has not ite 
him.among its scholars, because he graduated from no school, 


matriculated i in no college,.and attended no university. Yet 


wise men have sat at Mr. Moody’s feet. The, graduates of 


ihe greatest universities of England and Germany came and 

asked him to teach them. Audiences gathered, containing 

the best of the graduates of the colleges from every part of 

the country, and listened with rapt attention to his words. 

He was so wise that they could listen to him with great profit. 
249 


he nvOAL Cee at ita FD Mois NAY ae a eg een ae seat Sr. aR en 
i} bt “ ‘ & Pex VB Peo ee Vey i URE ar 
ReMi ; 





250, | SS DOIGHT OL. MOODY 


Oh, that ie young people of the United States cHeR get 
that lesson into their minds! You may be a poor working 
boy, as he was; you may be a fatherless boy, as he was; you | 
may be astray, and wandering and wicked, as was he, and yet _ 
you may have all the wisdom that books can furnish neces- 
sary to make you a very useful and helpful man. 

The next lesson that I draw from his history that is helpful 
to me is that any man can be a Christian. Men can now, as 
they have done in the years past, be great evangelists if they — 
will. The death of Mr. Moody has put the seal upon the | 
thought that even in this advanced age of the world the Gos- _ 
pel has lost none of its power. Its simplicity is just as effect- 
ive, and its declaration just as influential, as it ever ‘was in — 
the history of the world. The time for another Wesley is 
now. The time for a Whitfield is now. The time for a 
Luther is now. The time for a Moody is now. The day has 
not gone by, the world has not grown so wicked, so critical, 
or so learned, that the earnest, sincere evangelist cannot find 

plenty of work to do. 3 

Then there is that other thought—comforting to the young 
men who are arising in the ministry—that a man can still _ 
be great in the pulpit. We have thought that the pulpit is 
now claimed by a class of people who-are not very well edu- 
cated. People have often said: “Young men are going 
into the ministry because they cannot do anything else;” 
and young men with ambition and force have gone into 
banking and law and business and railroading and medicine, 
because they have said there is no opportunity for a man to 
develop into greatness of life and character and influence in 
the pulpit. Yet in the last century there has not been a 
greater man before the world than Mr. Moody. No greater 
has arisen in all the century than he. All the civilized world 
respects him and bows with reverence at his grave. A great 
man can yet find ample scope in the pulpit. The pulpits of 





Fen ae 


— 


enter been 


the future will contain great men when they learn, as he did, C 


to lean on God and preach His truths sincerely. You will 


remember, also, that Mr. Moody did not depend entirely — 
_ upon his preaching. I read in the “Homiletic Review” yes- 

terday the declaration of a minister of the Gospel that the — 
_ world was going to be saved “entirely by preaching,’ and 


that all the accessories of music, of entertainments, of socials; 


and all that, were of no use; that the world was going to be 
saved by the preaching of the Gospel from the pulpit in the 
fe church. : 
Mr. Moody’s life teaches us the great value of accessories. _ 
_ From the first he taught the great value of accessories. From 


_ the very first of his preaching he secured attractive music to 


_ go with his preaching. The very first music he had was an _ 


old broken down violinist who came in and led the street 
urchins in praise. Mr. Moody all his life used accessories 


greatly. When he came here to hold meetings in the church 


he sent ahead and had this city canvassed; advertising of all 


kinds was done systematically. In a thorough business way 
he laid out the field, defining the whole matter carefully, get- 


ting the people all ready to expect something when he did 


come, and the crowds flocked here when he appeared. Mr. 


Sankey was as influential in the beginning of Mr. Moody’s 


history as was Mr. Moody himself. Many of you who turned 


to the Lord at their meetings did so because of Mr. Sankey’s 
singing. Mr. Moody was one of those men who knew he 
could not do all the work alone, and he recognized the fact 


4 that God had a great many other ways of preaching the Gos- 


pel, and he determined to use them. Christ was much more 
than a preacher. Mr. Moody established the institutions at 
Northfield for the purpose of preaching the Gospel in a great 
variety of ways. He did not rely entirely on preaching the 


Gospel by word of mouth, but used the great choruses with 


the orchestral music which were assembled at his meetings. 


ote DAE MAN AND) HIS MISSION (\ % act 


i 


Cee, | $74, teh ae hai ns, So fala Som f 


Nealon Miele te cu aye) 
bee) ss DWIGHT L. MOODY | | 


He found a great variety of methods to attract people’s atten 
tion, and to impress upon their feelings the Gospel that he ~ 
was preaching. Oh, to impress upon the young men in the 
ministry that they cannot carry on:the Lord’s work alone! 
They must use every other means, every agency of every kind 
which will reverently attract men and women into association 
_ with His Gospel. ys 

Then another lesson we learn from Mr. Moody is that | 
friendship is better than criticism. True friendship which 
sees the good in a man, and which is ever ready to minimize 
the evil, is far better for God’s work than criticism. Such 
has been Mr. Moody’s relation to the Bible. Mr. Moody, 
with a broad common sense, has looked upon the Bible as 
having been written for common men, to be read by common 
men. He has interpreted the Bible by the manifest mean- 
ing that was found on its surface, because that is the true 
meaning. The Bible was not written for philosophers to dig 
in; it was written for the wayfaring man, and Mr. Moody 
had the good sense to hold to that. To him the Bible has 
always been the same sacred book, and his death has empha- 
sized that lesson to such a degree that I believe in his death, Ki, 
more than invhis life, he is going to bring the Bible back to 
the esteem and love of the common people. 

I heard of a man in Kentucky who lived in the Mammoth. 
Cave’ region, where there are large openings under ground.. 
Not far from the Mammoth Cave lived a prosperous farmer, 
across whose fields ran a beautiful stream. It rippled and_ 
sang. It was inexhaustible. It furnished him with water for 
the irrigation of the farm and the running of the mill. One 
day it occurred to him that he would like to have water a4 
little nearer his house. Although he could have led it across 
the field from the rippling brook so beautiful and so helpful, 
yet he had a strong curiosity to see what kind of water there 
could be found i in the earth. So he concluded he would dig 

















DR. P. S. HENSON 
Pastor First Baptist Church, Chicago. 


‘SSVI ‘CTSHIHH.LYON WATEO.LIGAV AHL dO AOlda.LNI 





a) we ty 
TD Ua 
#: 


a: 








THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 258 


a well. He would not take the water which had been filtered 
in God’s sunshine. He would have a well of his own. So he 
went out and dug a well. Down he went, blasting, blasting, 
_and blasting down, down, down, as some of these critics go 
through this Bible, blasting down, down, down. At last an 
overcharge of dynamite blew the bottom out of the well. A 
cave was underneath, and the water ran out the other way. 
The most unfortunate thing about it was that a little while 
after the water from the brook began to trickle along the 
rock through the ground into this well which he had dug. 
_ Finally the brook disappeared, and he was compelled to move 
away from the farm. The farm is going to ruin because he 
had dug a well too deep, and let all the water that flashed on 
the surface flow into a bottomless hole. There are so many 
critics of the Bible who want to dig down by charges of dyna- 
mite who do not realize that this Bible was written for the 
people, and they who dig too far below will lose the blessings 
they now enjoy. It is as free as the mountain stream; it is as 
bright as the fountain that flows in the valley, and it is free 
to all, and gives fertilization everywhere, unless a man dig 
a critical well, a personal well, and go down and blast the 
bottom out of it. 

Now Mr. Moody was one of those men who appreciated 
what God gave him—he-took it for what it was worth, and 
he used it for what it was intended. And his mill grinds on, 
and always will grind on; on the surface, but not superficially, 
and in the place where God has intended it to be. God has 
not written a superficial book.- I mean that it is a book that 
is as deep as the canyons of the mountains, and as high as 
the highest peaks, and as grand as the morning. But it is 
for every person to read for himself and in his own place. Do 
not allow yourselves to be turned by great destructive, tunnel- 
boring critics, but read the Bible for yourselves, is the great 
lesson that comes from Mr. Moody’s life. He studied the 


* 


256 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Bible himself thoroughly, and had it in his heart and mind, 
and by its rivers of power wrought out his mighty work. 
Another lesson from his life to me is that “the old doctrines 
are not dead.” We hear a great deal about the passing of the 
old theology, and hear that the “old-fashioned Gospel” has 
gone by; that the old creeds are of no further use, and that 
we need new ideas and new thoughts and a new Bible and a 
new Christ and a new God. But we are taught by the life 
of this wonderful man that these old doctrines remain as 
strong, yea, stronger than the everlasting hills. Christ is 
Christ, and God is God, and the word of God is true, and the 
Saviour of the world is still the Saviour of the world. It needs 
but his life and death to re-establish in the heart of the thous- 
ands who love him the grand old doctrine that this world is a 
lost world, and there is no salvation but through Jesus Christ. 
That old doctrine is so emphasized by his death that it puts 
back upon the pulpit platform the preaching of the old Gos- 
pel. Perhaps the forms and methods are new, that it may be 
wholly interesting, but it is the same old Gospel, the same old 
fountain, the same old river, the same old rolling ocean, go- 
ing on and on. Grand old Bible! Sublime old doctrines! 
Another lesson, and the last I will mention, is that we all 
really desire to die the death of the righteous. I saw some 
men playing cards on the train going from Grand Rapids 
to Big Rapids last Thursday night. One of the men was 
very profane, so profane that I got up and moved across the 
car. At a place called Howard City we suddenly felt the 
closing of the brakes and the sharp whistle, the cracking of 
the brake and the running of the train off the track. Those 
four men leaped up; and that man who had been swearing 
was as white as a gravestone. Let me die the death of the 
righteous. If at any time the train runs off the track and I 
am to die, then I want to die with the consciousness Mr. 
Moody had, that I have been true to. God’s words and true 









ait a ae noe Se ches ea a eae ; 

_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 257 
to His Son, and die the death of the righteous. Compare the 
death of the richest man in this land; compare the death of 
the greatest politician on earth; compare the death of any 
king or queen with the magnificent death of Mr. Moody, and 
who is there, with any trace of common sense remaining in 
his possession, who would not rather choose the death of 
Mr. Moody. We need to learn this great lesson. We know 
that life must go; we all know that; I know it and you know 
it, that death must come, that it will come is absolutely sure, 
and why not be ready to die the death of the righteous when 
that commandment comes. Surely you would rather be 
righteous and have Christ for your Saviour than to have any 
reputation or wealth or any sort of talent without Him. 

Mr. Moody’s death emphasizes the importance of being 
ready to die whenever the commandment comes; to have 
one’s heart free from every sin; to have the consciousness of 
having served God fully and completely; to have the idea of 
His forgiveness deeply planted in the soul, and the feeling of 
His presence in the heart. Brethren, brethren, whatever you 
hear about Mr. Moody, or read about him, keep this lesson 
I bring to you this morning always before you, that they who 
love much also suffer much. He had many persecutors, and 
has many critics and many enemies now. Even since his 
death have enemies arisen to assail and criticise. So it is ever. 
Every one who tries to serve God has enemies and critics and 
people who misunderstand him. © 
RussELL H. ConweELt. 


The Temple College, Philadelphia. 


VIII. 


THE LIKENESS OF PAUL AND MOODY 
BY PRESIDENT F. W. GUNSAULUS 


A ae clearly do we see the likeness of Paul and Moody 

as champions of their faith, as we study the account of 
Paul’s conversion and the life of Moody, not forgetful of dif- 
ferences in nature, culture and environment. We shall be able 
to perceive that the power of one has its source in an experi- 
ence such as stood behind the achievement of the other. Such 
men show us that the Christian ministry has its power and 
hope of making this a better world and otherwise serving 
God and man, in helping toward an erect manhood,—a man- 
hood which is erect because it has first confessed the Lord- 
ship of Jesus Christ and then has been uplifted and inspired 
_by a vision of Jesus Christ as the revelation of God and the 
revelation of man. 

In the presence of this career, it is useless to deny that we 
have often been weak, because we have failed to obtain the 
primary and fundamental energies indispensable for success 
in our work. 

Much of our effort at preaching is weak and unhelpful,—it 
cannot even be said to stir with promise of life,—because 
Saul, before or as he stood upon the verge of becoming Paul, 
has never felt his lips moving with even the questioning cry: 
“Who art Thou, Lord?” The emphasis of Saul’s nature is on 
the word “Lord’’—he is surer of his belief than he is of his 
doubt: “Who art Thou?” Never was a Saul, however bril- 
liant and honest in his cruel devotion, lifted upon his 
feet and reconstituted into Bee the princely preacher, 

2 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 259 


nor was a Moody recreated an evangelist, if he missed the 
experience of this confession forming itself at the centers of 
his thought and feeling, and uttering itself resistlessly upon 
his lips by divine logic and by impulse inevitable,—the Lord- 
ship of Jesus Christ. “Who art Thou?” Let him be uncer- 
tain as to a thousand other points,—yea, let him be only an ~ 
inquirer as to all other belongings and qualities of Jesus of 
Galilee; but he must tingle in every drop of his blood with 
the omnipotent conviction that lies in that word, “Lord.” The 
true minister is the true minstrel of the human soul,—the - 
words minstrel and minister have acommon root. He organ- 
izes the vagrant and apparently opposing sounds, the devious 
wafts of melody and the split and recalcitrant currents of tone 
about a common and regnant center. That center is the all- 
supreme and embracing theme. It alone co-ordinates and 
compels each aimless shiver of a chord and each stubbornly. 
isolating tonic energy into harmony. Its power is the power 
of music, hushing discord by completing it or by rescuing it 
into concord; its energy is the energy of harmony coercing 
to order, not by mechanical strength, but by inherent beauty 
and truth; expanding half-tones or allaying them to wedded 
loveliness of utterance by the might, not of external volume 
or intensity, but by internal and perfect sweetness. Such is 
Jesus, and such is His Lordship,—the master-soul and the 
master-theme, first, of the spirit and heart of the preacher, 
and then, the all-mastering and transforming master-soul and 
master-theme in the world of men. The human heart, mind, 
life, go searching for a Lord,—yea, for the Lord,—not for an 
abstract philosophy, not for a radiant ideal, not even for a 
noble memory or for a deathless hope; but for all of these it 
cries, and it expects these, in its living Lord, divine and 
human, near enough to touch, lofty enough to command. 
It throngs our churches, until it is sure the preacher has not 
heard or seen Him,—and then it sadly stays away. It be- 


S608" DWIGHT L. MOODY 


sieges the altars of a faith which has awakened its pristine and - 
fundamental desires, and, never as to-day, it hangs about, 
lingering yet in hope, asking for a Sovereign, a living Sover- 
eign, whom no death may vanquish or change; and the heart 
of humanity will never give up the church and the preacher, 
until, either by its fears or by the facts, it is compelled to say: 
“They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they 
have laid Him.” 

Mr. Moody, like Paul, knew that the race’s opposition to 
Jesus Christ Himself, whatever may be the race’s present an- 
tagonism to our cheap sensationalism and to our cold cere- 
monialism, is marshalled behind a wall as thin as was that 
which divided Saul, the persecutor, with hands of blood, from — 
Jesus his Lord, with hands of blessing. Nothing else will 
satisfy the demands of man which are feeling through, except 
the Lordly Christ before whose majesty of moral lovableness 
the wall is trembling down. Moody had experienced all this, 
—every true preacher can get it in no other way; and his ex- 
perience of it makes his appeal the utterance of a personal 
affair, warm as his blood, and as full of reality as he himself. 
Moody could not unwind the faultless argument for Christ’s 
kingly nature and quality which came into Saul’s mind at 
that unique and sudden moment, though he had no doubt it 
was as straight and strong as a cable between earth and 
heaven. It carried him into the conviction that the reality he 
confronted commanded him so completely, flung over him 
the spell of such an undeniable sovereignty, that, however 
much he might have to say: “Who art Thou?” he must also 
say: “Who art Thou, Lord?” Here was what no teacher of 
earth could teach him. No theological seminary can ever im- 
part that conviction. Men still call Jesus Lord, only by the 
might of the Holy Spirit within them. Moody, like Saul of 
Tarsus, was convinced by a logic swift as lightning; premises 
and conclusions followed one another by the speed of God 








Res cee THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 261 
rushing in upon him. Here began his deep and thorough | 
- preparation for the ministry. It began in that event, not in 
the process of reasoning, not in the advent of theory,—in that 
event came and remained his theological position. It placed 
him. He did not place it. Christ had taken him, as the sov- 
ereign harmony takes the wandering tone. He was appre- 
hended, as Paul said, that he might apprehend. So com- 
pletely had Christ won him that he said “Lord” with swift 
inevitableness. Every great truth comes in this way. Its way 
of coming fixes it in the life-tissue. He never would have to 
defend the proposition that Jesus is Lord, after that. The 
fact is that Christ had divinely Lorded it over him, by saving 
‘him from his sins. Do we defend that proposition? Do we 
doubt that men can or will believe in the Lordship of Christ? 
Do we spin our thread of logic and argument to convince, at 
length? Brothers, it is so only because Paul’s experience is 
~ not our experience. No human preacher ever convinced a 
man that Jesus is Lord; only Jesus Himself can do that. 
‘Christ is his own argument for Himself;—it is too great for 
you and me to manipulate. No human preacher ever had 
evangelic power who did not know that Christ is Lord by the 
indubitable fact that He actually has taken his soul by moral 
majesty and so rules at the center of his life that while he 
questions: “Who art Thou?” as to a thousand other things, 
he says in deepest, unconscious confession, “Who art Thou, 
Lord?” 

Ah, do you say, what then is the business of the church, if 
the church is not to compel men to acknowledge the power 
and right of Jesus to rule men, even at'the point of the sword, 
or at the more stinging point of a condemnation as a heretic? 
Moody would answer: “Hear ye Him, as He says: ‘Peter, 
put up thy sword into its sheath;’ let us leave My true king- 
liness to rule from its own throne.” He seems to say: “If 
moral Lordship does not command, it is neither moral or 


\hbe DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Lordly. Let me have My cross, instead of the legions who 
might protect Me. Let men see Me die and live there, and 
there will I draw all men unto Me.” This was his own trust in 
His Spiritual royalty. So did His divinity risk itself. So let 
the church and pulpit risk Him. | 

Now, it is this Lord before whose moral grandeur and right 
to reign over him, Saul has fallen upon the earth,—this it is 
who says: “Rise, stand upon thy feet.” It seems strange at 
first that it is the same power,—Jesus. But Jesus could not 
be the soul’s true Christ if it had been otherwise. His Lord 
had other uses for Saul; now that he had confessed Jesus’ 
Lordship, than to leave him there flat and uneffective upon 
this disordered and needy planet. It is of first importance to 
note that only the power which commands our admiration 
can lift us up. “We live by admiration.” We are made erect 
and manly by adoration. Before a merely beautiful character, 
a profound moralist, a true philosopher, a heroic martyr, we 
do not fall to earth in obedience, neither do we rise to our 
full height at his command. Divine enough must be that 
power which endows the minister of men,—divine enough to 
make our unhelped humanity lie full length upon the com- 
mon earth which is our fate and home without that power, 
and yet divine enough that power must be, on the other side, 
to lift man into the image of God and place him perma- 
nently on his feet before the problem of life. Moody knew 
that a man can stand on his feet only when he is lifted up by 
command of Christ. 

Secondly, the moment Saul is swept into the march of 
God’s energies by the sublime and moral energy of Christ, 
the very power whom Saul calls Lord must lift him up for 
other holy ministry. God’s economics demand this of God’s 
power; it must put the worshipper on his feet. 

Great, indeed, have been the services unto man and God 
_ wrought by men prone upon earth in adoration and prayer. 





Nie 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 263 


Moody knew how to pray in deepest humility. There, truly, 
is found the right to rise and to labor, and there alone is borne a 
the power to hear the voice saying: “Stand upon thy feet.” 
Angels bow when most angelic, men refuse to bow when 
least they are men. Supreme are some of the cables to which 
captains and law-givers, saints and prophets, psalmists and 
reformers have hitched their otherwise motionless trains of 
hope when these souls were prostrate before the Divine 
Glory. But the minister of Christ only begins to be powerful 
there. Matched with the truths which we find there, side by 
side in importance with the energies there felt and adopted, 
the completing and enriching powers for those which we 
know there, are the other sovereign inspirations and forces 
that promise and guarantee the vaster achievements of right- 
eousness on earth, and the deeper joy of heaven; and these 
are for man only when a man honors his own conscience and 
hope, and lifts his head as God’s son above the earth and into 
the free air of heaven. 

Christ—the power of God in humanity before whose spir- 
itual sovereignty every Saul must bow,—He alone has the 
voice, the speech, the right to say: “Rise, stand upon thy 
feet.” The hope for an erect, self-respectful, lofty-souled 
ministry lies in what Jesus is and does for humanity. It is our 
business to get Him to humanity. He alone can fairly say to 
Saul:. “Rise, stand upon thy feet; for I have appeared unto 
thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister.” 

Where was there a more erect man than Moody? His, like 
Paul’s age, has been an age of self-conceit and self-abaserment. 
Pompousness has lived with pessimism and kept open house. 
Intellectual arrogance and groveling discontent have mated. 
Man has been crying out: “I am nothing!” and yet he has. 
asserted: “I can do anything.” Man has been self-deprecia- 
tive largely because of the recoil consequent upon his pre- 
tense; his confessedly abject position has often been the result 


264 DWIGHT L. MOODY — 


of his audacity. Misanthropic he is, because of the collapse 
of his impious egotism. From whatever cause, he has been 
lying flat upon the earth, and often has he revelled in what 
Carlyle called “a dirt philosophy.” Not as Saul of Tarsus or 
Moody has man in the nineteenth century been humbled by 
the spiritual glory of Christ; but he lies there nevertheless. 
He is cursed by the sin from which he alone cannot free him- 
self. He is also half hopeless of a valid solution for the prob- 
lem of life as it appears in himself or in his race. I have men- 
tioned the fact of sin as one of the most restless influences 
which has caused, and still causes, hopelessness. Sin is only 
practical faithlessness. Our age’s philosophy does not extin- 
guish or even hide it. We are enough like Saul to behold in 
humiliation its disaster and we see it more clearly as it writhes 
or slidders darkly against the background of a better day, for 
ours is the most luminously Christian age the world has ever 
seen. We are not only prostrate on the earth, but we are 
tired of it. The mind of man is not more weary of the specu- 
lative materialism which has failed as dogma, than the heart 
and conscience of men are in revolt against a practical ma- 
terialism which has failed as a dogma, than the heart and con- 
science of men are in revolt against a practical materialism 
which fails as a method of life. Hucksters of our day are ad- 
vertising enough religious nostrums to demonstrate what a 
market there is for something to re-inspire the soul of man. 

Here Moody found himself and his message. Who was he? 
What is his message? How does it appeal to men? 

First of all, he was personally an erect and inspired man. 
How had he been made so? He felt, in a moment, unspeak- 
ably precious and grand, the actual Lordship of Jesus of Gali- 
lee. He had a vision—but more, he was a man of vision. He 
was not persuaded of it by logic. He had known it, yielded to 
it, gone into partnership with it as a fact in his experience. 
The triumphant Christ entered his life and thinking and hope, 








THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION. 265 


~ by Christ’s triumphing over him and not otherwise. He was: 

- going to some Damascus a persecutor of that which seemed 
to die on Calvary; he entered Damascus its disciple and cham- 
pion. The very power he antagonized in vain humbled him, 
then it lifted him upon his feet. He first adored it when he 
suddenly discovered its splendor in absolute command of his _ 
soul. But obeisance, however abject, submissive and humble, 
was not enough for him who saw the living Christ. He felt 
the fortunate contagion of the aggressive spiritual power of 

Jesus. He had to get on his feet. The gravitations that held 
him fast to earth, either because of his unworthiness, or be- 
cause of the contrasting glory of Jesus, were caught up, 
through a larger, higher circle of law, by the other gravita- 
tions that pulled him upward. The spiritual tallness he 
gained by his humility straightened itself in the light of God, 
in the hope of God for man that Jesus carried over Him. The 
whole fact is that he had fallen in love with God as Christ re- . 
vealed Him; he also accepted the ideal and reality of man as 
Christ has revealed man also, and, on that ground, his sin has 
fallen dead, sloughed away, been forgotten by God and by 
man, He is a new man in Christ. The cross made him so. 
Can we marvel that he is now an erect, hopeful, aggressive, 
stalwart man? What else could he be, under the spell of such 
an uplifting force? Would it not be strange, if he were not 
on his feet? 

I have little hope of valuable service to men from any so- 
called ministry to which all this is not intensely personal. It 
was personal with Moody. He asked, as did Saul, with an in- 
complete theology, it is true, but with vivid eagerness, “Who 
art Thou, Lord?” and the answer is as personal as the “who” 
and “thou” of his query, “I am Jesus, whom thou (Saul) per- 
secutest.” Every disguise is torn away. Religious exper- 
ience under Christ emphasizes “I,” “Jesus,” and “thou.” It 
is almost fearfully accurate, and it is searchingly true. Ugly 


266 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


facts also emerge, sinister and illumined. There can be no 
mistake. “I am Jesus,”—not vague goodness, not your in- 
dividual ideal of truth, but God’s own purpose incarnate, the 
very heart-throb of this whole system of things,—‘“I am Jesus 
whom thou persecutest.” “Wrong is an attack on Me ; sin 
is a stab in My soul,” so Jesus seems to say,—does say. All 
this enforces the personal element in the fundamental exper- 
ience of the man who is to be a minister. It is his seal of a 
divine prerogative. He is to help men get upon their feet. 
Nothing of this sort is possible unless he is intense in the sense 
of his own recovered personality, unless, by his own right to 
reverence and to make his own self and life distinct, he can 


clear away all circumstances and abolish all trivialities from 


every other man and bring that man personally close up to 
the burning heart of the personal Christ. Each man must be 
thus distinguished before God. Jesus erect amidst depravity 
and doubt; His minister stalwart and full of faith also,—these 
are the facts that make distinct and sacred every man’s soul 
and life. Then will each man respect himself as God deals 
with him by His providence and grace. This is the true call 
to the ministry. But Jesus makes it yet more personal. Hear 
His voice again, “I have appeared unto. thee.” and 
“thee,” these are the great words of the Good News unto 
men; and these are the two supreme facts in all thorough- 
going religion. Not the creed, not the church, and not 
society in general, nor even the noble fortune of race,—but 
“T” and “thee.” Christ never had a real minister who was 
not made self-respectful and powerful because he was thus 
led to honor his own personality and to lead every other man 
to honor his, as God Himself honored it. O man, if thou 
wouldst be a minister, “rise, stand upon thy feet.” Fear not 
to be personal, for impersonalness is cloud-land, weakness 
and death. 

An erect humanity in the pulpit, speaking to the humanity 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 267 


that honors it, trusts it, and provides support for it,;—how 
sublime it all was with Moody. 

Secondly, what was his message? His message is really 
the wine pressed from grapes grown on the soil of this ex- 
perience. He has the right to believe that what has lifted 
him and set him upon his feet will exalt and make stalwart 
other men. In truth, whatever else we may carry, this only 
is each minister’s working faith. If Jesus has truly become 
Saul’s Lord, and lifted Saul up to his full manhood, that, and 
that only, will He expect and work for in His people. By 
_ no magic or miracle can you get out of your minister what 
he has not to give. Moody knew this. 

Experience, which is so personal and particular, which is 
to be crystallized into his message, makes the erect man not 
~ less, but more conscious of the facts of sorrow and sin in the 
world. They lie heavy on the heart of the time, and often 
_ they conduce to a conclusion of despair. The true man can-. 
not be erect and have an outlook of hope, unless he appre- 
ciates the maddening riddle of life in its most involved snarl. 
I think every Moody must have in him the making of a pessi- 
_ mist as gloomy as Schopenhauer, and he must feel enough 
_ of the tragedy of life to shake the courage of a Liebnitz. 
But this must not be his all. He must have been on the 
dull earth, and felt its sick heart beat woe; he must also 
have been lifted up, conscious of it all, yet equally conscious 
that the very Christ who lifts him up and restores his faith 
was so much more conscious of it all that it brake His heart. 
It crowned Him with thorns when He flung upon its hidden 
night the first promise of a golden day. This is the only 
way God has of making Paul the minister. God’s manifesta- 
tion of Himself in our humanity is the uplifting fact in a 
world where, without Him man is on all fours in his animal- 
ism, or flat upon the earth,—earth to earth, ashes to ashes, 
dust to dust,—in his despair. If our ministry is Christian, 


268 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


it surpasses the keenest-eyed pessimism in perceiving the 
historical fact that “in Adam all die.” But if it is Christian, 
it surpasses philosophic optimism by its discovery of an out- 
look through the fact that “in Christ all are made alive.” 
Universal as was, and is, the disaster in Eden, so universal 
was, and is, the recovery at Calvary. The minister, of all 
men, is the one who can be erect and free because he is true 
to both these facts. He knows it is a groaning creation, but 
he knows also that it is loaded with divine destinies; he is 
aware that his is a race strained in ignorance and toil, often 
whelmed in anguish and defeat. But against that fact he 
puts this, the Son of Man, the very fact whose luminousness 
lays bare this dolorous reality, has lived to the bottom of its 
woe, felt in His own heart its blind cruelty, and, after being 
the victim of its calculating malice and dull-eyed villainy, 
Jesus emerges the most hopeful and the most powerful of 
leaders. He who was gibbeted by man, comes assuring us, 
for He is carrying the fortunes of redeemed humanity in His 
wounded hands. Surely, He can say: “Rise, stand upon thy 
feet.” Surely, His minister must believe in man. Moody 





was no pious ignoramus as to life’s tragic problem and its — 


solution. He trusted Jesus and His way enthusiastically. 
And this is the central flame that lights and warms the 


heart of the preacher. Jesus believed in man, because He | 


believed in God. He revealed man in revealing God. No 
one ever so depended upon God to reinforce man at his best. 
No one ever so trusted in man at his worst. He would not 


even save Himself at Calvary from man’s fury. He would — 


rather trust man to come again to Calvary, age after age, to 
find if one drop of His blood still quivered there. But this 
trust of His in man was fundamentally a trust in God, His 
Father and man’s Father. Jesus knew in Himself what God 
the Father meant for man. He Himself was that meaning. 


Human worth, the right and duty of a man to respect him: 


eS 


=F 


T Sipe 


» 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION © 269 


self, the joy a man ought to find in his privilege of being a 
man,—all these had their source in the fact that Jesus felt in 


_. Himself that the concerns of God and man are one. He illus- 


trated the capacity of humanity to receive God and the will- 
ingness of God Himself to come into man and abide with 
bim. In the manger at Christmas, humanity was proven 
capable of the Incarnation. Other events came in due order. 
That stable-event glorifies man; Calvary saves man; Easter 
rebuilds man; Olivet sees him go back to heaven. 

This hope kindles most as Jesus deals with the perplexing 
problems of evil. To Him and to His servant, Moody, the 
problem was not speculative, but practical. Witness Geth- 
semane and the heights of Golgotha. Moody knew that the 
pulpit often fails because it is untrue to the meaning of 
Calvary. The pulpit which fails here may succeed in being 
an arsenal of brilliant rhetoric and a fortress of valuable learn- 
ing, but as a pulpit it is a pitiful sham and a wicked deceit. 
It will leave man prone on his face, without the vision Saul 
had of the real Christ. The Christ whom Saul saw, the Jesus 
who spoke to Saul, had been no connoisseur of morals or in- 
genious exponent of a new cult which gathered about Him a 
unanimous coterie of dilletantes. No. His face was more 
marred than any of the sons of man. He has met sin fatally 
at Calvary, as before He had met sin and wrestled with evil 
in Peter and Judas and Mary Magdalene. He was Lord 
only because He had triumphed over sin and iniquity. He — 
had won the heart of man when sin had its carnival in His 
crucifixion. 

Let us be honest with God and conscience and the fact 
that it is a hopeless world without this Lord of man unfurl- 
ing His blood-stained banner of hope. The only pulpit that 
men respect permanently pours forth the music of the re- 
_demption. It is tremulous with the minors of Good Friday. 
Men scorn to squander an otherwise pleasant hour of their 


270 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Sunday where two things are not believed,—first, the fact 
that humanity, unhelped from God, is prostrate and despair- 
ing; second, the fact that with the Christ there come hope, 
self-respect, and manhood. People were never as willing,— 
nay, so desirous to go to church as they are now, if Christ 
is there to get them on their feet. : 

In the presence of Moody’s career how fearful a thing it 
is to fail to tell men of Christ in an age both as misanthropic 
and aspiring as our own. Dr. Roswell Hitchcock mentions 
a Bedouin on the desert whose piteous condition was this: 
He had been without food so long that he was starving. His 
hope was that some other traveler who had already gone 
that way, might have left, by chance or provision, a packet 
of food. Away, beyond, near a fountain, he spied what he 
took to be a traveler’s bag, and to his hunger it must con- 
tain bread. Slowly and hardly he pulled himself over the hot 
sand to the little pouch. He took it up and poured out 
before his vacant eyes a stream of glorious gems. As they 
-woed the sun by their splendor, his famished body fell over, 
while he murmured, “Oh, it is only diamonds, only dia- 
monds!” Merciful heaven, that this should be an honest 
description of so much that is called preaching! “Diamonds, 
only diamonds!” It is a piteous thing for the preacher and 
the people. Both are disappointed sadly. Diamonds! And 
he, the preacher, works so long to find them, and so hard to 
grind them well, and so unceasingly, perhaps, to set them 
in a golden paragraph,—and they, the people, want only the 
bread of life. One mouthful of plain bread, and you may 
have: the polished dogmas, the glittering periods, the flame- 
like phrases, the splendid sentences. All glowing exordiums, 
all flashing epigrams, all brilliant perorations, for one taste 
of the bread of life! When Christ Jesus said to Saul, “I have 
appeared unto thee to make thee a minister,” he gave Paul 
his theme, his method of appeal to men, his certainty of suc: 























DR. FRANK CRANE 
Pastor Hyde Park Methodist Church, Chicago. 











DR. RUSSELL H. CONWELL. 
Pastor of The Temple, Philadelphia, 





THE MAN 'AND HIS MISSION _—_a73 


cess. Jesus Himself is the capital on which alone the pulpit 
- ds in business. Men have the right to expect their ministers 
to be experts in manhood, erect, Christlike manhood, fear- 
less, hopeful, free. They have no right to expect their min- 
isters to compete with their fellow-men in anything else ex- 
cept in manifesting this Christ in His actual Lordship over 
them, “in our mortal flesh.”” Other men have better right to 
speak with plain authority on a multitude of other interesting 
subjects, than has the minister! No man ought to be able 
- to overmatch his mental and moral right to speak on the 
truth, the way, the life of manhood. Few of us are worthy 
to stand here! None save by God’s grace. But we fail only 
_ when we vacate our particular throne of power. No ton of 
_ diamonds is worth an ounce of bread toa hungry man. We 
- ought to feed men bread. We have no responsibility as to 
creating the food. God does that. Christ is given to us, and 
we have no need to strive to induce hunger. Believe it, men 
are hungry and are hunting for bread. While I am searching 
for a triviality bright enough to attract a crowd, my brothers 
who have the right to expect me to give them to eat are 
begging for plain bread. No man to whom Jesus has ap- 
peared as Lord, who also has been lifted to his feet by the 
hopefulness of Christ, ever was solicitous for a subject to 
preach on or a text for a discourse. The true minister does 
not run his race with lecturer, essayist, or poet or statesman, 
- foolishly abandoning his prerogative, to be beaten in a con- 
test, perhaps, with a magazine article purchasable for a quar- 
ter, but sufficient to emphasize the extemporaneousness of 
the parson’s suddenly-acquired information which could not 
be disguised. The minister of Christ has an unfailing theme. 
His topic’s interest depends not on war or peace, parties or 
revolutions,—it is the Lamb of God slain from the founda- 
tion of the world. His sermon is not a bit of pious oratory 
or unctuous literature, neither is it an impersonal or senfti- 


274 DWIGHT L. MOODY — 


mental relating of the precious story of Jesus. His is the 
argument in favor of bread addressed to hunger. It is an 


address by a man in favor of hope, and it has the impulse of 


his hope grounded in Jesus. It is his experience with One 
who has said: “Rise, stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared 
unto thee,” and it is this experience reinforced by all the 
history and prophecy of humanity, glorified by the love of 
God, and illumined by the mighty presence of Jesus as a liy- 
ing Lord—it is this, in the giving of comfort, in the urgency 
of appeal, in the defiance of wrong, and in the championship 
of right,—this, as it furnishes hope for mankind in Jesus Him- 
self, makes the minister. 

Not all of these sources of power or instrumentalities of 
service belong to any one man, but if, on this Christmas Day, 
anything comes to us from Moody’s life and death, it is the 
call of the Spirit that we who minister may trust the great- 
_ hess and power of Christ’s gospel. 

Frank W. GunsauLus. 
Armour Institute, Chicago. 








IX, 


MOODY AND HIS WAYS 
BY JOHN. V. FARWELL 


(Copyright 1899 by George T. B. Davis.) 


Y first acquaintance with Mr. Moody was as a late 
attendant of a class meeting in the old Clark Street M. 
E. Church, Chicago, coming in a little before 10 o’clock The 
recollection that I then thought him a very lazy Christian 
haunts me still, for I ascertained afterward that he came in 
after spending all the morning in getting poor children into 
a mission Sunday school, while I was only attending because 
it was one of the rules of the church, and not to get spiritual 
motive power for mission work for Christ, as he did. 

The next epoch of my recollections begins with the North 
Market Hall Mission Sunday school, in myself and others 
being invited to assist with five-minute talks to an audience 
of children, who were only sufficiently quieted to listen 
by gentle music from a brother of T. B. Carter, whose serv- 
ices were always needed at the end of five minutes, to quiet 
the boisterous waves of this sea of juvenile humanity. It 
took three months of such work of music and speech com- 
bined to prepare the children for classes, which: were then 
formed. 

The school grew apace, when Mr. Lincoln’s first visit 
to Chicago, after his first election, found him an invited 
guest of this school, then grown to 1,500 children, on the 
agreement that he was not to be asked for a speech. As he 
was about to leave Mr. Moody remarked to the school: “If 
Mr. Lincoln desires to say a word as he goes out, of course 
all ears will be open.” As he reached the center of the hall, 

225 


276 DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


evidently to go without saying a word, he suddenly stopped, 
and made a most appropriate Sunday-school address, in which 
he referred to his own humble origin, and closed by saying:: 
“With close attention to your teachers, and hard work to put 
in practice what you learn from them, some one of you may 
become President of the United States in due time.’ When 
the war broke out and his call for 75,000 volunteers was 
made, seventy-five young men from this school (scholars and 
teachers) responded. No one of these became President, 
‘but one of them was appointed postmaster of Chicago and 
filled the place to perfection. 

As a means of recruiting scholars for this school, Mr. 
Moody at one time promised a Christmas suit to a dozen of 
the worst street gamins if they would attend every session 
until Christmas. He had them photographed as they were 
found on the street, and as they appeared in the Sunday- 
school class after having obtained the suit—only two failing 
to meet the conditions. The first picture was underscored, 
“Will It Pay?” and the second, “It Does Pay.” As the 
teacher of this class I named it “Moody’s Bodyguard.” One 
_ day the worst of these boys came in and took a seat, with his 
hat on. Instantly another planted a stunning blow on his 
face, sprawling him on the floor, with the remark: > “1't 
teach you not to enter Moody’s Sunday school with your hat 
on.” The etiquette of good manners was thereafter fully 
maintained. ; 

About twenty years after this incident “Charley” Morton 
entered a railroad office to get a ticket as state secretary of 
the Y. M. C. A., while holding evangelistic meetings all over 
the state. He was asked to come inside, the ticket agent 
saying: “You do not seem to know me.” 

“I have not that pleasure,” said Charley. 

“Well,” said the agent, “do you remember Moody’s body- 
guard?” 








Pana ee Ne ER eo eae Ve eee nn ede he 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 277 


“Very well, indeed, and I have their pictures in my dressing-- 
room.” 

“Well, when you go home pick out the worst-looking one 
in the lot and you will see your humble servant, now a church 

-member and Sunday-school worker, by heredity from Mr. 
Moody’s church, and, I assure you, I never gave a pass with 
such sincere pleasure as I give you this. It did pay.” 

A personal appeal for an immediate decision after present- 

ing the facts of Christ’s love, was his most effective weapon 
in Christian work. On leaving his home one morning his 
wife requested him to send a barrel of flour. On his way to 
the Y. M. C. A. he met a person he was greatly interested in, 
and was so earnest and persistent in his appeals that he forgot 
the flour until he reached the door to apologize to his wife: 
for his neglect, when she answered, “You did not forget, the 
flour came about 3 o’clock.” Truly his barrel of meal was 
kept full, that he might save a soul from death. 

On another occasion he overtook a man on Clark street 
' bridge, a stranger to him, and asked if he were a Christian. 

_ The fact that the man knew Moody saved him from a severe 
castigation, for on his arrival at the board of trade he told the 
president of the Y. M. C. A. to tell his friend to be more 
discreet in the future, for if he had not known him he should 
have chastised him for his impertinence. Moody was thus 
admonished some weeks after, and, on asking the president 
who it was, said, “If you had been at the last prayer meeting 
of your church you would have heard his confession of faith, 
with this incident which you complain of as the means used 
for his conversion.” 

Riding on a railroad train he opened a conversation with a 
perfect stranger about the weather, etc., and then asked the 
same question and continued the interview until he neared his 
station, when he asked the privilege of praying with him. 
- After which the train stopped and Moody was. gone. 


278 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Years after this person related the incident as the means of his 
conversion. He certainly sowed beside all waters, and God 
gave the increase. 

There came into existence in due time the Illinois Street 
Church, made up from converts of the North Market Hail 
Mission Sunday school, organized by ministers of all the 
denominations connected with the Y. M. C. A. The Chicago 
Avenue Church is its lineal descendent. Mr. Moody pro- 
cured theological students to preach for this church, until on 
one providential day in the calendar of his services the selected 
student did not appear, and Moody was compelled to preach 
the sermon, as his first. After that he was the regular pas- 
tor. One evening “Charley” Morton, just out of the army, 
minus one arm, and fresh from a saloon, walked by this 


church with open doors and saw over the pulpit from the © 


street, printed in gas jets, “God is love.’ This magnet drew 
him in, and before leaving, a handshake from Mr. Moody and 
an invitation to share the bed of the then secretary of the 
Y. M. C. A. until he could get work opened the flood gates of 
Charley’s eminent usefulness as a gospel minister, and later 
as state secretary of the Y. M. C. A. for evangelistic work 
as one of Mr. Moody’s faithful lieutenants. Major Cole is 
another graduate of the Y. M. C. A. as an evangelist, who 
was with Mr. Moody in London, and has incessantly kept up 
his work ever since in this country. 

He gradually rose from being a preacher to poor childred 
in a saloon, rented by himself for that purpose in connection 
with the Sunday school, to be a preacher in the largest hall 
in London, holding 25,000 people from the commonest to the 
highest classes, and at his last meeting there, there were 
many more outside who could not get in. 

Let me recount some incidents connected with both places. 
A very small boy for his age—a child of a mother who had 
once kept a riotous sailors’ boarding-house—was converted 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 279 


in that saloon. The mayor of Brooklyn was in a prayer meet- 


ing held there, when this little boy rose to pray—a child, whose 


head did not reach the level of those in the seats, and the 
mayor was so touched by the prayer that he sought the lad out 
at the close of the meeting to speak with him. This same 
boy went with Mr. Moody to the saloon of an infidel for a 
discussion of Christianity—arranged for the day before when 
he went there to get the infidel’s boy to come to the Sunday 
school—between Mr. Moody and the infidel’s friends. They 
were all there on time, and the infidel and his friends used 
up all their time in discussing the order of exercises, as to 
their side of the case. At this point Mr. Moody called time, 
and asked this little boy to pray for these infidels. When 
the prayer was concluded all had gone out one by one, and 
left Mr. Moody and the boy alone with the infidel saloon- 
keeper, who then allowed his boy to go with them to Mr. 
Moody’s Sunday school. All arguments were useless in the 
presence of this diminutive living fact pleading with God for 
these infidels. 

In one of the monster London meetings the son of a rich 
Bombay merchant rose for prayer at the close, and became a 
Christian. He was an Eton student, and immediately set 
about having Mr. Moody preach to the Eton students. The 
effort was foiled by the teachers. Nothing daunted, this 
young man engaged a lawn, surrounded by a high brick wall, 
for the meetings, and the students heard Moody preach. This 
incident was heralded all over Great Britain by the papers. 
A non-conformist, unordained man preaching to the scions of 
wealth and royalty of Eton college, in nature’s grand cathe- 
dral, frescoed with stars and carpeted with one of Eton’s beau- 
tiful lawns, was a great event for even Great Britain. 

The great revival of 1857-8 gave birth to union noonday 
prayer meetings, and the Y. M. C. A., or, rather, the associa- 
tion’s second birth. For many years an association of that 





280 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


name, managed by old men, had had an existence, but: this 
revival put the young converts into the harness for them- 
selves, and the old men stepped down and out—all things be- 
ing new. Here was a channel through which laymen could 
make themselves felt as a unit. Metropolitan Hall, larger 
than the present association hall, was daily crowded from 
platform to gallery. The leaders seemed there only to look 
on and keep order, while from one to six were on their feet 
at once as witnesses for Christ. The result was that there 
was not a church, in time, that did not number its converts 
by scores or hundreds. In such an atmosphere, the Y. M. C. 
A., and mission Sunday schools, with such men as Mr. Moody 
to say “come” instead of “go,” became a power in city and 
country, from which all union efforts since then have gath- ° 
ered their spirit and growing strength. In one of these noon 
prayer meetings, held in Farwell Hall during the Taber- 
nacle meetings of 1876, a young man approached me with the 
question, “Do you know me?” After a careful scrutiny I 
replied, “I think you are the boy that Moody whipped for 
disturbing your Sunday school class, and was afterward con- 
verted. Did it last?” “Yes,” said he, “you are right, and 
I am still holding on.” Another evidence that it did pay to use 
all means to save some—even to a sound drubbing. 

While it is freely admitted that the Young Men’s Christian 
Association was the child of the great revival of 1857-8, it 
is true that as such it was the fitting educator of Mr. Moody 
for his life work in uniting Christians of all denominations at 
home and abroad, with Chicago as its center. The bells of 
the great fire of 1871 were ringing while he was preaching 
in Farwell Hall from this text; Chis“one thing I do,” ete. 
The next morning his own home, the Illinois Street Church, 


and the Young Men’s Christian Association building, all of — 


them the pride of his life, were nothing but ashes, and then it 
was that he heard the Macedonian cry, “Come over and help 








ie Ee 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 281 - 


us,” from two faithful ministers who had previously invited 
him to England to do evangelistic work under their guidance 
and with their help. 

I remember a striking incident in the opera-house, where a 
meeting of young men under the auspices of the Y. M. C. A. 
was held. A drunken man, whenever Mr. Moody referred to 
John, Mark, or Luke, repeated in a loud voice, “Say St. John, 
sir.” This was done several times, when Mr. Moody ordered 
the man removed. Lord Quinard and Quintin Hogg of his 
committee did the work, while Mr. Moody called on the audi- 
ence to rise and sing a spirited hymn, and then remarked, “I 
had this done for the good of the man as well as the audience,” 
and then went on with his sermon as though nothing had 
- happened. At the close of the meeting the inquiry room was — 
filled. Nothing seemed to disturb his equanimity, and, being 
an on-looker from the gallery, I never admired his wonderful 
tact as I did at that time. 

The question has often been asked where did Moody get the 
means to do so much? He only knows fully who said “‘the 
silver and the gold are mine.” When he went to London a 
friend gave him a check the day he left, and learned afterwards 
he could not have gone without it. In London one of his ad- 
mirers said to me, “How can I get one thousand dollars into. 
Moody’s hand without offending him?” He never would al- 
low any one to canvass for money for his personal use. As 
the tabernacle in the wilderness was built with free-will offer- 
ings, so-Mr. Moody’s personal expenses have always been 
made up of free-will offerings, until the publication of his 
books gave him a large income, and I learn from others that 
this has nearly all gone into his Northfield schools. The in- 
spiration of his example should endow them for all time. His 
humility was only discounted by his intense earnestness and 
distinguished ability—usually called common sense—but not 
near so common as one could wish. Here is a notable inci- 


282 - DWIGHT L. MOODY 


dent: | When the first association hall was dedicated, he- 


learned. or surmised that George H. Stuart, the chairman, was 


to propose that the hall be named Moody Hall. To prevent: 


this, Mr. Moody took the floor, and to my utter surprise pro- 
posed after a short and impressive appeal, that the hall be 
named Farwell Hall. Perhaps the present hall has providen- 
tially been without a name until Mr. Moody was translated, the 
trustees knowing that he would not, while alive, consent to 
have his name anywhere except in the hearts of mankind, 
whom he served. 

Now that he has gone and the world is practically girdled 
with Y. M. C. A. halls, would it not be an extremely wise and 


appropriate act to name the first of such buildings after the 


man whose consecrated life enabled him to command the influ- 
ence among Christian men necessary to its erection? 

A mighty man has finished his work on earth. The oldest 
_ book in existence records, “There is a spirit in man, and the 
inspiration of the Almighty giveth him understanding.” 
Moody’s spirit—or mental ability—was naturally of a super- 
ior order. Had he taken up politics he would have made an 
exceptional statesman. Having taken up with Christ as Lord 
for his life work, the inspiration of the Almighty gave him a 
power in Christian work second to no one in the apostolic 
succession from Saints Peter and Paul until December 22) 
A. D., 1899, measured by the results of his ministry, prac- 
tically surrounding the globe in its influence, and nearly so in 
his travels. 

The key to the understanding of all this is that Moody’s 
body, soul and spirit by his own deliberate choice was conse- 
crated to that ministry. He once heard a prominent man say 
“The world has yet to see how much one man wholly conse- 
crated to God can accomplish in this world for Him.” Then, 
said Moody, “I will be that man, for I can consecrate my all 
to Him.” 


i 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 283 





\ 


He began his work as a mission Sunday school drummer, 


and from that graduated in regular succession into superin- 


tendent of one of the largest mission Sunday schools in the 
city, president of the Young Men’s Christian Association, and 
the world’s evangelist, the highest office in Christ’s ministry. 

When he left a successful business for this calling, he had 
accumulated about twelve thousand dollars, all of which was 
invested in mission enterprises at the time he was most busy 
with the work of the Y. M.C. A. A little prayer meeting of 
three asked for wisdom to procure a building for that associa- 
tion, and in answer Mr. Moody began and finished the first 
building ever erected for the use of a Y. M. C. A. on earth, 
representing Chystian union, and in his work in Chicago, after - 
returning from his London mission, he raised the money to 
free it from debt, after having been twice burned to the ground, 
and but for this timely effort of his, the present magnificent 
temple of the Y. M. C. A. would not be as one of the world’s 
best material monuments of Christian unity (for which he 
stood) that was ever erected. 

The lineal descendants of his first enterprise—the North 
~ Market Hall Mission Sunday School—are the Bible Institute 
and the Chicago Avenue Church and Sunday School, now 
filled to its utmost capacity twice every Sunday to hear the 
plain testimony of Jesus, which the Angel said to John was 
“the spirit of prophecy,’—or preaching ;—and conversions 
follow every service, as a rule, and sometimes scores and hun- 
dreds attend the second meeting which follows the evening 
service. 

Being dead, he yet speaks through these institutions as 
clearly as did the angels when they sang “Glory to God in the 
Highest arid on Earth Peace and Good Will to Men,” at the 
birth of Christ; through whose life more abundant now 
given to men, that song is to be perpetuated through the agency 
of such men to the end of time. 


et. hoe OP ees 


284 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


The meaning of the removal of such workmen from the 
harvest field at such a time as this is beyond our ken, when, 
instead of one removal, a regiment of them seems to be needed 
for fields white for the harvest, and the world one as it never 
was before by the power of steam and electricity, as well as 
the power of Christian civilization in the strongest nations on 
earth. Yea, and when there were calls on Moody’s desk from 
Europe and America that would require months, if not years, 
to fill if he were here to do it. 

Why? God only knows. 

Joun V. Farwe Lt. 

Chicago, 








X. 


MOODY, THE EARNEST MAN OF THE PEOPLE 
BY BISHOP SAMUEL FALLOWS 

(Copyright 1900 by George T. B. Davis.] 
H ISTORY, it has been said, is but the biography of great 

men. The definition needs correction. History is but 
the biography of great men and of good men. There are 
some men who are simply great without being good. There 
are good men who are not great men. There are men who 
are both great and good; those of the latter class are not 
simply forces of attraction but of gravitation. From them 
spring epochs, eras, revolutions and reformations. 

Among these suns in the world’s religious firmament, ex- 
cluding the inspired writers, are Calvin, Luther, Knox and 
Wesley. 

Belonging to the class who are good but not great is Dwight 
L. Moody. But he was great in his goodness, perhaps the 
greatest man of his time in the goodness which is expressed 
in spiritual service to his fellow men. 

His life was an evolution of divine grace. There was first 
a burning enthusiasm without knowledge, to do something 
for Christ and for Christ’s little ones,—the poor and needy 
and helpless. Then the onrush of his sturdy, vigorous, im- 
 petuous nature took him into many experimental fields of 
labor. But his eyes and ears were ever open. He had an 

almost intuitive faculty to perceive what was the practical 
thing to be done. And in the doing of it, he continually 
gained in the knowing of God’s will. 

His tremendous earnestness, which became an irresistible 
religious fervor, converted opponents into warm supporters 
of his measures, Business men not only believed in his sin- 

285 


286 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


- cerity but in his sagacity. His constituency among them con- 
tinually grew both in numbers and constancy. He made the 
Bible his chief study, and wore out copy after copy of its most 


strongly bound editions in expounding its eternal truths. He : 
thoroughly believed in the literalness of its statements. He | 


said: “If the Bible had declared that Jonah swallowed the 
whale, he would have believed it.” He proclaimed the old- 
fashioned gospel with directness and simplicity and yet with 
pathos and dramatic power. He grew more and more his- 
trionic in his manner during his later years. The last time 
I heard him speak before a great audience in the South, he 
got down on his hands and knees, trying to put his head under 
a chair, to imitate the actions of a little child in its attempts 
to explore space, and also to illustrate the humility of the 
Christian in his efforts to know the truth. 

He employed the strong, sinewy Saxon in his sermons and 
addresses. I think, next to the Bible and Shakespeare, he 
will rank in this us> of his mother tongue. 

He was not a theologian, originating any philosophy of the 
divine teaching. He was a moon reflecting the light of many 


clerical orbs. When he gathered about him the chief spirits | 


in the theological ranks of the country and the world, he noted 
down the best things they said and the illustrations they used, 
and thenceforth they were his own! I have heard him say 
at such times: “I am a sponge, and I am going to absorb from 
you all I can get.” 

Uncompromisingly conservative in his views of the Bible, 
he yet won the friendship and secured the co-operation of 


many eminent religious thinkers who were decidedly advanced — 


in their opinions. 


His was the charity that never failed for the errant ones, 4 


whether in thought or conduct. 


To lift up the fallen, cheer the despondent, comfort the — 
mourning and point penitent souls to a Saviour that was able ° 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 287 





and willing to save to the uttermost was his passionate delight. 

He possessed a rare organizing faculty, which increased 
with the experience of years. He marshaled like a veteran 
_ general the religious forces of a community for his coming, 
and never began an extensive revival movement without giv- 
ing abundant notice to the people. He was one of the most 
judicious advertisers in this direction the church has ever 
known. And in thus advertising, he showed an uncommon 
sanctified common sense. 

He was as fond of work as a greyhound of the chase. He 
said to his sons: “I have always been an ambitious man, 
ambitious to leave work for you to do.” He died, as he wished 
to die, at work. The transition was a brief one from labor 
to rest and reward. The specific work for these sons to do 
is to see that the splendid institutions which he has organized, 
and on which the permanency of his fame may after all rest, 
shall be carried on with undiminished success. 

He has passed away, the most renowned revivalist the 
century has known. He has been an inspiration to hundreds 
of ministers of Christ in every branch of the One Hoiy Cath- 
olic Church. Tens of thousands will rise up to call him blessed 
for having unlocked their faculty of spiritual vision and given 


them the impulse to a Christian life. 
SAMUEL FALLows. 


XI. 


MOODY AS A STUDY IN EFFECTIVENESS 
BY DR. HERRICK JOHNSON 
[Copyright 1900 by George T. B. Davis.] 


EST we get off the King’s highway, let us first name the 
two things indispensable to spiritual effectiveness. The 
absolutely indispensable agent is the Spirit of God. The 
absolutely indispensable instrument is the Word of God. 
But this does not entirely explain, and account for, the 
man and his work. If it did, we could all be Moodys; and 
we can’t be. Having these alone, “one” may indeed “chase 
a thousand,” and “two put ten thousand to flight.” With 
God in the camp, the camp may be invincible, Jericho’s walls 


will go down by the blowing of old rams’ horns, if God lead — 


the encompassing host, and order the rams’ horns. God has 
sometimes “chosen the weak things of the world that he 
might put to shame the things that are strong.” But he is 
not always at war with the nature of things. In the kingdom 


of God, ordinarily there is an adaptation of means to ends. - 


It is on the basis of the natural, God builds the supernatural. 
Paul, Peter and John were marked each by his own individ- 
uality: and that individuality entered into and determined, 
under God, their varied and contrasting successes. Neither 
Peter nor John could have done Paul's work without a mira- 
cle of transformation in their natural and acquired powers. 

Now, what were the natural qualities that helped to make 
Moody one of the tremendous moral forces of this eener- 
ation? 

Take his physical characteristics as indices of the man. The 
lower part of his head was broad, strong, set as in adamant, 


denoting endurance and will. His eye was no eagle eye, but 
288 





> 








MR. JOHN V. FARWELL 
The Well-Known Chicago Merchant Prince. 





REV. HERRICK JOHNSON 


. 


ina ry 


ical Sem 


k Theolog 


McCormic 


ics in 


Professor of Homilet 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 201° 


gentle, playful, full of tenderness and sympathy, marked now 
by humor and now by tears, as these chased each other out 
of his heart. Thus two physical characteristics marked the 
man; a law jaw and a gospel eye; will power and heart power. 
He was Bunyan’s “Mr. Great Heart” plus a prodigious 
amount of Pauline energy. These two make the supreme 
leadership the world over. A man may rule even by sheer 
force of will. Generalship is possible with the iron heel. But 
if it win and keep loyal hosts, swift to service and glad in 
obedience, it must betray itself not only in power but in ten- 
derness and tears. It was this combination that helped this 
man of God to organize so many forces for such multiplied 
victories. His heart taught his lips, and gave them a gen- 
tleness even in their unalterableness. 

He knew deeply, not widely. He had far more wisdom 
than knowledge. But what he knew, he knew well. 

He knew men. He made a study of the actual human 
nature that came into anything like close relation with him. 
His early personal work with street arabs gave him quivers 
of arrows with which he afterward smote kings of shams 
between the joints of the harness. How he grew to know all 
the subterfuges and subtleties and lying refuges of the un- 
believing heart. How skilled he came to be in spiritual diag- 
nosis. How wise to say the right thing in emergent moments. 
How, like Lincoln, he shot a troublesome question through 
with an anecdote. What an art he acquired of answering 
questions through his long and patient study of questioners. 
He would send a talker to silence with such adroit and gentle 
phrase that it seemed like a prelude to prayer and consecra- 
tion. I remember one of his swift replies in a vast congre- 
gation in New York, when asked how he would heal a cold 
church: “Build a big fire in the pulpit.” 

He discovered Drummond. He put his grappling irans 
on Sankey. He com:aanded newsboys and university stu- 


¥ eos : fe Sen's tee 


292 DWIGHT L. MOODY 





dents. He picked leaders for his various enterprises. Never 
before did free lance in the open field so have the church 
of God at his beck. He knew men. 

He knew one book: the Book. Of course, we all know his 
faults, as an exegete. He had no technical scholarship. He 
was a literalist. But who kept this great soul from the ex- 
tremes and fanatical vagaries and wild licenses of those who 
make a fetish of “the letter of the law,’’ so that he was ever 
balanced and true as to all fundamentals? Who, but the 
Holy Spirit, leading this docile, eager, earnest, unlettered 
student, full of heart-hunger for knowledge of Jesus, up 
mounts of vision, where he could see the true proportion 
and balance of things? 

One of the pictures I like best is of Moody crossing seas 
and continents, and flinging himself against the worst classes 
and forces in our great crime centers, the very incarnation of 
aggressiveness—and the secret of it all, that well-worn Bible 
under his arm, which he had studied and pondered and prayed 
over until its truths were inwrought in every fiber of his soul, 
and his courageous manliness was of the sort that the rough- 
est criminal of the street would recognize. . 

Yes, Moody knew the Book. And the lesson for the living 
is that the man who is to do any effective battling must not 
only know the age in which he lives by a study of the actual 
men of the age, but he must know the eternal verities of all 
the ages by a study of the Word of God. 

And this man of so-called limited knowledge, knew God. 
He talked with Him and walked with Him. Like Moses, he 
“endured as seeing him who is invisible.” Fellowship! 
Divine fellowship! He literally entered into that secret. He 
saw God. And from out the presence he came to tell his 
vision. Hence the realism of the unseen world to him. 
Hence the definiteness and intensity of his convictions. 
Hence his sacred converse with the profound and eternal 


DPS tec el Tae ete Ae ee I 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 293 
_ realities. They were luminously clear to him.. Some of us 
rail at definite creeds. But the creed is the man. If the 
creed is a namby-pamby affair, with no definiteness and no 
fixedness, a piece of putty—the man will be a piece of putty. 

Now a word as to Moody’s preaching. 

First, it was to the spiritual nature of man. It involved 
always man’s personal relations to God, and God’s personal 
relations to him. It struck down to the roots of life. “Quit 
your meanness,” said Sam Jones. “Be born again,” said 
Moody. And between these two methods of preaching is a 
great gulf. : 

Again: Moody’s preaching was vivid and intense with 
eternity. 

What he thought, he thought passionately. What he be- 
lieved, he believed passionately. He saw things with his whole 
soul. He had the faith faculty to an intense degree—the 
religious imagination. “The assurance of things hoped for: 
the test of things not seen.” How easy to believe Christ said 
often by his Spirit to this believing soul, what he said once 
in words to the Syrophonecian mother: “Great is thy faith: 
be it unto thee even as thou wilt.” 

Hence the hold this man had of the deepest feelings of the 

_ heart. He never lost rein of curb or bit in the most mighty 
movement of feeling in the audience. “He was able to kin- 
dle the soul to a flame withowt flaming it into a conflagra- 
tion.”’ And hence, emotions kindled by him were never “born 
blind.” They were light as well as heat, for they were the 
offspring of truth. 

Still again: His preaching always had a distinct and definite 

object. He was after something always, and with his whole 
heart. His purpose was unmistakable. Whether his audience 
was laughing or crying, he never allowed a diversion from 
his object. He never let go the grip by which he would bring 
a soul to do, or be something, or die! me 


be 


XII. 
TEN SOURCES OF MOODY’S POWERS 


BY JOSEPH COOK 


[Copyright 1900 by George T. B. Dayis.] 


1. A man of prayer—the chief secret of his wisdom, use- 
fulness and success. 

It has commonly been taught that prayer consists of four 
parts—adoration, confession, thanksgiving, petition. But, 
according to Mr. Moody’s definition, it always included a 
fifth part, namely, total self-surrender of the soul to God as 
both Savior and Lord. To this severe, strategic and thor- 
oughly scriptural view of prayer he was strenuously faithful, 
both in the pulpit and in the inquiry-room. This one fact 
goes far toward explaining his astonishing spiritual efficiency. 
“T had rather know how to pray like Daniel,” he often said, 
“than to preach like Gabriel. If we know how to pray, we 
shall know how to preach, and there will be no difficulty in 
reaching the masses.” 

2. A man of the Book—unwearied in Biblical study, he 
wore out several Bibles; absorbed the very atmosphere as 
well as the spiritual texts of Scripture. . : ig 

Miss. Willard, who was his coadjutor in his early work in 
Boston, vised to say: “If we ever differed in opinions as to 
our methods, I could not stand before him, for he was a 
torrent of proof texts.” The sound of that torrent was in 
all Mr. Moody’s best efforts in both pulpit and inquiry-room, 
It is heard now and ought to be heard yet for centuries in 
the schools he founded in Northfield and Chicago. That 
torrent made him not only a great evangelist by the Divine 

204 





et 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION —_295 


blessing, but also through his schools a great Biblical edu- 
cator. 

3. A man of soundest evangelical faith, with a mighty 

grasp of essentials in the answer to the question, “What must 
I do to be saved?” 
His advice to the unconverted was always to accept God 
in Christ immediately as both Savior and Lord. He believed 
with his whole strength in the necessity of the deliverance of 
the soul from the love and the guilt of sin through the New 
Birth and the Atonement. It is, indeed, self-evident that in the 
very nature of things, the soul, without this double deliver- 
ance, can have no peace in life or death, or beyond death. 
Mr. Moody took this colossal fact seriously, and it domin- 
ated his whole crowded and strenuous career. He believed 
that the Scriptures teach that all men are to be judged by 
the deeds done in the body, and that probation is limited to 
this life. His central object in both pulpit and inquiry-room 
was to secure immediate acceptance of God in Christ and in 
the Holy Spirit as both Savior and Lord. His methods were 
all in harmony with this Biblical key-note. He did not preach 
to the imagination, or intellect chiefly, but to the Conscience 
and the Will. 

4. Aman of extraordinary practical sagacity, organizing 
power and aptness for leadership. He used to say it was 
better to set ten men at work than to do yourself the work 
of ten men. But he was accustomed to do both. 

5. A man of combined courage and tenderness—bold as 
any lion, tender as any drop of dew. 

6. A man endowed by his unusually powerful but bal- 
anced emotions with greatness of character, and by his cau- 
tion and trenchant common sense with strategic strength of 
mind. 

7. Aman of commanding spiritual manliness, everywhere 
inspiring confidence, 





296 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


8. A man of remarkable business and executive talent, he 
was trusted by men of affairs. 

9. A man working easily with associates whose endow- 
ments filled out his own, like Professor Drummond and Mr. 
Sankey, the three together making a globe of capacities and 
aptitudes for the work they undertook. 

10. A man whose career has been a spiritual link between 
England and America and all English-speaking lands. 

Mr. Moody has had no equal as an evangelist since Presi- 
dent Finney was laid in his grave; and, as he had no real 
predecessor like himself, so he is not likely to have a suc- 
cessor. The Chicago and the Northfield schools ought to 
continue through his sons his unmatched work. “I wonder,” 
said a young minister to Professor Park, “that Providence 
can accomplish so much through a man of only moderate 
endowments.” “I wish to speak respectfully of Providence,” 
said Professor Park in reply, “but I call Mr. Moody a great 
man.” “I wish I had your shoulders,” said Mr. Gladstone. 
“I wish I had your head,” said Mr. Moody in answer, 





XIII. 


MOODY AND NORTHFIELD 


BY REV. G. CAMPBELL MORGAN, OF LONDON, ENGLAND 


HE names of Moody and Northfield must always stand 
connected. There he first saw the light of day. There 
the schools that are now world-famous have their home. 
There also since 1880 have been held the conferences that 
have become so great a force in the spiritual life of the world. 
They began in a very simple way, and have grown in num- 
bers and interest up to that of last year, when the greatest 
of all, in point of numbers, was held. Over all these gather- 
ings Mr. Moody has personally presided, save during his 
absence in this country on evangelistic campaigns. He has 
also organized them, and carried them on his heart as one of 
the most delightful burdens he has borne. It has been my 
lot to be present and take some part in the last four of these, 
and the privilege of doing so I shall always count as one of the 
greatest of my life. 

The last was in very many ways a most remarkable and 
memorable one, and it is of that, in the light of the ascension 
of our beloved friend, that I want to write. Over the whole 
of the sessions there rested the shadow of the illness of little 
Irene, the beautiful child of his son, Will R. Moody. Yet. 
that shadow was the background which served to throw into 
brighter relief many of the glorious lights of the Light in 
_ which we were gathered together. 

Paul Moody met us at Northfield station and drove us to 
our home. Mr. Moody at once came to see us. That con- 

207 


298 | DWIGHT L. MOODY 


versation I shall not easily forget. He first told us of his 
sorrow about Irene, and we had some glimpse into that great 
heart. It was a three-fold grief—his own, the little one’s 
pain (which he seemed to feel), and the anguish of his 
son’s heart, which was very real to him. Then he spoke 
of the Conference, full of hope and confidence. Never 
had he felt greater joy or expectation. Past years’ gath- 
erings were sending their sheaves to this, and people 
were crowding in, and everywhere his keen ear caught the 
sound of the going in the tops of the mulberry trees. Then he 
spoke of our comfort. The rooms were to be arranged so as 
to make us feel at home. No detail escaped him; and, while 
' his heart was full to overflowing of his own trouble, every 
little thing that concerned us was considered and attended to. 
The days moved on. Once he said to me that he had dreaded 
the burden of the meetings under the existing circumstances 
of sorrow, and God had just come in and taken all the burden 
off his shoulders, and he felt the work was going right on 
independently of him. Whenever he spoke the tenderness of 
his words told how full his heart was, and surely through 
that baptism of suffering the Father sent some of his choicest 
blessings to us. 

The Conference closed on Sunday, August 20, and, on the 
. following Tuesday, in the early hours of the morning, to use 
Mr. Moody’s own beautiful words, “the chariot of God came 
down to the Connecticut valley and took our little Irene 
home.” On the following day we committed the fair form 
of her earthly tabernacle to rest. What a funeral that was! 
Flowers were everywhere. Songs of triumph over death were 
sung. Every address had victory as its key-note, and most 
beautiful of all was that of Mr. Moody himself, closing with 
the words: “TI thank God this morning for the hope of Im- — 
mortality. I know I shall see her in the morning, more beau- 
tiful in her resurrection glory than she was here.” That 





RG Roe ee rey = 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION —_—_agg 


morning has dawned for him also, and surely he and Irene 
are together. 

During the days following he gave himself up with lov- 
ing devotion to his son Will and his beloved wife. He sat 
with them, he drove with them, he mastered his own grief, 
and flung across their pathway the joyousness of his bright 
spirit. Then, as September came in, and his great family 
of boys and girls, the Mount Hermon and Northfield stu- 
dents, gathered back, he opened his heart and took them all 
in, driving backwards and forwards between the two schools, 
with always a cheery word and some strong, practical, happy 
sentence of counsel for each of them. 

At last, my work being done, and my extended tour begin- 
ning, I had to leave him, but I saw him again at Chicago, 
Boston, Brooklyn, and New York. How little I imagined 
these were the last occasions! How good God is to veil the 
future. 

After visiting several places, I reached Chicago, and there 
I found him at the head of the forces, eager for the campaign. 
It was his old and earliest battleground, and he knew it and 
loved it well. And what a time it was, and how we all had to 
“move around!’ Three centers, and three meetings a day. 
He was not a general directing others merely. He was him- 
‘self busy from morn to night. Some days he took part in as 
many as six meetings. At last his voice gave way. He was 
announced to address the students at Chicago University, 
but could not speak. Nevertheless, he came to the meeting, 
and I had to speak. It was no easy task. A thousand stu- 
dents and the faculty were there to hear him. When I rose 
I told them they had only to look at Mr. Moody and then at 
me to know how impossible it was for ime to fill his place. 
His ready humor helped me immediately, for he rose and 
stood by my side to emphasize the truth I had uttered. The 
effect was electric, and from that moment I had the attention 


300 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


and sympathy of the audience. That night he left for home. 


Wega > 
Be See 


I saw him next in Boston. Three days’ meetings in the j 
Tremont Temple he presided over. There I found his mind 


very much exercised about our war with the Boers. He could 
not understand it. Mr. Samuel Smith, M. P., of Liverpool, 
was staying at the same hotel with us, and one evening, after 
the meeting, Mr. Moody got him to tell him the story of the 
Transvaal and of the causes leading to the war. He was in- 
tensely interested and deeply grieved at the conflict. My last 
days of work came at Brooklyn and New York. In the 
former place the meetings were very large, and Mr. 
Moody came on from his home to help. He had another 
building, which, of course, was immediately filled to over- 


flowing, and, when I went to New York for the last three _ 


days, he continued the work in Brooklyn. 

_ During those days we stayed together at the Murray Hill 
Hotel. We had not very much time in each other’s company, 
but the hours we had were full. I cannot write of them. We 
look back when loved ones have been gathered home, and 
see the signs to which we were quite blind till their departure. 
And so I feel to-day as I look back. Surely he was “like as a 
shock of corn—in its season.” The fuller life, the new light, 
how manifest these were; yet we saw them not, or saw them 
only as those that do not apprehend quickly the significance 
of the King’s portents. 

My last vision of him is as he stands at the door of the 
hotel and waves us his farewell, having attended to the 
minutest matter that made for our comfort—God’s gentle- 
man in every fiber of his being. I shall see him next “at 
Home.” Many men have loved him longer, none have loved 
him more than I. | 





XIV. 


MOODY’S GREATEST WORK 
BY MR. HENRY M. MOORE 


[An Address Delivered at the Moody Memorial Meeting, Tremont 
Temple, Boston.] 


WIGHT L. MOODY was the Saint Paul of the nine- 

teenth century. If I were to sum up in one word the | 
whole entire life of Dwight L. Moody, that word would be 
simply this—Victory. He never knew a defeat. His life was 
a success. Converted, as many of you know, in the shoe store 
- on Court street at the age of 17, going at the age of 19, two 
years later, to Chicago, we might well say that he there com- 
menced his life work. In 1872, twenty-seven years ago, I 
became intimately acquainted with him. 

It was my privilege, as some of you know, to work with 
Mr. Moody; I worked with him in the great tabernacle work 
here in Boston, and for forty-four days I led the young men’s 
meeting. Twenty years ago, in 1879, he came into my store. 
and sat down to talk with me and to tell me that God had 


_ placed it upon his heart to organize a school for education of 


girls at Northfield. He asked me if I would become one of 
the trustees. I felt at first I could not, but finally consented to 
serve in that capacity. During these 20 years perhaps I might 
say with truthfulness that I have been somewhat intimate 
with him. I knew something of his plans for the future in the 
organization of those schools, and I believe that history in a~ 
few years will regard that the greatest work of D. L. Moody’s 
life was not his evangelical work, but his work in the schools. 


When we realize that there were goo students, when we think 
301 


302 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


that 17 different denominations were represented in those 


schools, that 16 different nationalities were being educated — 


there for a great work, and oh, how it pained his heart when 
he had to turn away any of those students. You know some- 
thing of the work of those schools, and you know how he 
would only charge $100 a year, where you found some of the 
finest characters that could be gathered together in the country, 
while the cost was $200. An attempt was made once to have 
him increase the cost of tuition. He said, “I founded those 
schools for the common, earnest people, and I will raise the 
money to make up the deficit of $80,000 a year by God’s help, 
that these young men and young women may be trained for 
God to go out into the world to carry the cross of Christ and 
to be a benefit and a blessing to the world whom Christ died 
to redeem.” 

I said he never knew a defeat, that his life was a success. 
May I tell you what I believe, having watched his life care 


fully for many years, was the cause of it? He dwelt in that q 


beautiful Psalm, the 91st Psalm: “He that dwelleth in the 
secret place of the most High shall abide under the shadow of 
the Almighty.” He dwelt there continually. The secret of his 
life and success was that he had submitted his will entirely 


to the word of God, and he was a mighty man of prayer. I 4 


have heard him say, “If I could have my own way, and God 
should say to me, ‘You may have your own way,’ I would 
settle it in less than one minute. I would take God’s way 
every time. It is better than my own way.” 


That was the secret of his life—that he knew the mind of 


God, and consequently as a man of prayer, his prayers were 


answered. There is not a building on the campus of the — 


twenty-six buildings that has not been prayed up, so to speak. 


Before he decided to go to a place, he did not go until he had © 


prayed it through and got the mind of God. He went, fur- 


y 3 


thermore, because it was God’s pleasure and God’s way. I 





sss THE MAN, AND HIS MISSION 303 


~-remember so distinctly this passage of Scripture: “If ye abide 
in me, I will abide in thee.” This was D. L. Moody’s life, 
and consequently his prayers were answered. 

I remember on one occasion, when Garfield’s life hung in 
the scale between life and death, a friend said to him, “Mr. 
Moody, can’t you gather with us for a season of prayer for 
Garfield’s life?’ His answer was, “If you feel like praying 
for Garfield’s life, God bless you, I can’t go.” “Why?” “Be- 
cause,” he said, “I am not sure that God wants Garfield to 
live.” I was once walking from a church where we had had 
a meeting a few summers ago with one of the prominent 
evangelists next to Mr. Moody. He said to me—Mr. Moody 
was a few steps in advance of us: ‘Friend Moore, what a 
wonderful man that is.” I said “Yes.” “Do you know, God 
gives him everything he asks for?” “Yes, that is true,” I said. 

To show you how God answered his prayers, at the time 
Crosby Hall at Mt. Hermon was built, we had a meeting of 
the trustees. He said, “I cannot bear to turn away so many 
applicants, so many young men.” One of our trustees, a very 
practical man, said, “Mr. Moody, that is all right enough, 
but it takes money to build buildings.” ‘Yes, I know it, but 
I have got $10,000. Won't you go on and build?” “Yes, if 
you can raise the money.” The money came along until the 
walls were up and the roof was on, and then he got out of 
money. One or two parties came there from time to time. 
Mr. Moody asked them: ‘Can’t you tell me of some one to 
help me?” One said, “I know a man who can give you $5,000 
~ just as well as not.” “Who is it?” So he gave him his name. 
One day, about ten days or two weeks after that, Mr. Moody 
said to me: “This is what God does for his people; how God 
answers prayer.” Then he told me how he went to his study. 
He said he could not leave at that time, and so he sat down 
and took his pen and wrote to that man, and, said he, “TI told 
_ him how I was trying to do a work for God in educating those 


304 DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


boys and girls that they might be sent out to heal and help the 
sick and sinful, and I need help. I want you to give me 
$5,000.” After I had written it, I laid the letter down on my 
desk and said, “Oh God, if that is Thy will, incline the hands 
arid heart of this man to give me the money.” In less than one — 
week the answer came: “Dear Mr. Moody: I received your 
letter this morning, as I was eating breakfast. The first 
thought that came into my mind was that I could not give you 
this money under any circumstances. However, as I con- 
tinued to eat, and then went into the library, I could not get 
your request out of my mind. Finally, an irresistible impulse 
seized me to write a check, giving you the $5,000 asked for. 
At the same time I felt that I must write the check quickly 
or my resolution to do so would fail me; so I at once sat 
down to my table and wrote it out, put it into a letter, and — 
mailed it.” 

This was a fair example of the man’s faith in prayer. 





XV. 
MOODY’S MANLINESS AND MODESTY 


BY WILLIAM E. DODGE 


[An Address delivered at the Moody Memorial Meeting held in Tremont 
Temple, Boston.] 


ie THE whole history of the Church of Christ, very few 
_4 have touched so many hearts and influenced so many lives 

as Dwight L. Moody. I am sure it is not exaggeration to 
say that if all those whom he has led to a better life were to 
be gathered together, a half dozen of the largest halls of the 
world would not hold them. Moody is not dead; he is gone 
to the better life above, and he lives with us to-day and will 
live on by his example and by the inspiration to the end of 
time. 

_ When Mr. Moody became a Christian, it was like the con- 
version of St. Paul, clear and decided and for all life. When 
the message came to him that God had offered pardon and : 
peace, life here and eternal life, he accepted it in all its fullness, 
and he wondered with a great astonishment that any one could 
turn away from such a message and from such an offer, and 
-he longed to bring men to understand it and to believe in it 
and to accept it. From the very beginning, his theology was 
very simple. His creed was “God so loved the world that He 
sent His only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in Him 
should have eternal life.” And this message he repeated with 
all his courage and manliness and strength through all his life, 
and so earnestly that it told wherever he carried it. Mr: 
Moody’s early work was a very simple one. He had had very 
few opportunities of education. At that time he had no gift 

395 


306 DWIGHT L. MOODY . 

of utterance, but he found fellowship and help in the Young 
Men’s Christian Association, and he commenced his work 
among a few poor children in Chicago when he was merely a 
clerk there. I remember, more than forty years ago, going 
with him one Sunday morning to that poor little school across — 
the river, and I got sight then of the peculiar character of the 
man, his directness, his simplicity, his kindliness, his humor, 
and the manliness of his character that won those children and 
won their parents. There were two early influences that 
directly influenced his life more than any others. One was 
the companionship and help that came to him from the brother- 
hood of the Young Men’s Christian Associations. All his life 
he acknowledged that as the forming part of his character, 
and all through his life he was the warm friend of those asso- 
ciations, helping them and aiding them in every possible way. 
But a stronger and greater influence was his beginning to 
study the English Bible. He had the idea that many good 
men have, that if God wanted him to do work and to speak for 
Him that God would put words into his mouth, and he failed 
for a long time. His talks were repetitions of each other and 
without much effect. A kind, earnest, simple, Christian man 
who influenced him very much, talked with him and urged , 
him and told him that if he wanted to devote his life to God’s 
work, he must fit himself in the best way to prepare himself for 
that work, and urged him to study the Bible. He shut himself 
up for a long time; he devoted himself to an intense study of 


the Bible, and from it got two things: In the first place, he got 


that clear-cut, plain, simple, Anglo-Saxon of the King James’ 
version which gave him such immense power over people 
everywhere. In the second place, he got from the Bible an 
arsenal, an armament, of promise and warning which, turning 
im One way and another, he used through all his life with such 
magnificent power. There was something wonderful about 
his simple directness, 





DR. JOSEPH COOK, LL.D, 


dOOddD OVW ‘0 '-H ‘Ada CNV NVOAONW TISENVO 








THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 309 


Moody’s influence over men was marvelous. I could give 
you by the hour instances of the clean way in which he went 
directly to a point. I remember when I first met him in Chi- 
cago, when he was a simple man and very little known, he went 
to call on the leading merchant and most influential man in 
_ that city, and as he went out he turned to him and said “Oh, 

4f you were only a Christian man, what an influence you would 
have in this growing city.” That man had been a communi- 
cant of a church for years, and it had never been known, and. 
it was the turning point in that man’s life, and he was Moody’s 
best friend and helper for many, many years. There was a. 
manliness about him, an earnestness, a hatred of cant and mere 
religious form. He had the most intense and superb enthus- 
iasm of any man I ever knew, but it was tempered by a strong, 
clean common sense. And then he had, in addition to that, a 
wonderful intuitive knowledge of men. We know very much 
of his wonderful success as a preacher; but those who knew 
him best and were nearest to him knew that the great power of 
his life was in personal conversation with men. The greatest 
sermon that I ever heard from Mr. Moody, far away the 
strongest, was one night on Madison avenue at half past 
twelve, coming up from one of those great meetings at Madi- 
son Square, three. or four of us together. We had been kept 
there by those who insisted upon talking and getting advice 
and help from Mr. Moody, and he was tired by a long, long 
day’s work, and a gentleman came up from behind, and said, 
“Mr. Moody, how shall I accept Christ and change my life?” 
And he turned, in the moonlight there, and stood on the corner 
of the street and, in a few sharp, cleanly-cut, kindly, earnest 
words, he put the truth so cleanly to that man that there was 
no getting away from it, and he became a changed man from 
that day. 

I was privileged to be with him at that wonderful series of 
services in the Haymarket Theater in London, the most won- 


310 DWIGHT TU. MOODY 
derful meetings that I have ever known, and what struck me 
and surprised me was the number of cultivated and educated 
people who came there. There was a large number of literary © 
men who really believed not at all in religion, who came for 
the very reason of hearing his simple, clean-cut English phrase- 
ology which is so little used nowadays. His work at Oxford | 
and in the Universities was simply wonderful. When he went 
to Oxford and to Cambridge, they determined to run him out 
of the town. They did not want that kind of talk there, but 
his manliness and straightforwardness and courage conquered 
them, and the number of young men whose lives were changed 
and who are now powers for good all over the world wherever 
England has a place, would astonish us, and we shall never 
know it until we get into a better world. His schools that he 
established after all this great work, are models of organization 
and ability of design and thoughtfulness. I hope with all my 
heart they will be carried on as a memorial of him, 

What touched me more than anything else in Mr. Moody 
was his extreme modesty about himself. He was the most 
masterful man I ever knew. He would direct and control and 
suggest to others like a general. We all know how that was 
at his great gatherings. But when it came to himself, he was 
the most modest of men. I was privileged to be in the house 
with him during all the time of those great meetings at Madi- 
son Square. I never heard him speak of himself. You would 
not know that he had anything to do with those meetings, and 
it was only occasionally, when he wanted to speak of what 
somebody said to him, that he ever said a word. Time after 
time he said to his friends, “My only wonder is that God can 
use so feeble an instrument as I am to do such work.” And 
he grew mellow as he grew older. His prejudices were 
thrown off. I was very much touched by his coming to me 
one day and saying, “I am ashamed of myself. You know I 
have always talked about the extravagance and the worldliness 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION ait 


of women in New York. It has been a sort of theme of talk 
with me in a good many places. I have been spending a few 
days here now. I have been down to the East and West side 
where the schools are that those ladies are conducting. I have 
never known anywhere so much self-sacrifice and devotion, 
and I am ashamed of what I have said.” He came again a 
year or two afterwards and said, “You know I have always 
had a great prejudice against the Catholic Church. I am 
ashamed of it. I have had some opportunity of knowing 
lately, and there are no churches in New York and none in the 
country where Christ is preached so simply, and where the 
cross is held up as it is in many of the Catholic Churches.” 


XVI. 


THE GREATEST WORKER IN GOD’S VINEYARD 
By DR. J. MONROE GIBSON, or LONDON, ENGLAND 


T is nearly eight years since the church catholic has suf 

fered such a bereavement as this. Spurgeon on this side 
of the sea, Moody on that, have stood out from their fellows 
as field-marshals of the army of the Lord. And now the 
younger of the two has followed his senior to higher service 
in another sphere. “The Lord hath given, and the Lord 
hath taken away,” and if we do not forget to lay due emphasis 
on the giving we shall be able to add, “Blessed be the name 
of the Lord.” 

For indeed this gift which has just been withdrawn was a 
very noble and a very needful one. It is difficult in all the 
complexity of forces in modern Christendom to measure indi- 
vidual contributions, especially in the case of men of far- 
reaching and varied influence; but there seems to be a general 
agreement among those in sympathy with evangelical truth 
that there is, probably, no man left whose life and work have 
been such a large factor in the history of the Kingdom of 
God as his whom now we mourn. 

That he sprang from the ranks of the people; that his 
nature was so rude and unpromising in the eyes of all who 
knew him in boyhood and youth; that he was without advan- 
tage of education or of culture; that in fact the vessel was 
so unmistakably earthen, and yet held such incomparable 
treasure—all this has only served to demonstrate that the 
excellency of the power has been of God and not at all of 


man. “He was a strong character,” you say. Certainly; 
312 


“ 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION. 313. 


but explain hew that strength was so completely redeemed 
from all selfish uses and consecrated wholly to God and 
his fellowmen. “He had great self-assertion.” Yes; for 
the Kingdom, never for himself. Even on his natural 
self-assertiveness he had “Corban” written as plainly 
as on any other part of his many-sided nature. His self-asser- 
tion was part of his self-denial; his masterfulness was always 
in the Spirit, and for the ends of ministry; for, though he 
was a king of men, a born ruler of his fellows, he was as 
humble as a child. 

He could not bear to hear himself commended. I remem- 
ber on one occasion, when an injudicious brother fell into 
that vein, Moody sprang to his feet, stopped him, and inti- 
mated that the time was too precious to be wasted in that 
way. He must speak of the Master, not of the servant. And 
those of us who knew him intimately can testify that he was 
just as careful in private to avoid the subject. 

Never, perhaps, was a man, judging by natural disposition, 
more likely to be spoiled by public recognition; never was 
man exposed to greater risk of spoiling; yet who can point 
to anything he ever said or did which showed a sign of it? 
One thing I must not leave out even in a brief notice—the 
great value of the example he has left of charity towards 
those who differed from him. Though a man not only of 
great heart and lofty and courageous spirit, but also of mar- 
velous strength of mind and soundness of judgment, 
we cannot speak of him as holding the same high position 
in the matter of intellectual discrimination; but then he was 
great enough in all other respects to know and acknowledge 
his limitations here. He did not, as so many small men do, 
condemn those whom he could not understand. He had 
strong convictions, and held to them with great tenacity, and 
often used very strong language on subjects under contro- 
versy. But when he found good Christian men differing from 


® CRE Se ae aN tae 


314 - DWIGHT L. MOODY tS 


him, even in matters on which he had thus-strongly expressed 
himself, he did not conceitedly assume that he must of neces- 
sity be altogether right and they wholly wrong; still less did 
he condemn and denounce them. He not only recognized 
the presence and grace of the Spirit in men with whose intel- ¢ 
lectual position he could not sympathize, but he was noble 
and modest enough to keep an open mind for any new light 
there might be for him. He was not among those who sup- 
posed that the Spirit had said his last word to the churches. 
So we find him not only a teacher and a preacher, but a 
learner and a listener, to the end. Oh, for the diffusion of 
that same spirit of humility, modesty, and charity in all who 
bear the name of Christ, and especially in those who stand 
forth as champions of His Word of truth! 

I have not written of his work, so vast and varied and pen- 
etrating; blessed be God for it all—for all the streams of 
gracious influence which have flowed from the ever-spring- 
ing fountain of that consecrated life. But, above all, we thank 
and bless our God for the witness of the life itself; lived in 
as fierce a light as beats on any throne, and without the corre- 
sponding shelter from criticism and cavil, yet kept unspotted 
from the world; a great heliograph for these times of ours 
of the mind of Christ. Blessed, ever blessed, be his name, by 
whose grace he was what he was in the face of the world, and 
is what he is before the face of God. May He who kindled 
that fire in the heart of our Elijah now gone from us, and 
kept it burning so many years, touch all our hearts with the 
same fire now; and call many a young Elisha to take up the 
prophet’s mantle with a double portion of the Spirit, to be 
for light and leading and Spirit-power in the years to come. 








XVIL 
D, L. MOODY—A MIRACLE 


BY REV. A. C. DIXON 


[Address delivered at a Moody Memorial Meeting held in Camenie 
Hall, New York City.] 


HERE was no need that D. L. Moody should ever per- 
form a miracle. He was a miracle. A miracle is God 
at work, and God Almighty worked through D. L. Moody. 
He showed to the world, as it seems to me no man ever did 
in this generation, the difference between influence and 
power. He began without influence. He became influential 
through power. He did not minify the influences of money 
and of education and of organization and of position, but his 
trust was in God, and the power of Moody’s life was God 
Himself at work. Jesus was not a Man of influence. He 
made Himself of no reputation, but a power. Paul and Silas 
did not have enough influence to keep out of jail, but they 
had power after they got in jail to shake the doors open and 
walk out. And Moody was linked with the power that could 
shake the doors open. 

I always felt when I left Moody not like praising Moody, 
but praising God. It seemed to me that I could see and feel 
the throbbings of God,—God’s love; God’s sympathy; God’s 
great-heartedness, as I come in contact with this wonderful 
man. He incarnated those words, “God is able.” Of course 
God is powerful, all-powerful, but the all-powerful God could 
do no mighty works “because of their unbelief.” Omnipo- 
tence stood there unable! God did mighty works through 
Moody because of his belief. He enabled God,—I speak it 


reverently. 
315 


316 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


I saw, some time ago, a great steam engine just throbbing 
with power. But it could do nothing, for a bolt was broken. 
Just one bolt broken, and the power was cut off. Moody 
gave the bolt. He linked himself with Almighty God, and 


God worked through him because he trusted in His Word | 


and in His Spirit and in His Son. 

_ The life work of our friend was soul-saving. “By all means 
save some.” Save through the great crowd, and he believed 
in the great assembly, making not only a sphere but an at- 
mosphere for Jesus. He had a heart that took in the great 
cities and the great country and the great world. We speak 
of the modesty and the humility of Moody, and the phil- 
osophy of his humility, I am impressed, was this: He always 
stood in the presence of some great undertaking, some won- 
derful unfinished business for God, and the work before him 
was so big that you could hardly see Moody, you could 
simply see the work to be done and the God that could do 
it. My brethren, we get puffed up with vanity and pride 
because we are so well satisfied with the little bit we have 
done. We have not undertaken enough for God. If God 
will just lift us into His thought of the evangelization of the 
cities of the world, and just let us see Him as Moody saw 
Him, we will be at His feet humiliated and trustful, expecting 
a blessing from Him. 

I believe in the educational work established by Mr. 
Moody. God prosper the schools. God lead some of you 
millionaires to lay your millions upon that altar, and do it 
quick. The quicker the better for the glory of God. But 
education with Mr. Moody was the result of evangelization, 
and not evangelization the result of education. Education 
was an incident in his life, a very great incident, to be sure, 
but it was simply an incidental matter, and education was 
established through his evangelization. And my prayer is 
that Moody may be projected into the future, and that those 





4 


Se 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 317 


schools may be supported by evangelization, not only wealthy 
men giving their millions, but the evangelists and the 
churches and the pastors praying for them, giving to them, 


and thus the two-fold work of Moody shall continue until we 


shall meet him in glory. 

Within the next twelve months,—if Moody were standing 
on this platform I believe he would say,—within the next 
twelve months we should preach the Gospel to every creature 
in Greater New York. Let that be the watchword of this 
year of 1900. The politicians can reach all voters within 
three months, and all the Christian churches might reach 
all sinners within twelve months. Not convert them. We 
cannot bring them to Christ any more than Moody could, 


_ but we can bring Christ to them, and the work of the church, 


—may God wake them up to-day,—is to bring the Gospel to 
the people in the home, in the theater, on the street, face to 


face. If we would perpetuate Moody’s work, it must be by 


taking Jesus Christ with power to save into the homes and 
hearts of our people. 


XVIII. 


A MODERN SAINT 
REV. JOHN MCNEILL’S TRIBUTE 


W E are met to-night under the shadow of a great loss. 

God has taken home to Himself our beloved brother, — 
Mr. Moody. The great evangelist’s death has created a pro- 
found impression on all our hearts, and I received the news 
with the shock that comes of a personal loss. The moment 
I read it in the newspaper the words leapt to my mouth, “My 
father! my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen 
thereof.” We feel, I feel, as if the Wellington of the Evan- 
gelistic Army had been taken from our head. When one | 
begins to speak about Mr. Moody, one hardly knows where 
to strike in, and once he has broken in he does not know 
where to stop. On all sides of him he was a great man; he 
Was a great man in all his measurements. He was great as a 
preacher. 

I have sometimes heard people say that they could not 
account for his success, because they did not see wherein he 
differed from other men as a preacher. I could not subscribe — 
to that opinion. To me D. L. Moody was an immensely in- 
teresting preacher. He was no end of a preacher in resource- 
fulness, in what you might call tactics; that is, he always kept 
his audience at his finger-ends, and yet was ever pressing with — 
all his force for the one great mark to capture them for a 
waiting present Saviour. 

I think he was not merely a preacher; he was an eloquent 
preacher. I did not hear him during his first visit to this ; 


country, when he and Mr, Sankey burst upon Scotland and 
318 


ig = 
% 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION —.3119 





e carried it captive; and they have held it in their grip ever 
_. since. It was at Mr. Moody’s second visit that I heard him, 
and yet some folks observed to me, “You should have heard 
‘him during his first visit. Then you would have heard him 
at his best.” Well, I do not know what his best must have 
been. I remember hearing him when I was a student, a city 
_ missionary. It was in this very hall on a weekday afternoon 
_ that I sat to the left there. That plain, simple American rose 
up, there being nothing about him that suggested oratory 
_ in the academic sense; ah, but I shall ne’er forget that first 
address of his. It was about Paul. Paul’s motto was—“One 
thing I do.”” How he made Paul live before us! With what 
consummate skill he ran through Paul’s history! He brought 
in Paul’s persecutions, pointed to the time when they stoned 
him, and left him for dead; and after they thought that they 
had wreaked their worst upon him, Paul recovered and pulled 
himself together. His friends came around him and said: 
“Now, Paul, you'll have some sense; you'll give up preaching 
whilst these fierce Jews are abroad.” And then he brought 
in with tremendous effect his great text—“This one thing I 
do! Show me the road to the next town; I must preach 
Jesus Christ and Him crucified.” The thrilling effect on one 
hearer of that sermon can never be forgotten. 

Oh! Moody was a great preacher. Although he was unh- 
trained, uneducated in our professional, theological, academic 
sense, in another sense he was educated. He was well de- 
scribed in that picture of the Apostles Peter and John. We 
are told that when the people saw they were unlearned and 
_ ignorant in the academical sense, they took knowledge of 
them that they had been with Jesus. But if the mark of great 
preaching be great success and gathering of great crowds, 
and bringing men to an intelligent decision for Christ, then 
Moody was one of the greatest preachers who ever lived. 

He was a great organizer. If he had never become a 


2205 DWIGHT L. MOODY - 


preacher, he would have been at the head of some of 
those tremendous businesses in the United States, the 
facts and figures of which we read over here with 
wonder and almost incredulity. You remember that he 
was a clerk in a boot and shoe store when he was 
converted. He started to preach, and by and by he gave 
up his worldly employment and took to preaching. If Moody 
had stuck to selling boots and shoes, he would, at length, have — 
been at the head of some gigantic boot and shoe combine ~ 
that would have dominated the trade on both sides of the - 
Atlantic. He was a tremendous organizer, a man of restless © 
activity, a man of tremendous brain power, and of great in- 
sight and foresight. 

Mr. Moody was a great man every way you took him, and © 
if Jesus Christ had not captured him, and claimed him, and 
used him for His service, he would have been great in the | 
. world’s work. And then as a man, how unique, how true, 
how thorough! I admired his genius and power in organiz- 
ing. He also honored me with his friendship. I mourn his — 
loss. It was impossible to know him and not to love him. 

He was a holy man, a godly man, a saintly man. And 
when you think of Moody’s saintliness, it does not suggest a_ 
recluse or a man who lives far from the madding crowds’ ig- 
noble strife. Oh! how human he was! When his life is 
written, I hope those who undertake the task will give us 
the man Moody as he was. I hope they will give a faithful 
delineation of him in the human sense, how he lived a hearty — 
life. I have seen him roll on his couch with laughter in the 
fair happiness and gleefulness of body and soul when a good 
story would be told during that memorable campaign at the 
World’s Fair in Chicago. 

I said that no man was more saintly, more devoted, no 
man had, a greater passion for doing his work well than he. 
How human he was in the human side! Even through my 


_THE MAN AND HIS MiSSION 321 


tears I smile as I recollect him as a man, as playful to his 
latest day as a boy. Get Moody amongst children, and he 
was the biggest romp in the crowd. An hour later that man 
was a flaming herald of the Cross, lifted up for Jesus Christ 
in the midst of 10,000 people. 

He is gone! One thinks of him entering heaven. One 
thinks of the multitudes who would be there to meet him, and 


of the multitudes who are to follow after him. I feel weaker; 


all of us on the evangelistic field feel weaker. Scotland to- 
day feels somewhat emptier. He bulked so large, he was so 
mighty for Christ. Alas! he is gone! May the Lord bring 
a great blessing to us out of this removal of His servant! 
May we creep closer to the Lord Himself; may we cry more 
mightily unto Him. 

We thank God that we were privileged to know and work 


with D. L. Moody. His labors are over. What can one say? 


His end, I should think, was just as he would have wished it. | 
He had gone to Kansas City, where he had spoken in a hall 


to 12,000 people. Suddenly his strength gave way; his call 


had come, but God in His mercy gave him time to go home 
and to have all his family gathered quietly about him; and 


then his sun set for this world to rise in the next. 


- He sets as sets the morning star 
That goes not down behind the darkened west, 
Nor hides obscured amidst the tempest of the sky, 
But melts away into the light of heaven, 


Servant of God, well done; 
Praise be thy new employ, 

And while eternal ages run, 
Rest in thy Master’s joy, 


XIX. 


MOODY WAS GOD’S MOUTH PIECE 
BY REV. GEORGE C. LORIMER 


[An address delivered at a Moody Memorial Meeting held in Tremont 
Temple, Boston.] 


| AM perfectly sure that God has spoken to the world, not | 
merely through the message, but through the life of 
Dwight L. Moody, even as he spoke to the world through : 
the prophets Isaiah and Elijah, or John the Baptist, or any 
of the great religious leaders of the past, and I think that the 
Divine Being would have us renew our faith in His perpetual - 
and marvelous oversight of His church. = 
The opening of this century was marked by many revivals 
of religion. The decade preceding had been one of great — 
religious coldness. And then began a series of revivals at 
the opening of the century, and then God raised up some of — 
the most notable men ever given to the Christian church 
to be the leaders of the people. And among them in 1837 | 
was born Dwight L. Moody. To me Mr. Moody was as 
much a gift to the church of Jesus Christ as Spurgeon or | 
Wesley or Whitefield, and the coming years will demonstrate _ 
the fact that it was an emergency in the history of American, — 
and perhaps world-wide, Christianity, that required a special — 
instrument from the hands of God, and God found it in the — 
untaught boy, and consecrated him to his calling, and I am 
perfectly confident that as the years roll around and the 
church of Jesus Christ with her earnest prayer shall plead 
with God to give the leader necessary, the man will be un- 
covered, for Jesus Christ will never be without his great wit: 
322 


= 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION 323 





 tiesses among the children of men. God spoke through Mr. 
_ Moody to us of this generation, and I interpret the message, 
and I think I interpret it correctly when I say that the first 
part of it was a reiteration of what God has taught the world 

from the beginning—that it is not by authorities, nor by 
officials, nor by men especially consecrated by holy oil or the 
imposition of hands, that His work is to be carried forward 
to the ends of the earth. Not for one moment do I reflect 
on the value and power of Christian organization, with its 
officers, its directors and its pastors. Without them the Chris- 
tian world would disintegrate and we would find ourselves 
in a deplorable condition, but the tendency continually is to 
lean too much on the wheels within the wheels and to forget 
_ the need of the reviving spirit in everything, and consequent- 
ly God has chosen more than one. Men of the type of Mr. 
Moody, though to me he was prominent for his type, do a 
great thing to move the human heart,—cause mighty up- 
heavals throughout the Christian world, that men may come 
to believe in the simple power of God’s spirit working 
through laymen as well as through clergymen for the 
pulling down of the strongholds and the upbuilding of 


the church of Jesus Christ, and not until you laymen learn 


this lesson, and every one of you learn it so deeply as to 
make your lives felt in the community where you dwell, will 
this world be brought to a knowledge of Jesus Christ, our 
Savior. 
- And there is another part of the message—a great dae 
to hear God speak. It was indeed a great thing in Mr. 
Moody’s life to hear the reconfirmation from the very throne 
of God through him of the essential verities of the gospel 
of Jesus Christ. I have lived with Mr. Moody. I worked 
- with him in the tabernacle, and worked with him through 
4 several series of meetings in Chicago. I knew his methods 
_ of thought, and I knew that he laid the emphasis where every 


424 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


minister that desires to see results will always lay the em- 
phasis—on the atoning power of Jesus Christ to save from 
sin, and the cleansing influence of the Holy Ghost on mind — 
and conscience. Now, we may formulate these things dif- 
ferently. The sinner may perhaps prefer to shape his concep- 
tion of salvation in language other than the language of 
Mr. Moody, but any conception that eliminates the essential 
sacrificial power of Jesus Christ’s death is a wrong concep- 
tion and the evidence that it is wrong lies here—it is un- 
feeling. No man’s conscience is troubled by any other con- 
ception. No faint-hearted people are gathered together to 
listen to any other conception. And take out of Christianity 
the divinity of Christ, His atonement and the work of the 
Holy Word, and we are back once more at the foot of Mount 
Sinai, without a God-given hope and without means to lift 
you out of sin on to the peace and piety of Christian love. 
I have heard God speak in Mr. Moody’s life. I have heard 
God speak in Mr. Moody’s message. I have heard God speak 
in Mr. Moody’s enthusiasm. Every now and then in the days 
gone by people have spoken to me of Mr. Moody’s intense 
earnestness. As though earnestness were something that _ 
could be estimated! As though earnestness were a mere 
superficial thing! There is no real enthusiasm without con- 
viction. The men that move others are men who move them: - 
selves. Ruskin says that no one is able to sway a congre- 
gation until they find that somewhere the cords in the throat 
begin to swell up and the man’s whole soul is surging into 
his brain. Mr. Moody had that feeling, but it was more than 
a feeling—it was a feeling developed naturally by conviction, 
and we who are gathered here to-day may learn that God 
works through laymen as well as through ministers, but 
never, never, never apart from Christ’s beloved as the center _ 
of human hope, and always in kindling the fire that sweeps — 
from heart to heart, until the whole community is ablaze. 





REV. A. C. DIXON 


Pastor Hanson Street Baptist Church, Brooklyn 








*EQQI 


HOUYNHS 


Ul ys[osuvAS wo13 94} Aq pepunoy 


ANNAAV ODVOIHD S.AGOOW 











3 « 
J 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 327 


_ You never yet heard of a revival of religion where there was 
no excitement, no enthusiasm. Enthusiasm it was that kin- 


dled the spirit that led to the Crusades. Enthusiasm it was 
that broke the chains from the slaves in the South. Enthu- 
siasm it was that opened the prison doors to Howard in 
Europe. Enthusiasm it was that led to the preservation of 
the Union. Enthusiasm it was that caused hope to spring 
up in the hearts of the despairing and the sending away of 
iniquity in the olden times. Enthusiasm! Enthusiasm! The 
meaning of the word itself brings God with it. It is God in 
the heart showing out in the frame and breathing in the 
speech. I tell you, Moody was: much more than Spinoza and 
in a higher and truer sense a God-intoxicated man. So that 
to-day this is simply my interpretation, and it is an interpre- 


tation of God speaking to us that hope may find expression 


in our human nature. 

I want you to roll away from your minds the miserable 
and the altogether unwarranted prejudice against enthusiasm. 
Let the enthusiasm of that man reprove you. Get rid of your 
carping criticism. There is never a church but there will be 
found here and there enough members that cannot justify 
the work that has been done for them. There has never been 
an army of any kind but there will be always camp followers, 
that somewhere follow without respect for the great purpose 
of the work, never an army without its camp followers, never 
a movement without its deserters. Soin Mr. Moody’s work 
here and there you will see all that kind of thing. But, 
evangelists, what is your gospel if it is not the evangel? How 
are we to evangelize? By sitting still, going through the 
Bible service on Sunday? No, stretch out your hands to the 
uttermost ends of the earth. Oh, were I free from obligations 
to Tremont Temple and Boston, I would start around this 
globe to the men and the women yet in sin and darkness to 
evangelize, to tell them of Christ! 


328 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


The burden of it ison us. The cry comes to us from every 
valley and from every hill throughout our land. Let us be 
up, brother,—in all our churches this winter let us evange- 
lize. And let the cry now circle around the globe that we are 
not ashamed to believe in evangelism, and to honor and 
glorify the memory of the greatest evangelist that God has 
yet given to His church, 





XX. 


MOODY AND LINCOLN—A LIKENESS 
BY DR THEODORE & CUYLER 


[Address delivered at a Moody Memorial Meeting held in Carnegie 
Hall, New York City.] 


HE marvelous voice that so often resounded in this hall 

has passed into the harmonies of heaven. The most 
unique and extraordinary Gospel preacher that America has 
produced in this century has gone up to his resplendent re- 
ward. Nay, more. The privilege was accorded to our 
brother, Moody, of having poured the Gospel of redeeming 
love into more human ears and more human hearts than any 
man in modern times. Spurgeon, in his peerless way, 
preached one day in a week; Moody seven days, and he some- 
times reached in one week forty or fifty thousand souls. And 
then our dear brother was more endeared to us because he 
was such a thorough, typical American. He tasted of the 
soil, and on his garments was the smell of the New England 
fields that the Lord had blessed. If I were called upon to 
mame the two most thoroughly typical Americans of the 
nineteenth century, the men who have battled their way from 
obscurity to a world-wide renown, the men whom all our 
American boys should be taught to study as the model patriot 
and the model preacher of righteousness, I would not hesi- 
tate to name Abraham Lincoln and Dwight L. Moody. Ah, 
when a nation’s life is to be preserved and its liberties secured, 
Almighty God called a poor boy from the log cabin in Ken- 
tucky, cradled him on the rocks of hardship, gave him the 
great West for his only university, then anointed him to be 

329 





330 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


our Moses and to lead us through a sea of blood toa Canaan 
of freedom. In like manner, Almighty God called a.humble 
farmer boy on the banks of the Connecticut, gave him for his 
education only one book, the Book, schooled him with the 
spirit of Christ Jesus, then sent him out as a herald of salva- 
tion till Great Britain hung on his lips, and the Lord Chan- 
ccllor of England said, “He gives me a new conception of 
preaching.” Lincoln and Moody are alike in the gift of an 
infallible common sense. Neither of them ever committed 
a serious mistake. They were alike in being masters of the 
~ simple, strong Saxon speech, the language of the Bible and 
of Bunyan, the language of the plain people, the language 
_ that is equal to the loftiest forensic eloquence, and Lincoln’s 
huge loving heart, his heart gushed out in sympathy with all 
sorts and conditions of men, and made him the best loved 
man in American history. And Moody’s big loving heart, 
fired with the love of Jesus, made him a pure master of pathos 
that touched the fount of tears in thousands of hearts, and 
often brought weeping multitudes before his pulpit. Those 
two lives! Lincoln, the Liberator, wearing a martyr crown, 
carrying four million of shattered manacles in his hand. 
Moody, the Liberator, the liberator of immortal souls from 
the fetters of sin, fell the other day as a martyr to overwhelm- 
ing work, and went up to be greeted at the gates of glory 
by thousands whom he had led from the cross to the crown. 
Now, for a moment ere I take my seat, let me say, it may 
not be known to all of you that on the Sabbath before our 
brother started for Kansas City he delivered his last sermon 
in New York in yonder Fifth Avenue Presbyterian church. 
In that discourse, as if already the premonitory shadow was 
falling, he uttered this wonder sentence: Said he, “You may 
read in the papers that Moody is dead. It will not be so. 
God has given me the gift of the life everlasting.” Aye, aye, 
thanks be to God, Moody is alive! Moody lives! Hig spirit 





Sees 2 gt 7 ctl, Le ue Regent Soak EN eae aay 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 331 


is in this hall to-day where he lifted up Jesus. Methinks I 
hear that trumpet voice calling on the pastors and the 
churches of New York to seek through this week of prayer 
a baptism of fire that shall kindle this city, and set, perhaps, 
the nation aflame. 

One other message, and I am done, as true as I speak to 
you. He said, “Five and twenty years ago in my native vil- 
lage of Northfield I planted two Christian schools for the 
training of boys and maidens in Christian living and con- 
secration as teachers and missionaries of Jesus Christ. I be- 
queath as my legacy those training schools for Jesus to the 
churches of America, and I only ask that visitors to the beau- 
tiful native village where my ashes slumber on consecrated 
Round Top when they go there shall not be pained with the 
sight of melancholy ruins wrought by cruel neglect, but 
rather shall be greeted by the spectacle of two great, glorious 
lighthouses of the Lord, beaming out over the land, over 
the continent, over the world.” : 

My beloved brother, the answer of the churches of God 
in America will be, “We will! We will! We will! We will 
perpetuate those training schools for Jesus as the splendid, 
beneficent and permanent monuments of our beloved Dwight 


Lyman Moody. 


XXII. 


NEVER SPOKE AN UNKIND WORD 
BY MR. WM. FRY, DUBLIN, IRELAND 


Y acquaintance with our beloved departed friend dates 
from the year 1868, long before his name had become 
famous, as it afterwards did, throughout the English-speak- 
ing world. He was preaching’ in the Merrion Hall, and stayed 
with the late Mr. Henry Bewley at Willow Park, Dublin. It 
was the time of the “Believers’ Meetings,” and one of the de- 
lightful days at Willow Park was drawing to aclose, when D. 
L. Moody, Henry Varley, Grattan Guinness, and a number of 
other brethren engaged in the Lord’s work, withdrew to a 
large hay-loft for a season of special prayer, confession, and 
renewed consecration to the Master’s service. It was a won- 
derful time of the Holy Spirit’s. presence and power, and Mr. 
Moody often spoke of the blessing received on that occasion. 
The friendship which then commenced deepened and in- 
creased as the years passed, and I had opportunity of becom- 
ing more thoroughly acquainted with his loving, child-like 
spirit, the transparent honesty of his aims, and his whole- 
hearted devotion to his Master’s service. I have been with him 
in many of his missions in England, Ireland, and Scotland, at 
times when no buildings could be found large enough to 
contain the crowds that thronged to hear him, when the secu- 
lar and religious press were eager to report his meetings, and 
thousands were converted under his preaching. Yet he 
thought nothing of himself, gladly giving all the glory to 
God alone. In fact, anything approaching to flattery was 
very distasteful to him. On a certain occasion, when some 
332 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 333 


remarks of a complimentary nature were made to him by a 
well-known dignitary of the church, Moody’s reply was, 
“Well, sir, I believe I am the most over-rated man in Great 
Britain to-day!” 

One never heard him speak of “my converts,” or of num- 
bers of conversions, for his object was the glory of God in 
the salvation of the perishing; and so he truly rejoiced when 
souls were brought to Christ, no matter who was the instru- 
ment used. 

In his preaching he did not allow any mere worldly con- 
siderations to influence him. I have heard him speak to 
‘some of the highest in the land, as well as to the poor; but 
even in the presence of royalty his message was the same as 
before any other audience, for he could say with truth, “I 
seek not yours, but you.” And this singleness of purpose 
with his intense earnestness, compelled the attention of his 
hearers to the great truths of the Gospel. With his whole 
heart and soul, both by word and example, he sought to pro- 
mote the spiritual prosperity of God’s people. 

In the company of those like-minded with himself he was 
very happy and sociable; but I never knew him to speak an 
unkind word of a fellow-Christian, or even allow anything of 
the kind in his presence. Wherever he traveled through the 
land he made many friends, but I never knew him to make 
a single enemy. Where differences or estrangements had 
come between Christians, I have known on several occasions 
how gladly he sought to be the peacemaker. 

When last in London he had the highest medical advice, 
- and was warned by the doctors to be careful on account of 
his heart, but he still continued his great work with unabated 
vigor. Personally, he was a strict teetotaler and never lost 
an opportunity of advocating the temperance cause. In 
money matters he was most unselfish, and in his living very 
moderate, preferring the simple and plain food. He suffered 


Gag 


334 _-. “DWIGHT L. MOODY - 





much from seasickness, and probably this (considering its” 
effect on the heart) was one of the reasons which kept him _ 
from visiting this country in recent years, though his interest _ 
in the work of God, and his affection for friends on this side 
of the Atlantic, never abated. 

In his home life he was a devoted and loving husband and 
father, as well as a dutiful son to the dear old mother who 
finished her earthly pilgrimage but a short time before her 
son. 





XXII. 
PERSONALITY OF MR. MOODY 


BY DR. JAMES BUCKLEY 


[Address delivered at a Moody Memorial Meeting held in Carnegie 
Hall, New York City.] 


We. GO to the Bible for sublime passages, and those 
; ~ who understand the great Book go to it for strange 
passages. The strangest memorial note in all literature is 
to be found in the Bible concerning a certain king who 
reigned in Israel eight years, and the epitaph composed for 
him is this: “And he departed without being desired.” 

What a contrast between such a career and that which 
has called us here! Our friend died when he was most 
desired. Desired to maintain those wonderful Bible confer- 
ences. Desired as a nucleus of undenominational religious 
activity. Desired to sustain those educational institutions 
which he had founded. Desired to raise up more workers 
imbued with his spirit. Desired to dart to and fro through 
the country to awaken communities to snap the chains of 
conventionalism, to elicit and evoke the tremendous latent 
forces of the church, and to unite Christians in the only way 
in which they can ever be united, by a firm and unswerving 
belief in the fundamental principles of the Gospel he devel- 
oped in active soul-saving consecrated labor. At this hour, 
a young man, he was called away. 

To attend a meeting of this sort sometimes produces 
singular effects. Persons are heated by the Scriptures and 
by their own rhetoric until at last you would think it a jubila- 

335 


Seah OT Wa RY, pir . oe} ne Pe 


B30 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


tion, and from one great memorial meeting in this city a. 
gentleman retired saying, “I was sad when I went there, but 
I do not know now that it makes any very great difference 
according to those speeches. God is going to take care of 
His own work.” Now the fact is, the New Testament never 
teaches that we should not be sad. On the contrary, when 
Epaphroditus was sick St. Paul wrote to the Philippians and 
told them that Epaphroditus longed after them, because they 
had heard that he had been sick, and the Apostle said, “He 
was sick even unto death, but the Lord had mercy on him, 
and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have 
sorrow upon sorrow.” The real feeling is midway between 
jubilation and the sorrow of the world that worketh death. 

It is a great loss. To human eyes, it is a dreadful and in 
a certain aspect of the case, an irreparable loss. How are 
we going to prove that any man has the Spirit of God, any 
brother? Will oratorical preaching? Will pathetic preach- 
ing? Will persuasive preaching produce a demonstration 
that he has the Spirit? Is the power of discerning spirits left 
in the church? Have not some of the most famous evangel- 
ists the world ever saw fallen into the very depths of iniquity 
and sin? Did not the author of that wondrous hymn, “Come 
ye sinners, poor and needy,” spend twelve years in a most 
dreadful depth of depravity, and go mourning all his days 
after he emerged from it? Have we not in our day abso- 
lutely known them to renounce the doctrines they held when 
they were most prosperous as evangelists, and with brazen _ 
faces confess that in the midst of their greatest efforts for ~ 
sinners they did not believe what they were supposed to be- 
lieve? How shall a man prove that he has the Spirit of 
God? He must prove it by a long career, by a spotless repu- 
tation, by meeting men face to face as well as upon the ros- 
trum, and the men that have slept with him and traveled 
with him and prayed with him and suffered in evil report 





Bare Sean PIS AS 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 337 


as well as in good report, these men must stand up and be 
able to declare in the face of God and in the presence of man 
that this man, all through this period, lived as he professed, 
prayed as he professed, preached as he professed, denied 
himself as he professed, and then, if God gives such a won- 
drous death to a man as this, we have all the evidence probable 
and conclusive that he was a man of God. 

But now, my dear brethren, you cannot undertake to show 
that D. L. Moody did just what any other man could do if he 
only had enough of the Spirit. Could God do as much by 
Peter in the same way that he could with Paul. What kind 
of a speech would Peter have made at Mars Hill to the 
Epicureans and the Stoics? What kind of a speech would he 
have made there unless a miracle had been wrought? He 
would, perhaps unconsciously, unless a special miracle had 
been wrought, got himself into very great difficulty. He 
did it as it was on other occasions, and he had not learned bet- 
ter until the very crucifixion, when he smote off an ear in his 
excess of ill-regulated zeal. The fact in the case is that God 
by nature endowed Mr. Moody in an astonishing manner. 

Now in regard to his mere body. There was a man in 
Connecticut and he loved and adored Mr. Moody and he 
invariably amused himself in this way. Sitting in the cars 
when Mr. Moody came in he would say to some one beside 
him, “Do you know him?” “No.” “Well, that’s Collis B. 
Huntington, the greatest railroad man in this country.” 
And never did he hear one word of question from a man 
who never had seen Huntington. At other times he would 
suggest that it was a western judge, and in every case every 
man seemed to think it exactly right. They saw there a 
tremendous head, an immense chest; they saw a man obvious- 
ly born to command. All this humility of Mr. Moody was 
before God. He never was humble in his dealings with Mr. 
Sankey, or with any man that he undertook to direct. If 


i 





338 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


ever there was a man self-confident under God it was D. L. x 
Moody. Now this same man invariably told people after-: ; 
ward before they left him, for he was a Christian, “No, it — 
isn’t Mr. Huntington; it’s Moody,” and then curiosity was — 
greatly excited. D. L. Moody never reminded any other 
man of another man in the ordinary sense of the term. But, 
physically, a great many men reminded other men of Mr. — 
Moody. That indefinable personality that won’t show in a 
photograph, and can’t be painted in oil, was in Mr. Moody, — 
and it went out of his eyes and head. He came up to me one | 
day in a parlor car and struck me on the shoulder. Said he, — 
“You look about as you did”—he mentioned so long a time 
it would not do for me to repeat it. A man came up after- 
ward and said, ‘““Who was that?” ‘“That’s D. L. Moody,” I 
replied. “I thought it was Henry Wilson,” was his response, 
and there was a great physical resemblance between the 
Vice-President and Mr. Moody. Then he had what you will | 
seldom find in men inclined to corpulence, immense activity. — 
Now he could improve, and that was one of his glories, 
Two hundred years from now the extreme higher critics 
will be trying to prove that there were two Moodys, and 
they will do it by getting up the language together, word 
after word and sentence after sentence, that Mr. Moody used 
when he began in Chicago. They will make a comparison 
of that with the highly improved style of later years. 

Some persons say that Mr. Moody was not a cultivated 
orator. Give that passage quoted by Drummond. Observe 
that when he described the ascension of Elijah, several dis- 
tinguished parliamentarians rose up and looked into the air. 
Take that sublime eulogy of Joseph of Arimathea, Not far 
from me in yonder box sat a bishop noted for sound judg- 
ment and scholarship. ‘That is a piece of work,” said he, 
“as mere oratory that any man might be proud of.” 

Take two scenes in Moody’s life. When he was a young 





Pie ed ar hee Se 
Ryan i 


_ ‘THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 330 


man in Illinois the Irish Catholic boys broke his windows. 
He called on Bishop Dugan to induce him to stop the de- 
struction. The Bishop said, “I am glad to see you. Your 
zeal is admirable, your motive is pure. I wish,” said he, 
“you were only in Holy Church.” “I may be wrong,” said 
_ Moody, “but if I am, I want you to pray for me that I may 
see light.” “Well,” said the Bishop, “I will.” Moody fell 
on his knees on the spot. “Pray now,” said he. “Life is 


5 _ short and I have a great deal to do.” He fell on his knees, 


and the Bishop solemnly knelt and prayed for Mr. Moody. 
As soon as the Bishop said “Amen” Mr. Moody began and 
prayed for the Bishop, and besought God to open his eyes 
_so that he could see Christ without any intervening and 
eclipsing idols. The Bishop always spoke respectfully of 
him, and no more windows were broken. That was Moody 
then. 

Now take something a little later. Twenty years ago 
_ the gentleman who presides to-day sat on the platform in the 
Hippodrome. A very strange scene was taking place in the 
city of New York. We have read the Arabian Nights enter- 
tainments. We know that a certain Caliph used to go about 
in disguise, and marvelous are the extraordinary tales told 
of him, but at that time in New York behold an Emperor, 
an Emperor of a great territory which is to be in the future 
one of the greatest empires of the world, unless it becomes 
- permanently republican. That Emperor » was in New York 
_ going about as he had been in the Old World. I refer to Dom 
Pedro, the Emperor of Brazil. He went upon the platform. 
He took the seat vacated by Mr. Dodge. He sat there. 
About two-thirds of the audience knew who he was. Mr. 
Moody was preaching then and there, and what did he do? 
Did he exhibit that peculiar and obsequious bow of many per- 
sons when a President appears, or even a Secretary of State? 
_Bynomeans, Mr, Moody never referred to Dom Pedro, but 


340 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


he introduced into the midst of his discourse these words: 
“What will you do with Jesus? An Emperor cannot buy 
heaven.” And as he said that he paused, and Dom Pedro 
bowed his assent, and afterwards said to the gentleman who 
wrote the account which I have in my possession, “That is a 
man to be heard and believed.” 

But Mr. Moody was a personality. That personality is 
now invisible. It will disappear. You and I will remember 
him, and those who have seen him will remember him. But 
we belong to a vanishing generation. Who can go through 
Westminster Abbey without a guide book and know much 
about a great many there? Very few. The personality of 
Moody will be totally forgotten as the personality, to a large 
extent, of Jacob Knapp and of Charles G. Finney and a great 
many others. To the present generation they are but names. — 
There is but one way to prevent the personality of Moody 
from entirely disappearing. It is by the perpetuation of © 
those schools and the maintenance of their spirit. God for- 
bid that those schools should ever follow in the way of Har- 
vard Divinity School. Harvard Divinity School was made 
to exalt the deity of Christ. Mr. Moody had his prejudices, 
but I heard him declare that he would fellowship with every- 
body that believed himself a sinner and trusted in Christ, 
“but,” said he, “God being my helper, I never will fellowship 
a man that denies the deity of my God and Saviour, Jesus 
Christ, or sneers at His atonement.” And so this must be 
done. “ 

Now I close by thanking God for two things. There was 
@ man who spent his life in traducing the Bible, in carica- 
turing the ministry, in making audiences as large as this 
laugh at our holy faith. That man boasted that he would 
have his stenographer with him when he died that none 
could misrepresent his last words. He had a painless death. 
He never had to meet the King of Terrors. No man whis- 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 341 


pered in his ear, “You are about to die. Now does your 
faith sustain you.” He died and left the most deplorable scene 
of unconsolable grief that the world ever saw. Our Moody 
was told that he must die. He knew he was a young man. 
Fle was told he must die. What then? He would have been 
as good a man if he had died in delirium. He died a blessing 
to the church. God showed, I believe, in a peculiar way 
for the church and for him that “precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of His saints.” But there is something 
worse in this world than agnosticism, something worse than 
blank infidelity; it is the practical effects of a faith that we 
cannot be sure of the future. Here are the words that I 
heard sung by sweeter voices than are often heard in the- 
sanctuary, at a private entertainment, and at the close a 
young lady was heard to say, “Well, perhaps that’s all there is 
Of it.” 


“We are no other than a moving row 

Of magic shadowy shades that come and go 
Round with the sun-illumined lantern held 

In midnight by the Master, so. 

But helpless pieces of the game He plays 

Upon this checkerboard of nights and days, 
Hither and thither, moves, and checks, and slays, 
And one by one back in the closet lays. 
Yesterday this day’s madness but prepare, 
To-morrow silence, triumph or despair. 

Drink, for you know not whence you came nor why! 
Drink, for you know not why you go nor where!” 


They were alive in Paul’s day. “Let us eat and drink, for 
to-morrow we die.” Ah, if that were so, I, too, would drink 
anything for oblivion, then, anything. But now, listen! 
Listen! Listen! 

“T heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write. 
From henceforth blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; 


342 _ DWIGHT L. MOODY 


yea, saith another voice, yea, saith the Spirit, that they may 
rest from their labors and their works do follow them.” 

Farewell, beloved brother. Farewell, stalwart friend. 
Farewell, all men’s friend. We shall see thee at last, not in 
the flesh, for didst thou not thyself say, “My body to the 
dust, my soul to the God that gave it?” ~ 





PROFESSOR D. B. TOWNER 
Professor of Hymnology in Moody Bible Institute, Chicago 


‘SGNNOUSD AUVNIWES WOUA—aFAIA LNOLLOANNOO SH.L SSOUOV AIA 








Bis Se 


XXIII. 


MOODY WAS A MODERN PROPHET 
BY BISHOP W. F. MALLALIEU. 


[Address delivered at a Moody Memorial Meeting held in Tremont 
Temple, Boston.] 


WIGHT L. MOODY was a prophet of God. When 
one of the flaming chariots of the heavens sprang low 
on Friday noon, December 22, he stepped in and ascended to 
eternal glory. This century has produced very few men who 
could be considered his equals. He was familiarly known 
wherever the English language is spoken. The world owes 
Dwight L. Moody a debt of gratitude which it can never re- 
pay. The debt will continue to increase as the years multi- 
ply. Pre-eminently he was a benefactor of the men, espe- 
cially the young men, of his generation. He possessed in 
a very unusual degree the qualities and characteristics that 
command the confidence and good will of all men, whether 
young or old. Some of them I will venture to mention, sug- 
gesting that in proportion as they are possessed by us will we 
have the best measures of influence and usefulness in our asso- 
ciation with men. 

First of all, there was something abet his nature as at- 
tractive and beautiful as the blue Connecticut winding 
through the level meadows of Northfield Valley, while at the 
same time there was something about him as rugged as the 
forest-clad hills where he was reared. He was a man who 
knew men and next he knew truth and God. Like Stephen 
of old, he was full of faith and the Holy Ghost. He utterly 
despised and hated shams of any and every kind and quality, 

. 345 


ek ‘DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


Life was a tremendous reality to him, and he was tremend- 
ously real. There was not the slightest trace of modern 
optimism about his thought, speech or methods. He was a_ 
broad-gauged, noble, natural, whole-souled man. He never 
affected to know more than he really knew, but what he did 
know he knew most positively and without a shadow of 
doubt. He never affected to be more than he really was. 

He was perfectly sincere. He lived in the very light of 
noonday with all the windows of his soul wide open to the uni- 
verse. Hewas gladto learn. He would sit at the feet of any 
teacher who had superior knowledge, but he had his own 
views and convictions in regard to all questions of doctrine 
and experience, and these were based upon conclusions 
reached by the most comprehensive and careful study of the 
Holy Bible. He never sought for worldly gain or emolu- 
ment, never sought for the good will or praise of his fellow 
men by surrendering his inborn convictions of truth and 
duty. If he had lived in the time of Cromwell, he would — 
have marched beside that grandest of all Englishmen, the un- 
_ conquerable Ironsides. 

He was completely fearless. It is doubtful if he really 
knew the meaning of the word fear as applied to men and 
things. If he had been in Luther’s place he would have 
thrown the inkstand with a more steady and vigorous hand 
than did Luther, and most likely he would have grappled 
with Satan and thrown him out of the narrow window. 

Truthful to the last degree, no man ever doubted his word, © 
His conscience quick and tender, well trained and properly 
balanced, and thoroughly informed and inspired by his ex- 
_ traordinary knowledge of the enjoyable and unquestionable — 
word of God, he was constant and steadfast in all the work 
and duties of public and private life. Not humorous, he 
possessed a fine, genuine humor, but he was never light and 
trifling, never frivolous. He lived too near to God and his 





: iy 7 ee A 4 ; : 
eis THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 347 


fellowship with Jesus was too intimate to admit of frivolity. 
In him we realize the answer to the prayer: 


Lord, give us men, strong and stalwart men, 
Men who trample self beneath them, 

Men who make their country love them. 
Men who never shame their mothers, 

Men who never fail their brothers. 

Men who tread where saints have trod, 

Men for country, home and God, 

Lord, give us men. 


Then, to crown all, his close touch with the poor and lowly, 
whose lives and struggles he knew so well. His personal 
comprehension of infinite compassoin and the love of God 

for humanity wrought upon his entire being. Sympathy for 
all men apparently obliterated all traces of selfishness and 
unworthy ambition, so that he lived and died for others. 

Thus constituted, it is not strange that he had a wonderful 
influence over men, and especially over young men. In view 
of his deep faith in God he succeeded in opposing the ob- 
stacles and discouragements thrown in his way by short- 
sighted but well-meaning friends. How ashamed and 
humbled before God we preachers ought to be that we have 
been and are so unlike our departed brother. How manifest 
it is that our unlikeness to him explains the fact that men, 
young or old, do not throng the sanctuaries where we minis- 
ter. During his public career it is estimated that his congre- 
gations would aggregate 100 millions of people. Of this vast 
multitude at least twenty-five millions were young men. Un- 
numbered thousands were made better, while scores of 
thousands were turned from sin to righteousness and brought 
into the fold of the Good Shepherd. Incidentally it may 
be said emphatically and truthfully that no man living or 
dead has done as much as he to establish far and near on 
firm foundations and to promote the life and development of 


Ch a ® we PR a a ie Ree BA Tae SN wd me 
= ST at IN NC ae ahs 


348 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


the Young Men’s Christian Associations. Magnificent man! 
Faithful Christian! Peerless evangelist of the nineteenth 
century! He has left us. His feet will never again press 


the platform. Earthly walls will never again resound with his x 


thrilling, pleading voice. His prayers will never again bring us 
near the mercy seat except as we remember them. His work 
is done, though his influence will abide through all time. 
Our upward loving gaze follows him as earth recedes and 
heaven opens until we see him pass the gate of pearl. He 


walks the streets of gold, he wears his crown in Paradise. If — 


we may not equal him in his high achievements, may God 
grant that at least the shadow of his mantle falling may rest 
upon us and our souls be moved to clearer consecration, 
holier ambitions and more faithful, heroic and unselfish 
service and sacrifice than we have ever known in all the 
past! 





XXIV. 
THE STORY OF THE SCOTTISH CAMPAIGN 


BY LORD OVERTOUN, OF GLASGOW, SCOTLAND 


NE day in 1873 I met Rev. Dr. Andrew Bonar in the 

street. We talked together of the daily prayer meeting 
then being held in Glasgow, and Dr. Bonar said: “I do not 
suppose it will get fresh life until Mr. Moody comes.” This 
was the first time I had heard the name of our honored friend, 
-and I then learned of the beginning of his work in England; 
but I little thought that God was sending us a man who was 
to be the means of untold blessing to our country. 

To know Mr. Moody was to love him, and to have known 
him intimately and worked with him, is a treasured memory 
and inspiration to everyone who had this privilege. I had the 
happiness of being in his inner circle, and working with him 
on each of his three visits to Scotland. During his first visit 
I was a member of his committee, and in his later visits, chair- 
man. While I had the pleasure of working with him in Lon- 
don and Liverpool and many parts of Scotland, I, of course, 
had most to do with his Glasgow campaign, and the hallowed 
associations of those times of blessing can never be forgotten. 

The Scottish campaign of Messrs. Moody and Sankey 
began in Edinburgh, where, in the winter of 1873-74, their 
meetings were very widely blessed; a deep and genuine work 
of grace resulted, and the churches received much blessing, 
The notable movement in Edinburgh awoke the country, 
and, in many instances, a work of grace had begun before 
the evangelists reached the district. The Evangelical min- 
isters throughout the country threw themselves into the 

349 


350 DWIGHT L. MOODY — 


work, and the churches all over the land received fresh im- : 


a 


pulse and life. Mr. Moody’s work, especially in Scotland, has - 


made preaching and praying much more direct, and has 
led thousands to love and study the Bible as they never 
did before. It has led the churches to fresh and successful 


effort in aggressive work, and has thus done much to bring — 


them together by united service in the great harvest-field, 
where earnest laborers lose sight of their minor differences 


in view of the mighty link which makes all one in Christ 


Jesus. 
Mr. Moody and Mr. Sankey arrived in Glasgow in the 


spring of 1874, and very soon the expected blessing came. — 


The Evangelistic Committee then formed from all denomi- 


nations of the Christian Church, arranged the campaign, and — 


for twenty-five years has continued it; so that now, as the 


Glasgow United Evangelistic Association, we are celebrating 


the twenty-fifth anniversary of Mr. Moody’s visit by a Gospel 
campaign on a larger scale than ever before attempted. Mr. 
Moody, in response to our invitation, greatly desired to come 
over and help us, but family bereavements and impaired 
strength—the result of his manifold labors—rendered his 
coming impossible; and now, while we are in the middle of the 
campaign here, the sad tidings reach us that the loved friend 
to whom we all owe so much has been called to his rest and 
reward. Few have ever laid more golden sheaves at the Mas- 
ter’s feet, and few ever received such a welcome in the 
“heavenly land” of which he so often spoke. 

Space will not allow me to give in detail what I could tell 
of our honored friend’s character and work, nor the many 


instances that come to mind of what I saw and heard during 


these times of blessing. Mr. Moody was a born leader of 
men, and had the talent of discerning character in a wonderful 
way; as when, for instance, he selected James Scott, a young 
divinity student, to be secretary of the committee when he 


: / P 
: { 5 ij 


THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION - 351 


left, and everyone knows how splendidly James Scott justified 
his choice. 

Mr. Moody’s wonderful power of preaching and organiz- 
ing were consecrated to the service of Christ and the winning 
of souls. Brought up among Unitarians, he early gave up 
their doctrines, and during all his life most eloquently pleaded 
the essential truths that circle round the Divine Savior and his 
great atonement for the sins of men. Of course, such preach- 
ing and work as Mr. Moody’s, which made great inroads on 
the kingdom of darkness, could not fail to rouse strong oppo- 
sition in many quarters, and many, both in the churches and 
outside of them, objected to the singing and the preaching 
of the Gospel. But God set his seal unmistakably on Mr. 
Sankey’s singing and Mr. Moody’s preaching, and to-day 
thousands, both in heaven and on earth, bless God for send- 
ing his honored servants to our islands. As of old, people 
said that it could not really do good to men to tell them that 
they would be saved by simply believing in Jesus, and that 
the doctrine of immediate salvation by faith in Christ was a 
dangerous one; but the quarrel of these objectors lay, not 
with Mr. Moody, but with all who preach the Gospel, for 
this doctrine of justification by faith inspired Luther to shake 
Europe, and is the theme of every evangelistic preacher, and 
the teaching of the inspired Word of God. 


XXV. 
“ONE OF THE SEVENTY” 


By DR. WILTON MERLE SMITH 


[An address delivered at a Moody Memorial Meeting in Carnegie 
Hall, New York City.] 


| CALL him one of the seventy. Nearly fifty years ago he 

heard the Master say those words that were said when 
He sent out the seventy lay workers: “The harvest is great 
and the laborers are few,’”’ and there found lodgment that 


day in his heart that sweet thought of his whole life which _ 


broke-into such beautiful expression at his death: “God is — 
calling me.” And his whole life was an anthem, “God is 
calling me. Here am I, O Lord, send me.” He lifted the ~ 
work of the Seventy up on an Apostolic plane, and he made 
the consecrated platfrom which he occupied to have more 
force and power for Jesus Christ than the pulpit of any land, 
and, best of all, he held up before you laymen in the churches 
the grand possibility of an heroically consecrated life. More 
than that, he was a hard driven man, hard driven of God. 
Our little inspirations seem to fade away before the giant 
movings that were hurling forward this servant of God. We 
read that Stephen was filled with the Holy Ghost, and we 


_ know, as the Scripture tells us, that he was irresistible, for | 


none could gainsay him as he argued in those synagogues of 

Jerusalem, and we learn the lesson when we study the Book 

of the Acts that the man who is filled with the Holy Ghost 

is ever driven hard of God. Martin Luther was irresistible at 

the Diet of Worms. He came against all the ramparts and 

bulwarks of a corrupt church, and the ramparts and bulwarks 
352 





‘THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 353 


and defences of the church went crashing down before the 
might of the man filled and driven hard of God. But this 
man, our friend, I believe was as mightily driven as any man 
that this world has seen, and we have reason to thank God 
for the illustration of the possibility of a God driven life 
which D. L. Moody held ever before the church. 


XXVI. 
STORY OF MR. MOODY’S BURIAL 
BY IRA D. SANKEY 


_ [An Address Delivered at a Moody Memorial Meeting, Held in Carnegie 
Hall, New York City.] 


E WENT to Northfield to bury our beloved friend and 
brother. We arrived in the evening before the day 
appointed and as we went into the hotel, the Northfield, that 
he had built for the accommodation of his friends during the 
convention, it was opened for us and was filled with his 
friends, but that evening was one of the saddest evenings 
that I ever spent in yonder village. We gathered in little 
groups about the hotel, in the parlors and the dining room, 
_ and we talked of him who had been our joy in days gone 
' by, and every now and then we would look toward the door 
of the hotel almost expecting to see him rushing through 
the door and giving some command for us to do something, 
for he always used to be up and doing, and then as the silent 
night fell and we waited for the morning, we were anxious for 
that day, wondering if the storm would break. But the sky 
even smiled upon us and upon the day—no fairer day ever 
broke upon those beautiful hills than the day that we buried 
our loved one. 

We went down early in the morning to the home, and as I 
went into the house I sought his beloved partner. And let 
me say right here, amid all that has been said about what has 
made Mr. Moody so great a man, I want to bear testimony 
to-day that one of the greatest powers in Moody’s life was 
the beloved partner that God gave him yonder in the work 

354 


| THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 355 


in Chicago long years ago. She has been at his side as it 


were a brake upon this impetuous man, and held him back 


and guarded him all the way through these years, and honor 
is due to Mrs. Moody more than to any living person today. 
for the success of the man, D. L. Moody. 

I walked into the chamber of death and looked upon his 
splendid form as he lay there, as it were, just sleeping. I 
could hardly believe that my friend was gone, he looked 
so natural. There was some color yet in his cheek. His eyes 
were closed, but I said, “He looks as if he were only sleep- 
ing.” It was the long sleep of death. I said, ‘““Why, I have 
seen him a thousand times like that after a long weary day 
of labor come into the hotel where we were stopping and 
throw himself down upon a lounge and fall asleep in a mo- 
ment.” It was wonderful how he could go to sleep. It was 
wonderful how he could recuperate by going to sleep for that 
few minutes, and then be up and away again with all the life 
and animation that he had in the morning. And so we stood 
beside him and I said in pare: “Good-bye, dear Moody, 
we will meet you in the morning.” 

We carried his body through the streets of the village. ‘We 
followed him to the little church, and there he lay in state for 
a few hours so that the neighbors and friends might see him. 
And they came in, the farmer, the farmer’s wife, and the chil- 
dren, and they came and looked at the noble man as he lay 
yonder, and I was very much touched as one poor old man, 
bowed down on his staff, and came and stood beside this 
man of God, and he said, as he turned away with a tear, “Oh, 
he was my friend, but he was a friend of everybody.” True, 
he was. He was a friend of everybody in Northfield. 

The Catholics as well as the Protestants believed in D. L. 
Moody and loved him, and they helped bear his mother away 
to the tomb. You could tell whether the people of the vil- 
lage loved him, and the members of the Catholic church 


~ 


at ‘ 
r Th Sia 27 


356 DWIGHT L. MOODY . 

asked the honor and privilege of being the bearers of that 
precious body, but it was the students, the boys whom he — 
was trying to educate to make good men, that carried him to 
the church and laid him there; and then in the afternoon, 
after all the addresses had been made, we started again 
through the cold, frozen street, and up past the very door 
where his mother had lived, and where he was born. Passing 
within a few feet of that door, we bore him on to beautiful 
Round Top, and just as the shadows were lengthening across 
the valley of the Connecticut, we bore him to the grave, and 
while we lowered his body down, some one struck up that — 
beautiful old hymn he loved so well, 


“Jesus, lover of my soul, 
Let me to Thy bosom fly.” 


And with one single verse he was laid away until we shall 
meet him in the resurrection. ; 





PART III. 


MOODY'S» EULOGY OF THE BIBEE 





This Book will keep you from sin, 
Or sin will keep you from this Book. 


Here search, and great shall be your store; 
Here drink, and you shall thirst no more. 





PART III. 


Mooby’s DRAMATIC VERSION OF FAMOUS 
BIBLE STORIES 


[These stories were originally delivered in London, England, to 
audiences of tens of thousands that were swayed like moving grain by 
rue Bes power. We have revised and edited them for American 
readers. 


THE STORY OF BARABBAS 


| HAVE often thought what a night Barabbas must have 
spent just before the day when Christ was crucified. 

As the sun goes down, he says to himself: “To-morrow! 
—only to-morrow! And I must die on the cross. They will 
hang me up before a crowd of people; they will drive nails 
through my hands and feet; they will break my legs with bars 
of iron; and in that awful torture I shall die before this time 
to-morrow, and go up to the judgment with all my crimes 
upon me.” 

Maybe, they let his mother come to see him once more be- 
fore dark. Perhaps he had a wife and children, and they came 
to see him for the last time. 

He couldn’t sleep at all that night. He could hear some- 
body hammering in the prison-yard, and knew they must be 
making the cross. 

He would start up every now and then, thinking he heard 
_ the footsteps of the officers coming for him. 

At last the light of the morning looks in through the bars 
of his prison. 

“To-day—this very day—they will open that door and lead 
me away to be crucified!” 

359 


360 DWIGHT L. MOODY =— 


Pretty soon he hears them coming. No mistake this time. 
They are unbarring the iron door. He hears them turning the ; 
key in the rusty lock. The door swings open; there are the — 
soldiers. Pans: 

Good-bye to life and hope! Death, horrible death now wis = 
and, after death, what will there be then? 

The officer of the guard speaks to him ee you — 
are free!” 

He hears the strange words, but they make very little im- — 
pression on him. He is so near dead with fear and horror, 
that the good news doesn’t reach him. He hears it; but thinks 
it is a foolish fancy. He is asleep and dreaming. He stands 
gazing a moment at the soldiers, and then he comes to him- 
self. 

“Don’t laugh at me! don’t make sport of me! Take me 
away and crucify me; but don’t tear my soul to pieces!” 

Again the officer speaks: “You are free! Here—the door 
is Open: go out; go home.” 

Now he ers to take in the truth; but it is so wonderful ; 
a thing to get out of the clutches of the Roman law, that he 
is afraid to believe the good news. And so he begins to doubt, 
and to ask how it can be. 

They tell him that Pilate has promised the Jews the release 
of one prisoner that day; and that the Jews have chosen him 
instead of one Jesus of Nazareth, who was condemned to be 
crucified. : 

Now the poor man begins to weep. This breaks his heart. 
He knows this Jesus. He has seen Him do some of His 
miracles. He was in the crowd picking pockets when Jesus ~ 
fed the five thousand hungry people. 

“What! that just man to die—and I, a thief, a highway- 


man, a murderer, to go free!” And in the midst of his joy at 


his own release, his heart breaks at the thought that his life 
is saved at such a cost. 


‘SOI}O UIO|se| Ul posites spunj wWosz o1y OSvoIYD }eo1S oy} 10}3e ysnf Apoow ‘sy Aq poyorT 


‘OOVOIHD ‘JIOVNUAEV.L AGIS HLYON S.AGOOW 











CTSISH.LUON ‘WATSO.LIGAV FHL 

















mee: 






THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 363 


Stiter. that is the Gospel. Christ died for you, “the just 
for the unjust.” ‘He was bruised for our iniquities, and by 
His stripes we are healed.” 

Come out of your prison; throw off the chains of sin. You 
were justly condemned, but Jesus died for you. Let your 
heart break in penitence; weep tears of love and joy. 





THE STORY OF ELIJAH AND THE PRIESTS OF 
BAAL 


ET us go to Carmel for a few minutes. 
King Ahab had forsaken the God of Israel, and all the 
court people and “upper ten” had followed his example. 

But there was an old prophet out in the mountains, to whom 
God said: ‘Go to Ahab, and tell him the heavens shall be shut 
up and there shall be no rain.” 

Away he goes to the wicked king. He bursts in upon him 
like a clap of thunder, gives his message, and hurries away. 

I suppose Ahab laughed at the old prophet. ‘What! no 
more rain? Why, the fellow must be crazy!” 

Pretty soon the weather gets very dry. The earth is wvthed 
and begins to crack open. The rivers have but little water in 
them, and the brooks dry up altogether. The trees die; all 
the grass perishes, and the cattle die, too. Famine; starvation; 
death! If rain doesn’t come pretty soon, there won’t be a live 
man or woman left in all the kingdom. 

One day the king was talking with the prophet Obadiah. 

You see he did have one good man near him, along vith all 
the prophets of the false god. Almost anybody likes to have 
one good man within reach, even if he is ever so bad. He may 
be wanted in a hurry some time. 


ma Ss Oe X lth aa Aas 
hed x = wie in PN 


x p 


364 DWIGHT L. MOODY ~ 


“See here, Obadiah,” says King Ahab; “you go one way, . 


and I’ll go another, and we'll see if we can’t find some water 
somewhere.” 

Obadiah hadn’t got a great way before Elijah geen out 
upon him. 

“Oh, Elijah! is that rout Ahab has been hunting for you 
everywhere, and couldn’t find you. He has sent off into all 
the kingdoms about, to have them fetch you if you were 
there.” 


“Yes; I’m here,” says Elijah. “You go and tell Ahab I — 


want to see him.” 

“I dare not do that,” says Obadiah; “for just as soon as I 
tell him you are here, the Spirit will catch you away and take 
you off somewhere else; and then the king will be very angry, 
and maybe he’ll kill me.” 

“No,” says Elijah. “As the Lord liveth, I will meet Ahab 
face to face this day.” 

So Obadiah hurries off to find Ahab, and tells him he has 
seen the prophet. 

“What! Elijah?” 

VES 

“Why didn’t you bring him along?” 

“He wouldn’t come. He says he wants you to come to 
him.” 

Ahab wasn’t used to have people talk that way to him; but 
he was anxious to see the prophet, so he went. And when he 
sees him he is very angry, and cries, “Art thou he that trou- 
bleth Israel?” 

“Not at all,” says Elijah. ‘You are the man that is trou- 
bling Israel—going off after Baal, and leading ever so many 


of the people with you. Now, we have had enough of this — 


sort of thing. Some people are praying to God, and-some 
are praying to Baal, and we must have this question settled. 
You just bring all your prophets and all the priests of Baal 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 365 
up to Mount Carmel, and I also will come. We will make 
us each an altar, and offer sacrifice on it; and the God that 
answereth by fire, let Him be God.” 

“Agreed,” says Ahab; and off he goes to tell his priests and 
get ready for the trial. 

I fancy that was a great day when that question was decided. 

All the places of business were closed, and everybody was 
going up to Mount Carmel. There must have been more 
people on Mount Carmel than there are to-day at the races.* 
A better class of people, too! 

There-were eight hundred and fifty of the prophets and 
priests of Baal altogether. I fancy I can see them going up 
“in a grand procession, with the king in his chariot at their 
head. ; 

“Fine-looking men, ain’t they?” says one man to another 
as they go by. “They'll be able to do great things up there 
on the mountain.” | 

But there Elijah marched, all alone: a rough man, clad in 
the skins of beasts, with a staff in his hand. No banners, no 
procession, no great men in his train! But the man who could 
hold the keys of heaven for three years and six months was 
not afraid to be alone. 

Now says Elijah to the people, “How long halt ye between 
two opinions? Let the priests of Baal build them an altar and 
offer sacrifice, but put no fire under; and I will do the same: 
and the God that answereth by fire, let Him be God.” 

So the priests of Baal built their altar. 

Tam sure if God hadn’t held him back, Satan would have 
brought up a little spark out of hell to set that sacrifice on fire. _ 
But God wouldn’t let him. 

Then they begin to pray: “Oh Baal, hear us! Oh Baal, 


1”? 


hear us 





* This was given on Derby Day, at the Opera House, Haymarket, 
London. 





366 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


Elijah might have said, ‘““Why haven’t you prayed to Baal 
for water this dry weather? You might just as well have 
asked him for water as for fire.” 

After a long time they begin to get hoarse. 

“You must pray louder than that, if you expect Baal to 
hear you,” says the old prophet. “Maybe he is asleep: pray 
louder, so as to wake him up.” 

Poor fellows! they haven’t any voice left; so they begin to 
pray in blood. They cut themselves with knives, and lift their 
streaming hands and arms to Baal. But no fire comes down. 

It is getting towards sundown. 

The prophet of the Lord builds an altar. Mind; he doesn’t 
have anything to do with the altar of Baal, but builds an 
entirely different one, on the ruins of the altar of the Lord 
which had been broken down. 

“We won't have anybody saying there is any trick about this 
thing,” says the prophet. So they bring twelve barrels of 
water and pour over the altar. I don’t know how they man- 
aged to get so much water, but they did it. 

Then Elijah prays: “Oh God of Abraham and of Isaac and 


of Jacob, let it be known this day that Thou art God in Israel.” 


He didn’t have to pray very loud. God heard him at once, 
and—down came the fire!! It burnt up the sacrifice, burnt up _ 
the wood, burnt up the water, and burnt up the very stones of 
the altar. Jehovah is God: nobody can halt any longer. 

Ah! but some of you say, “I too would have decided for 
God if I had been on Mount Carmel that day.” My friends, 


Calvary is a great deal more wonderful than Carmel. The 


sacrifice of Christ on the cross is more wonderful than the | 
sacrifice which was burned on that altar. 

Decide for Christ now, with Calvary in sight. Choose ye 
this day whom ye will serve. 





a ee eM 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 367 
THE STORY OF THE ADVENTURES OF DANIEL 


HEN we come to the life of such a man as Daniel, the 

first thing we ask is: What was the secret of his suc- 

cess? Well, my friends, I'll tell you what I think was the 

~ secret of this man’s success ;—He knew his God. 

A great many professing Christians never get on intimate 

_ terms with their God, and so they never amount to much. But 

Daniel, from his boyhood, knew and trusted in the God of 

Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and 
that was what put such courage into him. 

There is another very important thing about Daniel: he 
was able to say no! at the right time. 

I tell you, my friends, it would be a great thing for our 
- young men to be able to say No! when the devil comes up to 
them and begins to coax them away from the God of their ; 
father and mother. 

We don’t know just how old he was when we hear of him 
first: probably about seventeen. The king Nebuchadnezzar 
had given orders to take some of the best and brightest boys 
among the Hebrew captives and bring them up among his 
wise men. They were to be taught the language and the learn- 
ing of the Chaldeans, and to be fed with meat and wine from 
the king’s table. 

“But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile 
himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the wine 
which he drank.” There was something in the law of his God 
- forbidding him to eat meat or drink wine which had been 
offered to idols; and Daniel knew that the king’s meat and the 
king’s wine had been offered to idols, so he determined not 
to touch it. 

If he had been like a good many of our modern Christians, 
he would have said something like this: ‘Well, it can’t be 
helped. I don’t like to defile myself this way; the law of God 


368 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


forbids it; and if I were only home in Jerusalem I never’ | 
would do it in the world. But I really don’t see how we are 
going to help it. We are slaves. Besides, it is the king’s 
special order; and if he should hear of our disobedience, our 
heads would come off in no time. Really, we can’t be ex- 
pected to run such a risk as that.” 

That’s it: the devil told him to do in Babylon as the people 
of Babylon do. But Daniel had the courage to stand up to 
the law of his God, and say no! 

Consequences? Never mind the consequences. There 
wasn’t any such word in his dictionary when it came to obey- 
ing the law of his God. He was bound to do it, let the con- 
sequences be what they might. 

So when the servant who had charge of them came to bring 
them their dinner, Daniel and his three young friends told him 
they couldn’t eat that meat and drink that wine, because it was 
against the law of their God. 

Look at that! Daniel doesn’t try to dodge the question at 
all; he gives the true reason right out at once. 

“But,” says he, “it won’t do at all. If you don’t eat it, the 
king will find it out. He’ll see you some time looking lean and 
thin, and he’ll ask what the matter is, and then I shall lose my 
head as well as you.” 

“Just try us for ten days,” says Daniel. “Give us pulse to 
eat and water to drink, and see how we get along on it.” 





So the servant tried them on the pulse and water, and at the 


end of ten days they were the fattest and best looking of the 
whole crowd. 

Some people think wine makes them look better, and that 
they can’t get along without it. Look at their red noses and 
bloated faces! : 

The next we hear of him is about two years after. 

T seem to see the officer coming in and laying his hand on 
Daniel’s shoulder, and arresting him in the king’s name. 


el ee ee ee 
+ epee? = 


es 


"THE MAN AND HIS MISSION — 369 


“What s the matter?” says Daniel. 
“Why, haven’t you heard?’ says the officer. “The king 


had a dream last night, and when he woke up he couldn’t re- 


member it; so he called all his wise men together, and asked 
them to tell him his dream, and then interpret it for him. 
Nobody could tell it. The king was so angry that he com- 
manded that all the wise men should be put to death. You 
belong to that school; so you will have to die.” 

“It seems to me the king is rather hasty,” says Daniel— 
cool and calm as a summer morning. “Just let him give us a 
little time, and I’ll show him his dream and the interpretation 
also.” 

He knew his God and trusted in Him. All secrets belong 
to God. 

That night Daniel and his three friends had a little prayer- 
meeting together. I have no doubt they read the story of 
Joseph; how the dreams of old Pharaoh were revealed to him; 
and how he came to be a great man in Egypt afterwards. And 
then they went to sleep. 

I don’t think many of you would have gone to sleep with 


‘such danger as that hanging over your heads. But Daniel 


slept; and in his sleep the king’s dream was revealed to him. 
The next morning there was a great stir all about the palace. 
It had got out that a young Hebrew captive was going to tell 
the king his dream, and save the lives of all the wise men of 
Babylon; and everybody was anxious to know all about it. 
I can see the young man brought into the presence of the 


_ mighty monarch. He stands there without the slightest fear. 


His God, in whom he trusted, has made him master of the 
situation. The king looks at him, and says, “Young man, can 
you tell me my dream and the interpretation of it?” 

“My God can!” answers Daniel; and he begins. 


“In your dream, O king, you saw an image ” 





370 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


aie , 
apices 


“That's it!’ says Nebuchadnezzar, his face lighting up all 


at once; “you’ve got it! I remember it all now.” 


“Yes,” says Daniel; “my God revealed it to me last night q 


in a dream.” You see he doesn’t take any credit to himself 


~ for it, but gives the glory to his God. 

“The head of this great image was gold, his breast and his 
arms were silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his legs of 
iron, and his feet part of iron and part of clay. And then, O 


king, you saw a stone cut out without hands, which struck the 


image upon its feet, and crushed it to pieces till it became like 
the dust of the summer threshing-floor.”’ 

“That’s all right,” says the king. ‘Now can you tell me the 
interpretation of it?” 

Now I imagine some of you would have tried to soften 
down the interpretation a little. It was a pretty hard thing 
for Daniel to stand up there before that great monarch, and 
tell him his kingdom was to be like the dust of a summer 
threshing-floor, but he did it. 

“Thou art this head of gold. And after thee shall arise 
another kingdom inferior to thee; and another third kingdom 
of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth. And the 
fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron. Afterwards it shall 
be divided, and become part strong and part weak. And in 
the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up a king- 
dom which shall never be destroyed; it shall break in pieces 
and destroy all those kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.” 

The king was greatly pleased with Daniel, and made a great 
man of him; and, for his sake, put his three friends into 
office. You see Daniel didn’t forget his friends when he got 
into a good place himself. 

Well: not long after that—maybe it was the dream that 
put it into his head—Nebuchadnezzar made a great image, 
and set it up in the plains of Dura. It was about ninety feet 
high and about nine feet wide. Some people say it was made 





THE MAN ‘AND HIS MISSION — 3 


of solid gold. I rather think the king intended that image to 
represent himself. He was going to have a universal reli- 
_ gion, and he was going to be the head of it,—there are some 
such people now-a-days,—and so he gave orders to have all 
the nobility and great officers of his kingdom brought together 
_ to worship the golden image which he had set up. 

I don’t know where Daniel was at this time. Perhaps he 
was away in some other part of the kingdom on business; but 
his friends, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, were there 
to represent him. Their enemies were there too. A faithful 
servant of God is sure to have enemies, watching for a chance 
to get him out of the way. 

It was a great day when the image was unveiled. I seem 
to see it flashing in the sunlight; the vast throng of worship- 
pers standing around it; and the king, at the head of a spten- 
did procession of his lords and ladies, coming across the plain — 
with banners flying and music playing: really, it must have 
been a trying time for those three men, who were so much — 
out of fashion as not to bow down to the great idol when 
everybody else was doing it. 

But the law of their God and the law of the king were in 
conflict. The king said, Bow down! God said, No!—and it 
didn’t take them a minute to decide what to do. 

Some people would have said, ‘“There’s no great harm in 
bowing with all the rest; but then you needn’t worship, you 
know: just bend your knees a little, but don’t say any prayers 
to the idol.” 

Not a bit of it. These men were not going to compromise 
their consciences; and their enemies knew it very well. The 
hour has arrived; everything is ready; the king makes a sign 
with his-hand, and the cornets and sackbuts, and all the other 
instruments, give a great blast, and the whole multitude fall 
down on their faces before the great image which Nebuchad- 
nezzar the king has set up. No; not all! There are three 


372 DWIGHT L. MOODY — : 


pairs of stiff knees in that kingdom—three men who will not 

bow to the false god. Their enemies have taken care to put 
them in the front rank, near to themselves, where they can 
watch them, and so find occasion to accuse them to the king. 

I seem to see these fellows looking out of the corners of 
their eyes, when, by the king’s command, they ought to have ~ 
been worshipping the idol; and I hear them saying to them- 
selves, “Aha! we have got you now!” and so they go to tell 
the king. 

“O king! live for ever. Do you know that there are three 
men in your kingdom who will not obey you?” 

“No: who are they?” 

“Three of those Hebrew captives: they don’t bow down 
along with the rest of us; and we thought you would like to 
know it.” 

“Bring them to me,” says the king, in a great rage; “I will 
see whether these fellows are going to disobey my orders like 
this.”’ 

It is quite likely he would have ordered their heads to be 
taken off at once, if he had not remembered that they were 
particular friends of Daniel. 

Now they stand face to face with the great king. 

“What is this I hear of you?” says Nebuchadnezzar. “They ° 
say you disobey my orders, and do not bow down and worship 
my golden image. Now, I will try you once more; and then, 
if you don’t bow down, into the furnace you go.” 

We do not know who the speaker was on that occasion; per- 
haps it was Shadrach. He stands there with his two friends, 
looking calmly at the king, and thinking of the fiery furnace 
without trembling in the least, or feeling the slightest fear. 
And this is what he says,— . 

“Weare not careful to answer thee in this matter, O king. 
The God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 373 


fiery furnace, and He will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. 
‘But whether He deliver us or not, we will not bow down.” 

“Who is this God of yours, that is able to deliver you out . 

of my hands?” says the king, in a towering rage. “Go and © 

heat that furnace seven times hotter than ever, and take these 
fellows up, and thrust them into it. Be quick about it. I will 
not have such rebels in my kingdom.” 

So some of the king’s servants hurry away to the furnace 
to stir up the fire, and others seize Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abed-nego, and take them away; and when the furnace doors 
are opened, they come near to cast them into the fire——which 
is so hot that it burns the servants to death, but does not harm 
the men who are cast down headlong into it. Then the king 
goes and looks into the furnace; and what is his astonishment 
at seeing four men, instead of three, walking in the midst of 
the fire, as safely as if they were in the king’s garden! 

“Did I not tell you to cast in three men?—and lo! I see 
four walking about in the fire; and the form of the fourth is 
like the Son of God.” 

The Lord Himself was with His three faithful servants. 
The great Palestine Shepherd looked down from heaven, and 

“saw those three sheep of His flock about to be cast into the 
fire: and He made haste, and came down Himself, to see that 
they suffered no harm. Ah! Jesus is always with His people. 
Though they pass through water, they shall not be drowned; 
though they pass through the fire, they shall not be burned. 
The fire burned off only the devil’s bands: it did not singe a 
hair of their heads. 

Does not Christ say that the hairs of our heads are all num- 
bered? There is wonderful care and love in that. 

. Did you ever know a mother who loved her little child so 
well that she would count the hairs on its curly head? But 
the Lord loves His children so well that He counts their hairs 
—every one; and not one of them comes to any harm, so long 


374 DWIGHT L. MOODY. 


as His child is faithful to Him. There was not even the smell 


Rw Nickens ro 


of fire upon their garments; and the king’s counsellors, and 
princes, and governors, and captains, and all together, saw _ 


these men upon whose bodies the fire had no power. 
My friends, let us remember that it is always safe to do what 
God wants us to do. If our way to heaven leads through fire 


and water, it is all the same: it is all right. That is the proper — 


way for us to go. 


And now King Nebuchadnezzar orders these men to come ~ 


out; and he restored them to their places again. He has found 
out who was the God that was able to deliver His servants out 
of the hands of the king; and I am quite sure that, from this 


time, neither the king nor anybody else in Babylon ventured — 


to say anything against those men, or against the God whom 


they worshipped, and who had delivered them out of the fiery — 


furnace. 
‘The king himself makes a decree, “that every people, nation, 
and language, which shall speak anything: amiss against the 


God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut in. 4 
pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because 4 


there is no other God that can deliver after this sort.” So the 
king promoted these men; and, instead of being burned to 
death inthe furnace, they came to be more honorable than ever. 
The next thing that we hear of the king is, that he has had 
another dream. He seems to have been a great man for 
dreams. This time he saw a great tree which “reached unto 
heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth; 


and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from ~ 


heaven, and cried aloud: ‘Hew down this tree, and cut down 
his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the 
beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from its branches. 
Nevertheless, leave the stump of his roots in the earth. 


Let his heart be changed from man’s and let a beast’s heart — 


be given unto him, and let seven times pass over him: to the 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 375 


— intent that the living may know that the Most High ruleth in 
the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will.’ ” 
The king seems to have been as much puzzled by this dream 
as by the other; and nobody could tell him what it meant, until 
he sent for Daniel. Even he was troubled about it at first ; buts 
presently the Lord showed it to him; and then he preached 
such a sermon to the king about his pride, and the necessity 
of repentance, that the king’s face turned pale, and his knees 
began to shake, and it was not long before he lost his reason, 
and wandered away from his palace, out into the woods and 
the deserts, and became more like a beast than a man. But 
at last the Lord had mercy on him. His counsellors and 
_ princes gathered about him again, and brought him back to his 
_ palace. But the king’s heart was softened. I think he became 
truly converted to God; and from this time we don’t hear him 
saying any more: “Is not this great Babylon that I have 
builded?” But we hear him blessing the Most High, and 
praising and honoring Him whose dominion is everlasting, 
and whose kingdom is from generation to generation. : 
‘And now the king makes one more proclamation, different 
from all the others. Up to this time he has been telling other 
people what to do; now he begins to speak of his own duty, 
and he says, “I, Nebuchadnezzar, will do this—I will do that.” 
“T will praise and extol and honor the King of Heaven, all of 
whose works are truth.” He has found out his own duty. His 
heart is softened; and although we do not hear anything more 
of him, I have no doubt that Daniel and he used to walk the 
‘streets of Babylon, arm-in-arm, and talk over their experiences 
together; and when the king ‘died, I feel quite sure that he 
went safely to heaven, to be welcomed by the God of Daniel; 
and through the long eternity King Nebuchadnezzar will re- 
joice that that young man, Daniel, took his stand for God when 
“he came down to Babylon, and did not follow the fashion of 
that wicked capital, though it might have cost him his life, 


376 DWIGHT L. MOODY, 


The next thing we hear of Babylon is, that the grandson 
of Nebuchadnezzar, a wild young prince, called Belshazzar, 
has come to the throne. On a certain occasion he makes a 
great feast to a thousand of his lords. They come together in 
a great banquet-chamber, and they drink and carouse all night 
long. They do not care for the armies of Cyrus, which are 
besieging the city. They trust in its high walls and its gates 
of brass, and feel themselves perfectly safe. At last, when the 
head of the young king has been quite turned with wine, he ~ 
orders the golden vessels, which his grandfather captured from 
_ God’s temple at Jerusalem, to be brought into the banquet-hall, 
that they may drink wine out of them in honor of the gods 
of Babylon. But while they are doing this impious thing, be- 
hold,-a hand appears, writing with its fingers upon the wall— 
the doom of the kingdom of Babylon. 

Drunk as he is, the miserable king is frightened. 

“Bring in the wise men,” says he. And the wise men come 
in haste, and stare at the writing, but not one of them is able 
to read or understand it. No uncircumcised eye can read God’s 
handwriting. 4 

Somehow or other, the news of this strange affair reaches 
the ears of the king’s mother; and she sends a servant to him, 
telling him that, in the days of his grandfather, there was a 
man in Babylon who could interpret dreams, and reveal — 
secrets, and do all manner of strange things, and maybe he 
would be able to read the writing. 

It seems that Daniel had been lost sight of for the last fifteen 
years; but now there is special work for him to do; and so 
they find him out, and bring him in and ask him to read the. 
writing. “Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin”: and the meaning 
of it was clear as daylight to him. 

_ Now I have no doubt that a good many courtiers, if they 
had seen such writing as that upon the wall of the king’s > 
palace, would have softened the meaning of it a little, and not 


_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 399 


have given it in its full strength, for fear of offending the king. 
But that was not Daniel’s fashion at all. He reads it just as 
God writes it. “M@Mene: God hath numbered thy kingdom, and 
finished it. Tekel: Thou art weighed in the balances, and art 
found wanting. Peres: Thy kingdom is divided, and given 
to the Medes and the Persians.” 
__ Ah! poor miserable Belshazzar! Even now the soldiers of 
Cyrus have turned away the waters of the Euphrates, and are 
coming into the city along the empty banks. The soldiers are 
_ battering away at the doors of your palace, and before morn- 
ing your blood shall be spilled upon the stones, along with 
the wine which you have been drinking, out of the vessels from 
God’s holy temple at Jerusalem. You are weighed in God’s 
balance, and found wanting. 

After a while, Darius, the Mede, comes to the throne of 
Babylon. He must have met Daniel somewhere in his travels, 
for no sooner does he set up the kingdom than he puts him 
into a place of great power. He chooses a hundred and twenty 
princes, whom he places over the kingdom; and over these 
princes he appoints three presidents, and he makes Daniel the 
president of the presidents: so that he really is the first man 
in the kingdom, after the king. His business was to “see that 
the king suffered no damage”; that is, he was to keep watch 
of the accounts, to see that nobody cheated the king. This 
must have been a very difficult place, and Daniel must have 
had his hands full. He had to watch those hundred and twenty 
‘rascals, who were all the while trying to steal something off 
the revenue; and to go over their accounts again and again, 
so as to be certain that they were correct to a penny. 

It was not long before Daniel became very unpopular with 
the princes. I seem to hear them talking amongst themselves 
in this way :— 

“There is that miserable old Jew, Daniel: if we only had him 
out of the way, we could make no end of money. We would 


378 DWIGHT L. MOODY _ Ree 


very speedily be rich; we would have our country houses and 
our city houses, and our fine horses and chariots, and we would 
live in the very highest style, off the revenues of this kingdom; 
but that old fellow watches us as narrowly as a cat watches a 
mouse. We can’t cheat him—even to a shilling.” “Why,” 
says one, “I never saw such a man in all my life. I gave in an 
account the other day that was only a few pounds short; and 
did not he send it back to me, and make me pay the difference? 
I wish he were back in Jerusalem, where be came from.” 

However, the king trusted Daniel; and he was such a thor- 
oughly good and honest man that they really could find no 
way to revenge themselves upon him. They talked it over 
together again and again, and all agreed that there was no 
chance of getting him out of the way, unless they could find 
something in his religion by which they could bring him into 
trouble. 

“We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except 
we find it against him concerning the law of his God.’”’? What 
an honor! Nothing wrong with him—even in the eyes of these 
bad men—except that he was too faithful to his God! 

How many of you are likely to be complained of on that 


- account? 


Finally, they hit upon a plan which they thought might 


possibly succeed. One night they are closeted together in 


secret; and one of the princes says to the rest: “I think I have 
got a plan that will work. You know King Darius is very 
popular, and he is very proud of it. The people praise him a. 
great deal, and he likes it. Now suppose we ask him to estab- 
_ lish a royal decree, ‘that whosoever shall ask a petition of any 
god or man for thirty days, save of the king, he shall be cast 
into the den of lions.’ That will be putting the king in the | 
place of the gods, and he is most likely to be flattered by that 
of anything I can think of: then, if once we can get that old 
Hebrew into the lions’ den, we shall make a good deal more 

















THE CRUCIFIX ON 
Showing the penitent thief on the left. 


% 





BARABBAS PASSING OUT FROM BONDAGE TO 


FREEDOM 


A eat 


‘ Yay, 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 381 
money than we have been able to do with him watching us 
all the time.” 3 ee 

This notion seemed to please the princes very well. They 
drew up the document immediately. It would not do to let 
Daniel hear of it, before the king should sign it; and so they 
appointed a committee to take the decree down to the palace 
the very first thing in the morning. There were some lawyers 
among these hundred and twenty princes; and I seem to see 
them drawing out the law with great care, making it firm and 
binding—laughing to themselves, and saying: “The laws of 
the Medes and Persians change not. If once we can get Darius 
to stamp this document with his signet-ring, Daniel is done 
for, sure enough.” 

So the committee go down to the palace next morning to 
obtain his signature. They begin by flattering him. Ifa man 
wants another to do a mean thing, he always begins by appeal- 
ing to his vanity. 

“OQ king, we have been thinking how popular you are in 
your kingdom, and what you might do to make yourself even 
more famous than you are; and we have come to the conclu- 
sion that, if you would publish a decree that nobody in the 
kingdom, for thirty days, should pray to any other god except 
yourself, it would turn the hearts of all the people towards 
you even more than now. We should then have a universal 
religion, and the king would be at the head of it.” 

Darius felt flattered by this proposition. He turned it over 
in his mind, and presently said,— 

“That seems sensible.” 

“All right,” said the princes. “We thought you would like 
it; and in order that there might not be any delay, we have 
the document here already drawn up. Now if you will please 
to stamp this with your signet-ring, we shall have it published 


'~ right away.” 


The king takes the document, reads it over, stamps his seal 





e 


} 


382 - DWIGHT L. MOODY: 





upon it; and the committee go away laughing, and saying, s 
“Ha, ha! old Hebrew, we will have you in the den of lions | 4 
before night.” Ee 

The princes lost no time in publishing the new decree of the 
king. I can imagine some one of Daniel’s friends, who had 
seen the document, going up to his office in great haste, to 
give him warning that there was some trouble brewing. 

“Have you heard the news, Daniel? Those hundred and 
twenty princes have gone and got Darius to publish a decree 
that nobody shall pray to any other god, except him, for thirty 
days. That is a conspiracy against you. Now I want to give 
you a little advice; and that is, to get out of this town in a 
hurry.” 

But Daniel says he can’t leave his business. He is afraid 
these hundred and twenty princes will cheat the revenues while 
he is away. His duty is right there, and he is determined to. 
stay there and attend to it. 

“Well, then, had you not better pray more secretly? You 
have a habit, that is all well enough in ordinary times, of going 
up to your chamber, where the windows open towards Jeru- 
salem, and saying your prayers there three times a day. And 
sometimes you pray. pretty loud, and people out of doors can 
hear you. Now just shut your windows while you. pray, for 
the next thirty days; for these princes are sure to have some 
spies watching you at your prayers. You had better stop up 
the keyhole of your door also, for these mean fellows are not 
above peeping in to watch you. It would be stil! better, Daniel, 
if you would not kneel down at all, but say your prayers after 
you get into bed.” 

Ah! how many young men have gone to Yale or Harvard, _ 
and lost their peace of mind and their hope in Christ, because 
they were afraid to pray before their room-mates! 

And what does Daniel say to such advice as this?’ He scouts 
it. He tramples it under his feet. No man shall hinder him 





ee eyed Por hee pte Ta et ee ee OL 3 _ ti — A | dane Ph 


THE MAN AND HIS MISSION —_383_ 





from praying. No king shall frighten him out of his duty. - 
He attends to his morning’s work; looks over the accounts _ 
as usual; and when twelve.o’clock comes, he goes to his cham- 
ber, puts the windows wide open, kneels down and prays, not 
to Darius, but to the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. His 
windows are opened towards Jerusalem, and his face is turned 
that way; for Jerusalem is dearer to him than his life, and the 
- God of his fathers is his sure defence. I can seem to see him ~ 
kneeling there—that old man, with his white locks and beard, 
praying at the probable cost of his life; but he does not seem 
to be troubled by the danger; neither is he angry at the com- 
mand of the king or the manifest wickedness of those hundred 
and twenty princes. He prays for the king, his friend,—who, ” 
he is sure, has done this wickedness in some thoughtless mo- 
ment. He prays for his enemies, the princes, who are wickedly 
seeking to destroy him. 

Those men have taken care that two witnesses shall be un-— 
derneath Daniel’s windows at the time when he usually goes to 
pray. “Hark!” says one to the other. “Did you hear that? 
The old man is up there praying, sure enough! Listen: he is. 

~not praying to King Darius.” 

“No,” says the other; “he is praying to the God of the 
Hebrews.” 

‘So they listen till the prayer is finished, and then they hurry 
away to the princes, to give their evidence against Daniel; 
and the princes lose no time in laying the matter before the 
king. 

“© King Darius! live for ever. Is it not written that the 
laws of the Medes and the Persians change not?” 

“Tt is,” said Darius; “anything that is stamped with the 
king’s seal cannot be changed.” 

“That is what we thoucht,” said the princes. ‘Did you not 
make a decree that no man should pray to any other god than 
to the king?” 


384 ‘DWIGHT L. MOODY 


“Yes, I did,” said Darius. , 
Then they tell him that the chief of the vjecidente ane ¥ 


Daniel, the Hebrew—has refused to obey the king’s command. - 


Poor Darius! “a 
“What a mistake I have made!” says he. “I might have 
known that Daniel would not obey such a command as that. 


-Ihad quite forgotten about him when I made it.” There is 


not a man in all Babylon who is so troubled as the king. The 
account says that “he labored till the going down of the sun 
to deliver Daniel.” But the command had gone forth, the law 
had been made, and it could not be changed, even for the sake 
of Daniel himself. . 

If Darius had loved his friend only as much as Christ loves 
us, he would have gone down into the den of lions for him. 
Our Darius, our King, counted not His life dear unto Himself, 
but freely delivered it up for us. 

At sundown the king’s officers go for the old man, to take 
him away to the lions. They bind his hands behind his back, 
and lead him along the streets of Babylon towards the den. 
The whole city goes out to see the sad procession. The princes 
look out of their windows, and rub their hands, and laugh over 
the success of their wicked plot; and the people look on in 
wonder, to see such a sweet-faced old man led away to die like 
a criminal; and poor Darius walks the chamber of his palace, 
wringing his hands in agony, saying, “Ah, me! I have de- 
stroyed my friend.” 

But Daniel walks with a firm step. His old knees dont t shake 
a bit. The wind of the evening plays with his white locks, 
and with a smile upon his face he goes to meet the lions. He 
has served his God now for seventy long years, and he feels. 


sure that God will not desert him in this great hour of trial. I 
can imagine him saying, “My God can bring me out of the _ 


jaws of the lions just as easily as He saved my three friends s 
from the furnace of fire. But even if they eat me, I shall only 





‘THE MAN AND HIS MISSION. ——_385 


die for my God.” And when they put him into the den, God 
sent one of His angels to shut the mouths of the lions. 

At the hour of the evening prayer, Daniel kneels in the 
den; and if he can get the points of the compass down there, 
he prays with his face towards Jerusalem; and then, taking 

‘one of the lions for his pillow, he lies down and sleeps, as 
sweetly as any man in Babylon. The king sits up all night, 
thinking what his folly has cost him—even the life of his most — 
faithful servant. But he remembers that the God of Daniel 
has done strange things for them who trusted Him. He has 
heard of Shadrach and his friends coming out of the fiery fur- 
nace; and he knows that Daniel went into the den feeling that 
his God would go with him and save him. At the first dawn 
of day he orders out his chariot, and you can hear the wheels 
rattling over the pavements of Babylon before the people are 
up. Away he goes, with his horses on the run, to the door 
of the lions’ den; springs out of the chariot; looks down into 
it, and with a voice trembling with anxiety, cries out, “O 
Daniel, servant of the living God; is that God whom thou 
servest continually able to deliver thee from the lions?” 

Hark! There comes up a voice out of the den. It is the 
voice of Daniel; to whom this morning is like the morning 
of the resurrection. He has been down to the gates of death, 
and yet he is alive. 

“© king! live for ever. My God hath sent His angel and 
shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me.”’ 

Oh how glad King Darius was to hear the voice of his friend 
once more! He has him brought up out of the den, takes him 
up in his arms, into his chariot; and away they go, home to 
the palace, to breakfast together and talk over this wonderful 
deliverance. 

Then King Darius published another decree. The experi- 
ence of Daniel had thoroughly converted him; and now he 
declares “that, in every dominion of his kingdom, man shall 





386 - DWIGHT L. MOODY 
_ tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, who worketh signs _ 
and wonders in heaven and earth, and hath delivered His ser- 
vant from the power of the lions.” 

May the God of Daniel be with us—the courage of Daniel 
be in us! May we have grace to confess the Lord, to go 
through the fire and amongst the lions, if need be, for the sake 
of His truth; and at last, after all the trials of this life are ~ 


over, may we be so happy as to sit down with Daniel and all 
the ancient worthies, in the kingdom of our God! 


THE STORY OF CHRIST AND BARTIMEUS, 


HRIST was going into Jericho; and as he drew near 
the gates of the city therewas a poor blind man who sat 
by the wayside, begging people to give him a farthing, and 
crying out, “Have mercy on a poor blind man!” This blind 
beggar met aman who said to him, “Bartimeus, I have good 
news to tell you.” “What is it?” said the beggar. “There ; 
is a man of Israel who can give you sight.” “Oh, no!” said 
the blind beggar; “there is no chance of my ever receiving 
my sight. I never shall see. In fact, I never saw the mother 
who gave me birth; I never saw the wife of my bosom; I 
never saw my own children. I never saw in this world; but 
{ expect to see in the world to come.” 

“Let me tell you, I have just come down from Jerusalem, 
and I saw that village carpenter, Jesus of Nazareth; and I 
saw a man who was born blind, who had received his sight; 
and I never saw a man with better sight. He doesn’t even 
have to use glasses.” Then hope rises for the first time in this 
poor man’s heart, and he says, “Tell me how the man got his 
sight.” 

“Oh,” says the other, “Jesus first spat on the ground and 
made clay, and put it on his eyes’—why, that is enough to 


so SOS oe Lee ps leas eek ge, Sena 
~ et S 





_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 387 
put a man’s sight out, to fill his eyes with clay !—‘“and then 
~ He told him to wash his eyes in the Pool of Siloam, and he 
would receive his sight. More than that, Bartimeus, He 
doesn’t charge you anything: you have no fee to pay; you — 
just-tell Him what you want, and you get it, without money 

and without price. It does not need dukes, or lords, or in- 
fluence; you just call upon Him yourself; and if He ever — 
comes this way, don’t let Him go back without your going 

to see Jesus.” And Bartimeus said, “I will try it; there’s no 

harm in trying it.” I can imagine him being led by a child 
to his seat as usual, and that he is crying out, “Please give a 
blind beggar a farthing.” He hears the footsteps of the com- ~ 
ing multitude and inquires, ““Who is it passing? What does | 
the multitude mean?” They tell him it is Jesus of Nazareth 
passing by. The moment he hears that he says, “Why, that is 
the Man that gave sight to the blind!’ The moment it reached 
his ear that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out at 
the top of his voice, “Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy 
upon me!” Some of those who went before—perhaps Peter 
was one of them—rebuked him, thinking the Master was go- 
ing up to Jerusalem to be crowned King, and did not want to 
be distracted. They never knew the Son of God when He- 
was here. He would hush every harp in heaven to hear a 
sinner pray; no music would delight Him so much. But the 
blind man still lifted up his voice, and cried louder, “Thou 
Son of David, have mercy on me!” and the prayer reached 
the ears of the Son of God, as prayer always will; and they 
led the poor blind man to Him. Well, when Jesus heard the 
blind beggar, He commanded him to be brought. So they 
ran to him, and said, “Be of good cheer: the Master calls you; 
He has a blessing for you.” When Jesus saw him He said, 
“What can I do for you?” “Lord, that I may receive my 
sight.” “You shall have it”: and the Lord gave it to him, 
And now the beggar follows with the crowd, glorifying God. 


388 — : DWIGHT Ly MOODY. « 


I can imagine he sang as sweetly as Mr. Sankey; no one sang 
sweeter than he when he shouted, “Hosanna to the Son of 
David!”—no one sang louder than this one who had received 
his sight. Then he follows on with the crowd, which we see 
pressing into the gates of the city. I can imagine when he » 
gets into the city he says to himself, “I will go down and see 
Mrs. Bartimeus,”—having, of course, after all those years of 
blindness, a curiosity to see what his wife looked like. 

As he is passing down the street, a man meets him, and 
turns round and says, “Bartimeus, is that you?” 

“Yes; it’s me.” 

“Well, I thought it was, and yet I thought my eyes must 
deceive me. How did you get your sight?” 

“I just met Jesus of Nazareth outside the walls of the city, 
and I asked Him to have mercy on me; and He gave me my 
sight.” 

“Jesus of Nazareth! Is He in this part of the country?” 

“Yes; He is on His way to Jerusalem. He is now going 
down to the eastern gate.” 

“I should like to see Him,” says the man, and away he runs 
down the street; but he cannot get a glimpse of Him, being 
little of stature, on account of the great throng round Him. 
He runs to a sycamore tree, and says to himself, “If I get up ‘ 
there and hide, without any one seeing me, He cannot get by 
without my having a good look at Him.” A great many rich 
men do not like to be seen coming to Jesus. Well, there he is - 
in the sycamore tree, on a branch hanging right over the high- 
way; and he says to himself, “He cannot get by without my 
having a good look at Him.” All at once the crowd comes in 
sight. He looks at John—“That’s not Him’; he looks at 
Peter—“That’s not Him,” Then he sees One who is fairer 
than the sons of men. “That’s Him!’ And Zaccheus, just 
peeping out from amongst the branches, looks down upon that 
wonderful—yes, that mighty God-Man, in amazement. At 








THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 389° 


last the crowd comes to the tree, and it looks as if Christ is 
- going by; but He stops right under the tree. All at once 
He looks up and sees Zacchzeus, and says to him, “Zacchzus, 
make haste and come down.” I can imagine Zacchzus says 
to himself,—“T wonder who told Him my name. I was never 
introduced to Him.” But Christ knew all about him. Sinner! 
_ Christ knows all about you; He knows your name and your 
house. Do not think God does not know you. If you would 
“try to hide from Him, bear in mind that you cannot do so. He 
_ knows where each one of you is; He knows all about your 
sins. Well, He said to Zacchzus, ‘‘Make haste and come 
down.” He may have added, “This is the last time I shall pass 
this way, Zaccheus.”. That is the way He speaks to sinners, 
—‘This may be the last time I shall pass this way; this may 
be your last chance of eternity.” Oh sinner! make haste and 
come down and receive Him. There are some people in this 
nineteenth century who do not believe in sudden conversions. 
I should like them to tell me where Zaccheus was converted. 
- He certainly was not converted when he went up into the tree; 
he certainly was converted when he came down. He must 
have been converted somewhere between the branches and the 
ground. The Lord converted him just right there. People 
say they do not believe in sudden conversions; and that if a 
- man is converted suddenly he won’t hold out—he won’t be 
genuine. I wish we had a few men converted like Zacchzeus 
in London; it would make no small stir. When a man begins 
to make restitution, it is a pretty good sign of conversion. Let 
men give back money dishonestly obtained in London, and see 
how quick people will believe in conversion. Zacchzeus gave 
half his goods to the poor. What would be said if some of ° 
the rich men of London did that? Zacchzeus gave half his 
goods all at once; and he says, “If I have taken anything from 
any man falsely, I restore him fourfold.” I think that is the 
other half. But to get Christ is worth more than all his 


a 


i 
Pia 
Sa 
s 


ant ey ts 
OWT mane 


aT 


390 J DWIGHT 0 Es MOODY 


fe oy, 

Preah a 

SH ¥ eS is 
ont . 





wealth. I imagine ‘the next morning one of the servants’ oft 3 
Zaccheus going with a cheque for $500, and saving, “My = 
master a few years ago took 3 you wrongfully about $100, — 
and this is restitution money.” That would give confidence ’ 
in Zaccheus’s conversion. I wish a few cases like that would — 
happen in London, and then people would not go on talking 
against sudden conversions. 


THE STORY.-OF MEPHIBOSHETE, oe 


HERE is a story, my friends, in the books of Samuel—_ 
away back as far as the time of the kings of Israel— ~ 
which will help us to understand the Gospel. It is about a~ 
man of the name of Mephibosheth. cs 
You remember what a hard time David had when Saul was” 
hunting him to kill him, just as men hunt game. ‘ 
“Well: one day David and his good friend Jonathan were E 
taking a walk together in the fields. Saul was very angry, — 
and was bent on killing David; but his son Jonathan was E 
looking out for a chance to save him. It had been Be 
to him that David was to be king after his father, instead of | 
himself; but this did not hinder his love for David. It must 
have ae real, true friendship, that could stand that sort of 
thing! ‘<2 
After they had agreed upon a sign by which David was tor 
know whether it was safe for him to stay around the court — 
of the king, where he could see his friend once in a while: ‘ 
or whether he must leave, and go off into the cave of Adullam, — 
Jonathan says to him,— 
“David, it has been revealed to me that you are to be king = 
after my father. Now, I want you to promise me one thing: r . 
when you come to the throne, if any of the house of Saul are 
alive, I want you to be good to them, for my sake.” 








THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 301 


“T’ll do that, of course,” said David. So he made a solemn 
- covenant to that effect, and then he went off to the cave of 
Adullam, to get out of the way of Saul, who was bound to 
kill him if he could. 

But God took care of David. You never can kill or harm 

a man if God is taking care of him. 

About four years after that, David heard that there had 
been a great battle over by Mount Gilboa, and that the Phil- 
_ istines had beaten the Israelites with great slaughter, and that 
Saul and Jonathan were both dead. So he got his men to- 
gether, and went out after the enemies of the Lord and of 
Israel; and it was not a great while before he had turned 
the tables on them, and set up his kingdom at Hebron. 

It must have been pretty near fourteen years after that be- 
_ fore David remembered his promise to his old friend Jonathan. 
It is a great deal easier to make promises than to keep them. 
How many broken vows has God written down against you 
to-night? But one day the king was walking in his palace at 

Jerusalem, where he had removed his capital; and all at once 
_he happened to think of that promise. It is a good thing God 
does not forget His promises that way. 

-  “That’s too bad!” said David. “I forgot all about that 
promise. I have been so busy fighting these Philistines, and 

fixing things up, that I have not had time to think of anything 

~ else.” So he called his servants in great haste, and said, “Do 

any of you know whether there is any of Saul’s family living?” 

One of them said there was an old servant of Saul’s by the 
name of Ziba, and maybe he could tell. 

“Go and tell him I want him, right away.” 

Pretty soon Ziba came; and David said, ‘“Ziba, do you know 
whether tnere is anybody of the house of Saul in my king- — 
dom?” Ziba said there was one he knew of—a son of Jona- 
than, by the name of Mephibosheth. 

Oh how that name, Jonathan, must have smitten the heart 


Litre MNT NET Utes SUELN SY aia g Seg = 244 St Pore aa 


202 DWIGHT L. MOODY oe 


of David! One of the. sons of his old friend living in his 
kingdom for as much as fourteen years, and he had never ~ 
known it! What would Jonathan think of him for forgetting — 


his promise that way! 


“Go, fetch him!” says David; “go quick. Tell him I want — 


him. I want to show him the kindness of God.” 


Now, my friends, where do you suppose Mephibosheth was — 
all this time? Why, he was down at Lo-debar. Did you ever ~ 


hear of that place? There may be some sailors here: did you ‘ 
ever come across that port? When you have travelled on the 


railway, did any of you ever stop at that station? 


Ah! yes: that is where the whole human race are until they : 
come to Christ for salvation; away down at Lo-debar,—which ~ 


means, a place of no pasture. 


The king is in haste to keep his promise now. I seem to 


see them hurrying off; maybe they take the king’s own — 


chariot, and rattle away to find this son of Jonathan. 


Ais) ere by 


When they reached the little out-of-the-way place, I fancy 


there was a great commotion. 
“Where’s Mephibosheth? The king wants him.” 
‘Poor fellow! when he heard that, he hung down his head. 


He was afraid the king wanted to kill him, because he was of — 


the house of Saul, his old enemy. 
Ah! my friends; that’s just the way sinners receive Christ’s 


offers of salvation. They think God hates them, and wants to 
cut their heads off. But that is a great mistake. God loves — 


them for Christ’s sake, a great deal more than David loved 
Mephibosheth for Jonathan’s sake. I never knew a sinner to 


take the Gospel right. They always think, at first, that it is _ 


too good to be true. 
“Don’t be afraid,” said the servants. “The king says he 
wants to show you the kindness of God. He is in a great 


hurry to see you; so get ready, and jump right into the 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 393 


chariot. Don’t you see the king has sent his own chariot to 
fetch you?” 

It did begin to look as if the king meant no harm to him. 
But poor Mephibosheth had another difficulty. He was lame - 
in both feet. He was a little fellow when David came to the 
throne; and an old servant, who was afraid that all the house 
of Saul were going to be killed, took him up and ran away 
to hide him. Somehow he managed to drop the lad, and lamed 
him in both feet. 

And now I can see poor Mephibosheth looking down at his 
feet. Maybe the toes turned in,—or he was club-footed. And 
he says to himself, “I am not fit to go to the king. Tama 

‘poor cripple. I am not fit to be seen among the tall, handsome 
servants of the palace in Jerusalem,” 

That’s just the way with a convicted sinner. He is all the 
time thinking of his own unworthiness, and saying to himself 
that he isn’t fit to be saved. 

“Never mind your lame feet, Mephibosheth; so long as the 
_king sends for you, it’s all right.” So they take him up, and 
put him into the chariot, and start for Jerusalem on a run. 

As soon as the king sees him, he takes him in his arms, and 
cries out,— 

“Oh Mephibosheth, the son of my dear old friend Jonathan! 
you shall have all that belonged fo the house of Saul; and you 
shall live with me here in my palace!” 

What a happy man he must have been to hear that! Since 


that is just. what God says to the soul that comes to him in 


Jesus Christ. He takes us in His arms; He gives us a great 
fortune of love and grace; and He promises that we shall live 
with Him in His heavenly palace for ever. 

Some people think that Mephibosheth, like certain low- 
spirited Christians, after he went to live with the king, must 
have been all the time worrying over his lame feet. But I 


- don’t think so, He couldn’t help it; and if David didn’ t mind 


iy EN Foe Moh ee ty § 


SRE ens een 


oa DWIGHT L. MOODY 





it, it was all right. So I think that when he dined with him 
in state, with the great lords and ladies all around him, he 
just stuck his club-feet under the table, and looked the king 
right in the face. a 

That is the Gospel, my friends. We are God’s enemies, and : 
the children of His enemies. We are lame, and blind, and - 
wretched, and ragged, and hateful by reason of our sins. But : 
the covenant of grace in Jesus Christ has been made; and 
now God sends for you, poor sinner, to come in Christ’s name 
and eat bread at His table, and be in His house, and in His 
heart for ever. Will you come? Will you come now? - 








THE STORY OF THE LEPER. a 


EE that poor leper! Do you know what an awful thing 
the leprosy is? A disease so terrible that it separates its 
victim from all the world, and makes him an outcast, even : 
from his home. Every one is afraid of him. His disease is 
so contagious, that to touch him, or even to breathe the airs 
near him, is dangerous; and so these poor afflicted wretches — 
have to go away and live in caves and deserts by themselves. — 
They sit by the wayside afar off, calling to the passers-by for 
charity,—who sometimes throw them a piece of money, and — 
hurry away lest they also come into that terrible plight. Here — 
is a poor man who finds the marks of what he thinks is this — 
terrible disease upon his body. According to the law, he 
must go to the priest and be examined. Alas! the priest says 
it is the leprosy—nothing else. ° : 
Now the poor man, with broken heart, turns away from the © 
Temple, and goes to his house to say good-bye to his wife, 
and to take his children to his arms once more, before he goes — 
away to spend the long years in the wilderness alone, or with — 
other lepers like himself, until death shal] come to deliver him — 


- 





le iat i ee re gp ae it se net eo ~ eww 
Poergee ee <2 TS ee oO 


_—s—s THE MAN AND HIS MISSION —_395 


‘= 


a from his sufferings. What a sorry house is that! Surely this 


_ is worse than death itself. He goes out of his door with no 


hope of ever entering it again. He walks the street by him- 


_ self, and if any one comes near, he lifts up his voice in that 


mournful cry, “Unclean! Unclean!’ Out of the gates of the . 
city he goes, away from all his friends and acquaintances, 


_ carrying with him the sorrow of separation and the seeds of- 


death. One day he sees a crowd passing along the road, but 


_ he dares not go near enough to inquire what it is. All at once 


he happens to think it may be that Prophet of Nazareth whom 
he has heard of—that same Man that, people said, could open 
the eyes of blind men, make lame men to walk, and who had 
even raised the son of the widow from death, over there at 
Nain. If only it were He! At any rate he will take the 
chances, and cry out after Him; and so he shouts, at the top 


of his voice, “Have mercy upon me!” All the rest of the 
_ erowd are afraid of him; but Jesus, who is in the midst, hears 
some one calling; and, just as He always did when anybody 


wanted anything of Him, He stopped to find out what it was. 
He is not afraid of the leper; and so, while the rest of the. 
crowd stand away by themselves, He calls the poor fellow up 


to Him and asks him what he wants; and the leper, with his 


heart full of anxious hope, replies, “Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou 


canst make me clean.” “I will,” says Jesus: “be thou clean!” 
_ A strange sense of health and strength suddenly comes over 


the man. He looks at his hands, and finds the leprosy is all 


gone. He begins to pour out his heart in thanks to Jesus, who 


sends him away to the priests, saying, “Go, show thyself to 


the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded.” 


Now I seem to see that cleansed leper hurrying’ away to 
show himself to the priest, to be pronounced cured, according 
to the law; and then hastening to his little home, to see his 
wife and children once more. He bursts into the house, weep- 


ing for joy. He stretches out his arms to his wife and little 


396 | akg L. MOODY 
ones, saying, “I am ean | I am clean! Jesus ae it Jesus” : 
of Nazareth.” : 

Sinner, how glad you would be if Jesus had made you clean — 
from the leprosy of sin!--and He is just as willing to cleanse q 
you as He was to cleanse this poor leper. Come to Him just — 
now. Ask Him to cleanse you, and hear Him say, “T we 
be thou clean!” 


THE STORY OF THE WIDOW’S SON. 


HINK of that poor widow at Nain! She is an old woman — 
now; and her only son, who is the staff of her life, is — 
sick. How she watches him; sits up all night to see that he © 
has his medicine at the right time; sits by his bedside all day, 
fanning him, keeping away the flies, moistening his parched 
lips with water! Everything he asks for, she brings. The — 
very best doctor in Nain is sent for; and when he comes and | 
feels the pulse of the young man, and looks at his tongue, he — 
shakes his head; and then the poor woman knows there is no 
hope for her boy. What an awful thought! My son, my ~ 
only son must die:’ what will become of me then? Sure_ 
enough, the doctor is right; and in a little while the fever — 
comes to its crisis, and the poor boy dies, with his head upon ~ 
his mother’s bosom. The people come in to try to comfort | 
the poor woman; but it is of no use. Her heart is broken. 
She wishes she were dead, too. 
Some of you know what it is to look your last upon the 
faces of those you love. Some of you mothers have wept hot — 
tears upon the cold faces of your sons. 
Well: they make him ready for burial; and when the time 
comes, they celebrate the funeral service, and put him on the > 
bier to carry him away to the grave. What a sad procession! 
Just as they come out of the city gates, they see a little com- 
pany of thirteen dusty-looking travellers, coming up the road, — 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 307 


There is One among them, tall and far fairer than the sons 
of men. Who can He be? He is moved with compassion 
when He sees this little funeral procession; and it does not 
take Him long to find out that that woman who walks next 
the bier is a poor widow, whose only son she is following to 
his grave. He tells the bearers to put down the bier; and 
~ while the mother wonders what is to be done, He bends ten- 
derly over the dead man, and speaks to him in a low, sweet 
voice, “Arise!” And the dead man hears Him. His body 
begins to move: the man who was dead is struggling with 
- his graveclothes; they unbind them, and now he sits up. He 
leaps off the bier, catches a sight of his mother, remembers 
that he was dead and is now alive again; takes her in his arms, 
kisses her again and again, and then turns to look at the 
Stranger who has wrought this miracle upon him. He is 
ready to do anything for that Man—ready to follow Him 
to the death. But Jesus does not ask that of him. He knows 
his mother needs him; and so He does not take him away to 
be one of His disciples, but gives him back to his old mother. 

T would have liked to see that young man re-entering the 
city of Nain, arm-in-arm with his mother. What do you sup- 
pose he said to the people, who looked at him with wonder? 
Would he not confess that Jesus of Nazareth had raised him 
from the dead? Would he not go everywhere, declaring what 
the Lord had done for his dead body? Oh how I love to 
preach Christ, who can stand over all the graves, and say to 
all the dead bodies, “Arise!” How I pity the poor infidel, 
who has no Christ; who goes down to his death without any 
hope of resurrection! Is there a poor widow here to-night? 
Christ will have compassion on you. Your son is dead, maybe. 
Well, He will raise him up also at the last day, and you along 
with him; and give him back to you, and you to him, if you 
both have believed in Jesus, and given Him your hearts. 


308 «3=———s«é‘«=OS WGI. L. MOOD 


THE STORY OF NAAMAN. 


WANT to tell you about a person who was a great man 3 


in his own country—a very honorable man, one whom the 
king delighted to honor. He stood high in position, he was 
captain of the hosts of the king of Syria; but he was a leper; 
and that threw a blight over his whole life. There was no 
physician to help him in all Syria. None of the eminent doc- 
tors in Damascus could do him any good. Neither could any 
in Jerusalem. But I will tell you what they had in Syria: 
they had one of God’s children there—and she was a little girl. 
Naaman knew nothing about her, though she was one of his 
household. I can imagine this little Israelite, one day, as she 
said to Mrs. Naaman, her mistress, that there was a prophet 


in her country that could cure her master of his leprosy. — 


“Why!” says the mistress, “what are you talking about? Did 
you ever hear of anybody being cured of leprosy?” “Ah!” 


said the little girl, “it’s true, I can assure you: we have got — 


physicians down there that can cure anything.” So at last 


some one told the king -what the little maid of Israel had said. — 
Now Naaman stood high in the king’s favor, for he had just 


won a great victory. He was called a lord; perhaps he was 


a prince—a sort or Syrian Prince Bismarck, who stood near — 


the throne. So the king said, “You had better go down to 


Samaria, and see if there is anything in it, and I will give you _ 


letters of introduction to the king of Israel.” 
Yes, he would give Naaman letters of introduction to the 


king. That’s just man’s idea. Of course, if anybody could — 


help him it was a king. Of course the king had power both — 


with God and man. Oh, my friends, it’s a good deal better to 


know a man that knows God! A man acquainted with God — 


has more power than any earthly king. 


Away goes Naaman down to Samaria with his letter of — 


introduction, and he takes with him a bag of gold and silver. 


- 





FS Whos Oy Oh! A oe 
= 


| THE MAN AND HIS MISSION —_—_39 


That’s man’s idea again: he is going to pay the great doctor. 
And he took about $500,000 sterling, as far as I can make it 
out, to pay this doctor’s bill. There are a good many men who 
would willingly pay that sum, if with it they could buy. the 
favor of God, and get rid of the curse of sin. Yes, if money 
could do it, how many would buy salvation! But, thank God, 
it is not in the market for sale! You must buy it on God’s 
terms, and that is “without money and without price.” Naa- 
man found that out. My dear friends, did you ever ask your- 
selves which is the worse—the leprosy of the body or the lep- 
rosy of sin? Why, for my own part I would a thousand times 
sooner have the leprosy eating my eyes out, and eating off 
feet and arms; I would rather be loathsome in the sight of 


__ my fellow-men than die with the leprosy of sin in my soul, and 


be banished from God for ever. The leprosy of the body is 
bad, but the leprosy of sin is a thousand times worse. It has 
- thrown the angels out of heaven; it has ruined the best and 
strongest men that ever lived in the world. 
There is one thing about Naaman that I like—and that is, 
his earnestness of purpose. He was thoroughly in earnest. 
‘A good many people say, “Oh, I don’t like such and such a 
minister; I should like to know where he comes from, and 
what he has done, and whether any bishop has ever laid his 
hands on his head.” My dear friends, never mind the min- 
ister; it’s the message you want. Why, if some one were 
‘to send me a message, and the news were important, I 
shouldn’t stop to ask about the messenger who brought it; I 
should want to read the news; I should look at the letter and 
its contents, and not at the boy who brought it. And so it 
‘is with God’s message. The good news is everything, the 
minister nothing. The Syrians looked down with contempt 
on the Israelites; and yet this great man was willing to take 
the good news from the lips of this poor little slave. Why, 
if I got lost in London, I should be willing to ask anybody 


400 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


which way to go—even if it were only a poor shoeblack. It g 
is the way I want, not the person who directs me. But there | 





was one drawback in Naaman’s case: though he was willing _ 


to take the advice of the little girl, he was not willing to take 
the remedy. oe 
The stumbling-block of pride stood in his way. The remedy — 
the prophet offered him was a terrible blow to his pride. I 
have no doubt he expected a grand reception from the king 
of Israel, to whom he brought letters of introduction. He 
had been victorious on many a field of battle, and held high _ 
rank in the army—perhaps we may call him Major-General 
Naaman of Syria; or he might have been higher in rank even 
than that. He had a letter of introduction from the king him- _ 
self, and of course he would be received with high honors. 
But instead of the king rushing out to meet him, when he © 
~ heard of Naaman’s arrival and his object, he rent his mantle 
in a rage, and said: “Am I a God, that I can kill and make 
alive?” But at last the king bethinks himself of Elisha the 
prophet; and he says, “There is a man in my kingdom who 
may be able to help you and cure your leprosy.” Now I can 
imagine Naaman’s pride reasoning thus: ‘Surely the prophet 
will feel very much exalted and flattered that I, the great 
Syrian General, should come and call upon him.” . 
He drives up in grand style to the prophet’s house; and, 
after awhile, as nobody seems to be coming out to meet him, — 
he sends in his message: “Tell the prophet Major-General — 
Naaman of Syria has arrived, and wishes to see him.” Elisha 
takes it very coolly. He does not come out to see him; but, 
as soon as he learns his errand, he sends his servant to say: 
“Dip seven times in the river Jordan, and you shall be clean.” 
What a terrible blow to his pride! 3 
I can imagine him saying to his servant—“What did you — 
say? Did I understand you aright? Dip seven times in Jor- 
dan! Why, we call the river Jordan a ditch in our country!” — 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION. 4ox 


But the only answer he got was, “My lord says, Go and dip 
seven times in Jordan.” I can fancy his indignation as he 
asks—“Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better 
than all the waters of Israel? May I-not wash in them and 
be clean?” So he turned and went away ina rage. The fact 
was, Jordan never had any great reputation as a river; it 
flowed into the Dead Sea; and that sea never had a harbor 
to it. And its banks were not half so beautiful as those of 
the rivers of Damascus. Yes, it was a dreadful blow to his 
pride! The truth was, that Damascus was one of the most 
beautiful cities in the world; and it is said that when Mahomet 
first saw it, he turned his head away, for fear it should lead 
his thoughts away from heaven. 

Naaman went off ina rage; he got very angry. But I don’t 
think much of that; for, if you notice, when a man turns away 
in anger, he generally cools down and comes back again. 

He thought the prophet would have come out to him very 
humble and very solemn, and bid him do some great thing. 
Instead of that, Elisha, who was very likely busy writing, 
didn’t even come to the door or the window: he merely sent 
out the message—‘‘Tell him to dip seven times in the Jordan.” | 

And away he went—saying “J thought; I thought; I 
thought.” I have heard that tale so often, that I am tired 
of it. I will tell you just what I think about it, and what I 
advise you. to do—Give it up. Take God’s words, God's 
thoughts, God’s ways. _A man to be converted has to give 
up his will, his ways, and his thoughts. I have often noticed 

- that when a man says: “If ever I am converted, it will be 
this way or that,” God leads him in quite a contrary direction. 

Whilst Naaman was turning the matter over in his mind, 
and thinking what was best to be done, one of his servants 
came and said—and a very sensible remark it was: “My lord, 
_ if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldst thou 

not have done it? how much rather, then, when he saith to 


\ 


402 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


thee, Wash and be clean!” Yes, and there’s a deal of truth : 


in that. Why, if Elisha had said to him, “Go back to Syria 


on your hands and knees,” he would most likely have done 
‘it. If he had said, “Go back all the way on one foot,” he 


would have tried to do it. Or if he had said, “Give me a _ 


hundred thousand pounds for the medicine I prescribe, and — 
thou shalt be cleansed,” no doubt he would have done it. But — 


to tell him merely to dip in the river Jordan seven times— 


why, it was absurd on the face of it! “Why, if there is such — 


cleansing power in the waters of Jordan, does not every leper 


in Israel go down and dip in them, and be healed?” “Well,” — 


says the servant, “you have come a hundred and fifty miles; 
and now don’t you think you had better do what he tells you?” 


His anger is cooling down; and he says, “Well, I think I 
might as well try it.” That’s the starting-point of his faith; — 
but still he thought it a foolish thing, and could not bring — 


himself to believe that the result would be what the prophet 
had said. 


Naaman’s will was conquered at last. He got to that point — } 


where he was willing to obey; and the Scripture tells us “to 


obey is better than to sacrifice.” So he goes down to the river ‘ 


and takes the first dip; and as he comes up, I can imagine 
him looking at himself, and saying to his servant, “There! 
there I am, no better than I was when I went in. If one 


seventh of the leprosy was gone, I should be content.” Down 


he goes.a second time, and he comes up puffing and blowing, 


as much a leper as ever; and so he goes down again and again, ~ 


the third and fourth and fifth time, with the same result—as 


much a leper as ever. When he comes up the sixth time, he ‘4 
looks at himself, and says, “Ah! no better. What a fool I 


have made of myself! How they must all laugh at me! I 
wouldn’t have the generals and aristocracy of Damascus know _ 


that I have been dipping in this way in Jordan for all the 
world, However, as I have gone so far, I’ll make the seventh 


‘THE MAN AND HIS MISSION. 403. 





plunge.” He has not altogether lost faith; and down he goes 
the seventh time, and up he comes again. He looks at himself, 
and shouts aloud for joy. “Lo, Iam well! My leprosy is all 
gone—all gone! My flesh has come again as that of a little . 
child. I never knew such a thing. I never felt so happy in 
all my life. I thought I was a great and a happy man when I 
accomplished that victory; but, thank God! praise God! I 
am the happiest man alive.” So he comes up out of Jordan 
and puts on his clothes, and goes back to the prophet, and 
wants to pay him. 
That’s just the old story: Naaman wants to give money for 
his cure. How many people want to do the same now-a-days! 
_Why, it would have spoiled the story of grace, if the prophet 
had taken anything! You may give a thank-offering to God’s 
cause, not because you can be saved, but because you are saved. 
But the prophet refused to take anything; and I can imagine - 
no one felt more rejoiced than Elisha did. So Naaman starts 
back to Damascus, a very different man than he was when he 
left it.. The dark cloud has gone from his mind; he is no 
longer a leper, in fear of dying from a loathsome disease. He 
lost the leprosy in Jordan when he did what the man of God 
told him; and if you obey the voice of God, even while I am 
speaking to you, the burden of your sins will fall from off 
you, and you shall be cleansed. It is all done by the power of 
faith. 





THE STORY OF THE -PENITENT THIEF. 


AM going to talk this morning about a man; the last one 
whom Jesus saved before He went back to heaven; and the 
fact that He saved such a man at all ought to give every one 
of usa great deal of hope and comfort. This man was a thief, — 
a highwayman, a murderer, perhaps; and yet Christ takes 





‘podinooo [eeg jo sjsorid 04} pur yrlip”y weemjoq 3s0}000 O1103S1y 24} a10y M 


TaAWAVO “LIN 























ox 








THE MAID TELLING HER MISTRESS ABOUT THE 
WONDERFUL PROPHET ELISHA 





es Nad .SNOIT 4H NI THINVG 





THE MAN AND HIS MISSION 409 


have when He worked those miracles they talk about, why 
_ does He not bring out His vengeance, and sweep all these 
_ wretches into destruction? I would do it in a minute, if I 
_had the power. Oh! if I could, I would open the earth and 
_ swallow up these tormentors! But this man ptays to God 
to “forgive them.” Strange! strange! He must be so dif- 
_ ferent from the rest of us. I am sorry I said one word against 
Him when they first hung us up here. What a difference 
there is between Him and me! Here we are hanging on two 
crosses, side by side; but all the rest of our lives we have been 
far enough apart. I have been robbing and murdering, and 
He has been visiting the hungry, healing the sick, and raising 
the dead. Now these people are railing at us both. What 
a strange world is this! I will not rail at Him any more. 
Indeed, I begin to believe He must be the Son of God; for 
surely no son of man could forgive his enemies this way.” 
That is what did it, my friends. This poor man had been 
scourged, and beaten, and nailed to the cross, and hung up 
there for the world to gaze upon; and he was not sorry for 
his sins one single bit—did not feel the least conviction on 
account of all that misery. But when he heard the Saviour 
praying for His murderers, that broke his heart. Hear him: 
“We are suffering justly,” he says. I never knew any man 


to be converted till he confessed. He confesses his sins to - 


Christ, and Christ has mercy on him at once. 

We have heard a great deal about the faith of Abraham, 
_and the faith of Moses; but this man seems to me to have had 
more faith than any of them. He stands at the head of the 
class. God was twenty-five years toning up the faith of Abra- 


ham; Moses was forty years getting ready for his work; but 


this thief, right here in the midst of men who rejected Him 
—nailed to the cross, and racked with pain in every nerve, 
overwhelmed with horror, and his soul in a perfect tempest 
—still manages to lay hold upon Christ, and trust in Him for 


410 DWIGHT L. MOODY — 





a swift salvation. His heart goes out to the Saviour. How 4 
glad he would be to fall on his knees at the foot of that cross, 
and pour out his prayer to Him who was hanging on it! But — 


this he cannot do. His hands and feet are nailed fast to the — 


wood; but they cannot nail his eyes, nor his heart. He can, 


at least, turn his head, and look upon the Son of God; and~ 


his breaking heart can go out in love to the One who is 
dying beside him—dying for him, and dying for you and me, 


And what does Jesus say in answer to his prayer? That 


prayer was a confession of Christ. He calls Jesus Lord, and 


begs to be remembered in His kingdom: that must be a king- " 
dom in heaven, for surely there was no chance of a kingdom 


on earth, as things looked at that time. 
Christ fulfilled His promise to the thief—“Whoso con- 


fesseth me before men, him will I confess before my Father — 
and the holy angels.” He looks kindly upon him, and says, — 
“To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.” And now the 


darkness falls upon the earth; the sun hides itself. 


In the midst of all His agony, how sweet it must have 
been to Christ to hear that poor thief confessing Him! He 


likes to have men confessing Him. Do you not remember 


His asking Peter, “Whom do men say that lam?’ and when 





Peter answered, “Some people say you are Moses, some peo- 


ple say you are Elias, and some people say you are one of the — 
old prophets,” He asks again, “But, Peter, who do you say 


Tam?” and when Peter says, “Thou art the. Son of God,” = 


Jesus blesses him for that confession. And now this thief 
confessed Him—confesses Him in the darkness. Perhaps — 
it is so dark he cannot see Him any longer; but he feels that 
He is there beside him. This poor thief did as much for 


Christ in that one act as if he had lived and worked for Him 


fifty years. That is what Christ wants of us—to confess Him; 


in the dark as well as in the light, when it is hard as well 


Reis * 


pest WE Slr eti8 de rr 


oa 





_ THE MAN AND HIS MISSION ~ 411 


as when it is easy; for He was not ashamed of us, and 
carried our sins even unto death. 

_ Just look a minute at the prayer of this penitent thief. He 
calls Jesus Lord. That sounds like a young convert. “Lord, 
remember me when Thou comest into Thy kingdom.” Not 
a very long prayer, you see, but a prevailing prayer. Some 
_ people think they must have a form of prayer,—a prayer- 
book, perhaps—if they are going to address the Throne of 
Grace properly. But what would that poor fellow do with a 
prayer-book up there, hanging on the cross, his hands nailed 
fast to the wood? Suppose it were necessary that some min- | 
ister, or priest, should pray for him, what is he going to do? 
There is nobody there to pray for him, and he is going 
to die in a few hours. He is out of reach of help from men; 
_ but God has laid help upon One who is mighty, and that 
- One is close at hand. 

Then look at the answer to his prayer. He got more than 
he asked. He only asked to be remembered when Christ 
came into His kingdom. But Christ says to him, “I will 
take you right up with me into my kingdom to-day.” The 
- Saviour wants us all to remember Him in His old kingdom, 
-—to remember Him in the breaking of bread and in the 
- drinking of wine,—and then He will remember us in the new 
kingdom. 

Now think of this, my friends. The last the world ever 
saw of Christ, He was on the cross. The last business of His 
life was the saving of a poor penitent thief. That was a part 

of His triumph. That was one of the glories attending His 
death. No doubt Satan said to himself, “I will have tthe soul 
of that thief, pretty soon, down here in the caverns of the lost. 
He belongs to me. He has belonged to me all those years.” 
- But Christ snapped the fetters of his soul, and set him at 
liberty: Satan lost his prey. “The Lion of the tribe of 
Judah” conquered the lion of hell, 


412 DWIGHT L. MOODY 


What a contrast! In the morning he is led out a con- 


demned criminal; in the evening he is saved from his sins. 
In the morning he is cursing; in the evening he is singing 
hallelujahs with a choir of angels. In the morning he is con- 
demned by men as not fit to live on earth; in the evening he 
is reckoned good enough for heaven. Christ was not 
ashamed to walk arm-in-arm with him down the golden pave- 
ments of the eternal city. He had heard the Saviour’s cry, 
“It is finished.” He had seen the spear thrust into His side. 
_ Jesus had died before his very eyes, and hastened before him 


to get a place ready for this first soul brought from the world ; 


after He had died. 
You have heard of the child who did not like to die and go 


to heaven, because he did not know anybody there. But the 
thief had one acquaintance: even the Master of the place 


Himself. He calls to Gabriel, and says, “Prepare a chariot; 
make haste: there is a friend of mine hanging upon that 
cross. They are breaking his legs. He soon will be ready 
to come. Make haste and bring him to me.” And the angel 
in the chariot sweeps down the sky, takes up the soul of the 
poor penitent thief, and hastens back again to glory; while 
the gates of the city swing wide open, and the angels shout 
their welcome to this poor sinner “washed in the blood of 
the Lamb.” 


I8206 


THEOLOGY LISRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


University of Southern Californte 


% Set 


























. 


I8206 


av 
aT 98206 
M7 Dwight L. Moody 
| D9 The man and his 


mission 






ISSUED TO 


























¥) 
Mg THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


mS 2,04, 


ka? Printed in U.S.A. 





