THE  VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES 
OF  ZECHARIAH 


THE 

VISIONS  &  PROPHECIES 
OF  ZECHARIAH: 

"THE   PROPHET   OF   HOPE 
AND   OF   GLORY" 


AN    EXPOSITIO*7        COLLEGE 


BY 

DAVID     BARON 

AUTHOR  OF 

"THE   ANCIENT  SCRIPTURES   AND  THE   MODERN  JEW 
"TYPES,    PSALMS,   AND  PROPHECIES"   ETC.    ETC. 


MORGAN    ftp     SCOTT    LTD 

12,   PATERNOSTER   BUILDINGS 
LONDON,   E.G.  MCMXVIII 


FOREWORD 

BY  PREBENDARY  H.  E.  Fox,  M.A. 

THE  Bible  is  an  inexhaustible  gold  mine.  Age  after 
age  men  have  been  drawing  from  it  priceless 
treasures.  The  most  successful  searchers  have 
not  been  "  the  wise  and  prudent "  of  this  world,  but  to  holy 
and  humble  men  of  heart  it  has  been  given  to  know  therein 
the  "  secret  of  the  Lord."  Still  more  when  to  this  spirit  is 
joined  both  sanctified  scholarship  and  racial  intuition.  It 
is  for  this  reason  that  among  the  many  expositors  of  latter 
days  we  cherish  the  memory  of  Adolph  Saphir,  truly 
"  a  scribe  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  bringing 
forth  out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and  old."  For  the  like 
reason  we  commend  to  Bible  lovers  the  exposition  which 
our  beloved  brother,  the  author  of  the  following  pages,  has 
given  of  prophetic  Scriptures,  too  little  studied  at  the  present 
time,  and  yet  of  increasing  importance  for  all  who  would 
learn  the  purposes  of  God,  perhaps  very  soon  to  be  fulfilled. 
Those  who  have  followed  the  expositions  in  The  Scattered 
Nation  will  be  thankful  to  have  them  in  a  connected  form, 
and  we  hope  that  many  who  had  not  seen  them  in  their 
earlier  state  will  study  them  carefully,  and  find  faith  and 
hope  quickened  in  each  step  they  take  along  the  prophetic 
path. 

The    Introduction    to    the    second   part   will   be   found 
especially  helpful  to  those  who  have  been  troubled  by  the 


vi  FOREWORD 

difficulties  created  by  the  critics,  whose  shortsightedness 
is  ill  fitted  to  take  in  the  vast  perspective  of  the  Divine 
picture.  And  other  readers  will  at  least  learn  to  say  with 
the  Psalmist,  "  Thy  testimonies  are  wonderful,  therefore  doth 

my  soul  keep  them." 

H.  E.  FOX. 


PREFACE 

MANY  into  whose  hands  this  volume  will  come 
know  its  history  in  advance,  and  the  character 
of  its  contents,  but  for  the  sake  of  others  a  few 
words  of  explanation  are  necessary. 

Being  earnestly  asked  by  honoured  friends  and  readers 
of  The  Scattered  Nation,  the  Quarterly  Record  of  the 
Hebrew  Christian  Testimony  to  Israel,  to  write  connected 
expository  "  Notes  on  Zechariah,"  I  undertook  to  do  so, 
without  sufficiently  realising — as  I  must  now  confess — how 
formidable  the  task  of  a  continuous  exposition  of  this 
particular  prophetic  book  would  prove,  especially  to  one 
whose  life  is  subject  to  much  strain  and  distraction  on 
account  of  many  other  claims  and  responsibilities  in 
connection  with  the  work  of  God  among  scattered  Israel. 

But  having  once  made  a  start,  the  conviction  deepened 
within  me  that  it  was  a  task  entrusted  to  me  of  God, 
and  that  such  a  handling  of  this  great  prophecy,  which 
stands  in  close  organic  connection  with  the  whole  prophetic 
Scripture,  and  the  last  chapters  of  which  deal  so  vividly 
with  the  solemn  events  of  the  end  of  this  present  age, 
might,  with  His  blessing,  prove  of  some  use  to  earnest- 
minded  believers  and  Bible  students  at  this  present  time. 
I  was  also  greatly  encouraged  in  the  process  by  the  many 
spoken  and  written  words  of  approbation  and  encourage 
ment  from  esteemed  brethren  in  Christ — Christian  ministers, 
missionaries,  and  others — who  read  the  expositions  in  the 


viii  PREFACE 

fragmentary  form  in  which  they  first  appeared.  In  the 
pages  of  the  little  Quarterly  above  named,  these  "  Notes," 
under  the  heading  of  "  The  Prophet  of  Hope  and  of  Glory," 
extended  over  a  period  of  nearly  eleven  years.  I  have 
now  gone  through  them  again,  and  made  a  few  slight 
alterations  and  corrections,  but  on  the  whole  they  are  pre 
sented  in  this  volume  exactly  as  they  originally  appeared 
in  The  Scattered  Nation — including  the  introductory  re 
marks  in  the  first  chapter,  which  were  written  eleven  years 
ago.  This  will  partly  account  for  the  style.  Did  time  and 
strength  permit,  I  might  have  re-written  parts  with  a  view 
to  their  abbreviation,  but  certain  circumstances  made  this 
impossible.  Besides,  my  object  was  not  to  write  a  "  Com 
mentary  "  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  usually  under 
stood,  but  to  unfold  and  explain  this  great  Scripture  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  make  it  at  the  same  time  spiritually 
profitable  to  the  average  intelligent  Christian  reader. 
That  I  am  not  unacquainted  with  the  various  works  which 
already  exist  on  Zechariah,  the  pages  of  this  book  will 
bear  witness.  To  several  scholars  in  particular — both 
English  and  Continental — -I  have  either  in  the  text,  or  in 
the  footnotes,  again  and  again  expressed  my  indebtedness. 
I  have  indeed  gleaned  what  I  considered  best  and  helpful 
for  the  elucidation  of  the  text  from  many  sources — and 
even  from  writers  with  whose  general  attitude  to  the  Holy 
Scriptures  and  principles  of  interpretation  I  am  altogether 
at  variance.  But  almost  all  the  existing  works  on  this 
prophetic  book  are  in  one  way  or  another  defective, 
and  some  of  them  even  misleading.  The  older  com 
mentaries,  though  commendable  for  their  reverent  spiritual 
tone  and  practical  teaching,  and  some  of  them  containing 
also  a  good  deal  of  sound  philological  and  historical  matter, 
are  more  or  less  vitiated  by  the  allegorising  principle  of 
interpretation  by  means  of  which  all  references  to  a  con- 


PREFACE  ix 

crete  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  a  literal  national  restora 
tion  of  Israel,  and  the  visible  appearing  and  reign  of 
Messiah,  are  explained  away ;  while  most  of  the  modern 
writers,  biased  at  the  outset  by  their  committal  to  what 
is  known  as  the  Higher  Criticism,  with  its  attitude  of 
suspicion  of  the  authenticity  and  genuineness  of  the  sacred 
text,  spend  themselves,  so  to  say,  on  theories  of  reconstruc 
tion,  and  for  the  most  part  uncalled  for  alterations  and 
emendations,  with  the  result  that  there  is  much  of  criticism 
in  their  works,  but  very  little  which  is  worthy  of  the  name 
of  exposition. 

As  to  my  own  effort  now  embodied  in  this  volume, 
I  am  disposed  to  say  little  about  it,  for  I  am  deeply 
conscious  of  the  greatness  and  sublimity  of  the  theme,  and 
my  inadequacy  in  handling  it,  but  I  may  claim  this  much, 
that  I  have  tried  in  constant  dependence  on  the  Spirit  of 
God,  who  first  moved  holy  men  of  old  to  utter  the  Divine 
oracles,  to  deal  simply  and  conscientiously  with  this  great 
Scripture,  and  that,  while  I  have  consulted  many  sources 
and  "  authorities,"  my  chief  guide  and  final  authority  has 
been  the  Hebrew  text  itself,  viewed  in  the  light  of  the 
whole  of  God's  self-revelation  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments. 

The  reader  will  find  some  parts  both  in  the  visions  and 
in  the  prophecies  more  thoroughly  handled  than  others,  my 
object  being  first  of  all  to  elucidate  as  fully  as  possible  the 
great  Messianic  prophecies  in  this  book,  and  secondly  to 
unfold  and  emphasise  the  great  and  solemn  prophetic 
events  which  centre  around  the  land  and  the  people  of 
Israel — events  the  rapid  fulfilment  of  which  men  may  now 
begin  to  see  with  their  own  eyes. 

Let  me  add  in  conclusion  that  while  the  whole  Scripture, 
which  in  each  case  stands  at  the  head  of  the  chapter  in 
which  it  is  treated,  is  now  given  for  convenience'  sake  from 
b 


x  PREFACE 

the  American  Standard  Edition,  which  I  consider  the  best 
of  all  the  English  versions,  in  the  exposition  itself  I  have 
had  to  do  only  with  the  original  text,  and  have  sought  to 
bring  out  shades  of  meaning  which  cannot  be  reproduced 
in  any  one  translation. 

The  Indexes  at  the  close,  prepared  by  other  practised 
hands,  will,  I  trust,  be  found  helpful  for  purposes  of 
reference. 

DAVID  BARON. 

NORTHFIELD, 
CHORLEY  WOOD,  HERTS. 


CONTENTS 

PART    I 

THE  VISIONS  AND  THE  ANSWER  TO  THE  DEPUTA 
TION  FROM  BETHEL  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE 
CONTINUED  OBSERVANCE  OF  THE  FASTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

I.  INTRODUCTION  AND  THE  PROPHET'S   INTRODUCTORY 

ADDRESS  :  A  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE  (Chap.  i.  1-6)  .        3 
II.  THE  FIRST  VISION  :  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH  AMONG 

THE  MYRTLE  TREES  (Chap.  i.  7-17)     .  .  19 

III.  THE  SECOND  VISION:  THE  HORNS  AND  THE  "CAR 

PENTERS"  (Chap.  i.  18-21)         .  .  .  -43 

IV.  THE  THIRD  VISION  :  THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASUR 

ING  LINE  (Chap.  ii.  1-13)  .  .  .  -55 

V.  THE  FOURTH  VISION  :  JOSHUA   BEFORE  THE  ANGEL 
OF  JEHOVAH  (Chap,  iii.) ;  "THE  BODY  OF  MOSES" 
(Note  to  Chap,  iii.)          .  .  .  .  -83 

VI.  THE  FIFTH  VISJON  :  THE  CANDLESTICK  (Chap,  iv.)     .    125 
VII.  THE  SIXTH  VISION  :  THE  FLYING  ROLL  (Chap.  v.  1-4)     141 
VIII.  THE  SEVENTH  VISION  :   THE  EPHAH  (Chap.  v.  5-11)  .    153 
IX.  THE     EIGHTH     VISION  :      THE      FOUR     CHARIOTS 

(Chap.  vi.  1-8)       .  .  .  .  .  .     171 

X.  THE   CLIMAX  OF  THE  VISIONS  :  THE  CROWNING  OF 

JOSHUA  (Chap.  vi.  9-15)  .  .  .  .  .185 

XI.  ADDRESS  TO   THE   DEPUTATION   FROM   BETHEL  :   (a) 

THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  (Chap,  vii.)  .  .  .    207 

XII.  ADDRESS   TO   THE   DEPUTATION    FROM  BETHEL:   (£) 

THE  POSITIVE  ANSWER  (Chap,  viii.)    •  •           •    227 


xii  CONTENTS 

PART    II 
THE   PROPHECIES 

CHAP.  PAGE 

XIII.  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  PART  OF  ZECHARIAH  : 

AN    EXAMINATION     OF    THE    MODERN    CRITICAL 
VIEW        .  .....    259 

XIV.  THE    GENTILE    WORLD  -  CONQUEROR    AND    ISRAEL'S 

PRINCE  OF  PEACE  (Chap,  ix.)   ....    283 

XV.  WHAT   ISRAEL'S   SHEPHERD-KING   WILL   BE  AND  DO 

FOR  His  PEOPLE  (Chap,  x.)       .  .  .  -335 

XVI.  A    DARK   EPISODE  :  THE    REJECTION   OF   THE  TRUE 
SHEPHERD     AND     THE     RULE    OF     THE     FALSE 
(Chap,  xi.)  .  .     373 

XVII.  ISRAEL'S  FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  GREAT  DELIVERANCE 

(Chap,  xii.)  ......     419 

XVIII.  THE  CLEANSING  OF  THE  PEOPLE  FROM  SIN  AND  THE 

LAND  FROM  IDOLATRY  (Chap.  xiii.  1-6)          .  .    457 

XIX.  THE  SMITING  OF  THE  SHEPHERD  AND  THE  SCATTER 
ING  OF  THE  FLOCK  (Chap.  xiii.  7-9)    .  .  .471 
XX,  THE  GLORIOUS   CONSUMMATION  :   MESSIAH'S  VISIBLE 
APPEARING   AND  THE    ESTABLISHMENT    OF    GOD'S 
KINGDOM  ON  EARTH  (Chap,  xiv.)        .           .           .    487 

GENERAL  INDEX 533 

INDEX  TO  SCRIPTURE  REFERENCES      .  .     546 


PART     I 

The  Visions  and  the  Answer  to  the 
Deputation  from  Bethel 


CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTION  AND  THE  PROPHET'S 
INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS 

A   CALL  TO   REPENTANCE 
(CHAPTER  i.  1-6) 


In  the  eighth  month,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the  word  of  Jehovah 
unto  Zechariah  the  son  of  Berechiah,  the  son  of  Iddo,  the  prophet,  saying, 
Jehovah  was  sore  displeased  with  your  fathers.  Therefore  say  thou  unto  them, 
Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  Return  unto  Me,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  I  will 
return  unto  you,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts.  Be  ye  not  as  your  fathers,  unto  whom 
the  former  prophets  cried,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  Return  ye  now 
from  your  evil  ways,  and  from  your  evil  doings :  but  they  did  not  hear  nor 
hearken  unto  Me,  saith  Jehovah.  Your  fathers,  where  are  they?  and  the 
prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever  ?  But  My  words  and  My  statutes,  which  I  have 
commanded  My  servants  the  prophets,  did  they  not  overtake  your  fathers  ?  and 
they  turned  and  said,  Like  as  Jehovah  of  hosts  thought  to  do  unto  us,  according 
to  our  ways,  and  according  to  our  doings,  so  hath  He  dealt  with  us. 


CHAPTER    I 

INTRODUCTORY 

I  AM  commencing  a  somewhat  difficult  task,  in  which 
I  am  much  cast  upon  God  for  the  help  and  guidance 
of  His  Spirit — the  source  of  light  and  truth — for  it  is 
my  desire  and  prayer  that  these  "  notes,"  though  inadequate 
and  unworthy  of  so  great  a  theme,  may  yet  prove  in  His 
hand  not  only  helpful  to  a  right  understanding  of  this  most 
precious  part  of  Holy  Scripture,  but  be  made  spiritually 
profitable,  and  a  blessing,  especially  to  "  the  poor  of  the 
flock"  (xi.  1 1),  who  still  believe  that  prophecy  came  not  in 
olden  times  by  the  will  of  man,  but  that  "  holy  men  of  God 
spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost." 

As  I  am  writing  here  for  Christians,  and  as  these 
expositions  are  intended  for  average  intelligent  English 
readers,  I  shall  avoid  elaborate  introductions,  and  as  much 
as  possible  also  minute  critical  points.1 

There  are  some  reasons  why  this  portion  of  Old  Testa 
ment  Scripture  should  especially  be  precious  to  Christians. 
I  will  mention  only  two.  First — because  of  the  clear  and 
striking  manner  in  which  it  testifies  of  our  Lord  Jesus. 
Luther  calls  Zechariah  Ausbund  der  Propheten — the  quin 
tessence  of  Old  Testament  prophecy — and  this  is  especially 
true  in  reference  to  Messianic  prophecy.  Indeed  it  seems 
to  be  the  special  aim  and  mission  of  Zechariah  to  condense 
and  concentrate  in  small  compass,  and  in  his  own  peculiar 
terse  style,  almost  all  that  has  been  revealed  to  the  "  former 

1  An  examination  of  critical  points  and  the  theories  of  "  modern "  critics 
against  the  authenticity  of  the  last  chapters  will  be  found  in  the  Introduction  to 
Part  II. 

5 


6     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

prophets  "  about  the  person  and  mission  of  Messiah — about 
His  Divine  and  yet  truly  human  character,  and  of  His 
sufferings  and  of  the  glory  that  should  follow. 

His  betrayal  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver  (chap,  xi.) ;  the 
Roman  spear  with  which  He  was  "  pierced  "  by  His  own 
nation  ;  the  awakened  sword  of  Jehovah's  justice  which,  in 
love  for  a  lost  world,  and  for  the  sin  of  the  guilty,  smites 
the  Good  Shepherd,  "  the  Man  "  who  is  God's  own  equal ; 
and  the  outcome  of  His  sufferings,  when  He  alone  shall 
bear  the  glory,  and  "  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  His  throne," 
and  when  upon  His  blessed  brow,  once  crowned  with 
thorns,  shall  at  last  be  put  the  crown  of  glory : — these, 
as  well  as  other  striking  details,  are  brought  before  us 
in  this  prophecy  very  vividly  and  in  small  compass. 

"  The  Messianic  prophecies  of  Zechariah,"  says  Hengsten- 
burg,  "  are  only  second  to  those  of  Isaiah  in  distinctness. 
In  this,  the  last  prophet  but  one,  the  prophetic  gift  once 
more  unfolded  all  its  glory  as  a  proof  that  it  did  not  sink 
from  exhaustion  of  age,  but  was  withdrawn  according  to 
the  deliberate  counsel  of  the  Lord." 

Secondly,  on  account  of  the  light  it  throws  on  the 
events  of  the  last  times  preceding  the  great  and  terrible 
"  Day  of  the  Lord,"  which  is  fast  approaching. 

The  presence  in  Palestine  of  a  representative  remnant 
of  the  Jewish  people  in  a  condition  of  unbelief;  the  fiery 
furnace  of  suffering  into  which  they  are  there  to  be  thrown  ; 
their  great  tribulation  and  anguish  occasioned  by  the  final 
siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  confederated  Gentile  armies 
under  the  headship  of  him  in  whom  both  Jewish  and 
Gentile  apostasy  is  to  reach  its  climax  ;  how  in  the  very 
midst  of  their  final  sorrow  the  spirit  of  grace  and  sup 
plication  shall  be  poured  upon  them,  and  they  shall  look 
upon  Him  whom  they  have  pierced  and  mourn  ;  how  this 
blessed  One  whom  they  so  long  rejected  shall  suddenly 
appear  as  their  Deliverer,  and  His  feet  stand  "  in  that  day  " 
on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the 
east ;  how  God  shall  again  say  "  Ammi "  to  the  nation 
which  during  the  long  centuries  of  their  unbelief  were 


A  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE  7 

"  Lo-Ammi " — "  not  My  people,"  and  how  Israel  shall 
joyously  respond,  "  Jehovah,  my  God " ;  how  Israel's 
Messiah  shall  speak  peace  to  the  nations,  and  Israel  himself 
enter  at  last  on  his  priestly  mission  to  the  peoples  for  which 
he  was  originally  destined,  and  Jerusalem  become  the  centre 
of  God's  fear  and  worship  for  the  whole  earth — all  these  and 
other  solemn  events  of  the  time  of  the  end  are  spoken  of  in 
this  book  with  a  clearness  and  distinctness  as  if  they  were 
occurrences  of  history  instead  of  prophecies  of  the  future. 

A  very  few  words  will  suffice  on  the  personality  of  the 
prophet. 

Zechariah  (Zekharyah,  "  he  whom  Jehovah  remembers  ") 
is  the  central  figure  in  the  group  of  the  three  post-exilic 
prophets,  and  his  voice  was  the  last  but  one  of  that  unique 
and  wonderful  succession  of  men  who  were,  indeed,  the 
oracles  of  God,  and  through  whom  "  in  divers  portions  and 
in  different  ways "  He  Himself  "  spake  unto  the  fathers," 
revealing  His  eternal  counsels  to  men. 

Like  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  among  the  "  former 
prophets,"  Zechariah  was  of  honourable  priestly  descent  ; 
his  grandfather,  Iddo,  being  head  of  one  of  the  twelve 
priestly  families,  or  courses,  who  returned  from  Babylon 
with  Zerubbabel,  and  with  the  high  priest  Joshua ;  and  at 
a  later  period,  when  Jehoiakim,  the  son  of  Joshua,  was 
high  priest,  Zechariah  himself  succeeded  his  grandfather 
Iddo  as  head  of  his  priestly  course  (Neh.  xii.  4—16),  from 
which  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  the  prophet's  own  father, 
Berechiah,  died  young,  and  before  he  was  able  to  succeed 
his  father  Iddo  in  the  priesthood.1  The  above  facts  lead 
us  to  infer  that  when  called  to  the  prophetic  office 
Zechariah  was  still  very  young.  That  he  was  scarcely  a 
full-grown  man  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  in 
chap.  ii.  4  he  is  addressed  as  "V?_,  naar — translated  in  the 
Authorised  Version  "  young  man."  Now  naar  means 
"  boy,"  "  lad,"  or  "  youth."  It  is,  for  instance,  the  word 

1  This  is  probably  the  reason  why,  in  Ezra  v.  I  and  vi.  14,  Zechariah  is  called 
"  Bar-Iddo,"  "the  son  of  Iddo,"  and  that  his  father  is  passed  over. 


used  by  Saul  as  a  designation  of  David  in  I  Sam.  xvii.  33, 
when  he  said,  "  Thou  art  but  a  youth,"  and,  therefore,  not 
fit  to  go  forth  to  fight  with  Goliath,  who  was  "  a  man  of 
war  from  his  youth."1 

By  the  same  word,  also,  Jeremiah  designates  himself 
when,  feeling  the  awful  responsibilities  of  the  prophetic 
office  to  which  he  was  being  called,  especially  in  an  age 
like  his,  he  tried  to  excuse  himself  by  exclaiming,  "  Ah, 
Lord  God  !  behold,  I  cannot  speak :  for  I  am  a  child." 

This  fact  should  be  an  encouragement  to  those  of  any 
age  who  have  a  message  from  and  for  God.  He  can  speak 
to  and  through  men  at  any  and  every  time  of  life.  He 
presses  into  His  service  the  hoary-headed,  and  sanctifies  the 
experience  of  years ;  but  He  also  reveals  Himself  "  by  the 
Word  of  the  Lord "  to  the  child  Samuel,  and  speaks 
through  him  His  message  to  the  aged  high  priest :  "  I 
thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because 
Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and 
hast  revealed  them  unto  babes.  Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it 
seemed  good  in  Thy  sight " :  yea,  out  of  the  mouths  of 
babes  and  sucklings  He  can  ordain  strength,  and  perfect 
His  praise,  in  order  to  silence  His  enemies  and  to  confound 
the  worldly-wise  and  experienced.  Let  us  despise  neither 
age  nor  youth  in  God's  servants.  The  question  to  be 
asked  in  reference  to  those  who  profess  to  speak  in  the 
Name  of  God  is  not  about  age,  experience,  education,  or 
worldly  position  ;  but  are  they  really  the  Lord's  messengers, 
and  do  they,  like  Haggai,  speak '"in  the  Lord's  message"? 
Zechariah  was  contemporary  and  fellow-labourer  with 
Haggai  (Ezra  v.  i)  to  this  extent,  that  his  first  message 
was  uttered  in  the  eighth  month  of  the  second  year  of 
Darius ;  while  Haggai's  ministry — which,  as  far  as  it  is 
known  to  us,  spread  over  a  period  of  scarcely  four  months 
altogether — closed  on  the  24th  day  of  the  ninth  month  of 
the  same  year  ;  that  is,  scarcely  two  months  after  Zechariah 

1  Some,  indeed,  deny  that  the  term  nyj,  naar,  is  used  of  the  prophet ;  but  we 
will  enter  into  this  question  when  we  come  to  the  exposition  of  that  passage. 
See  p.  60. 


1U    KJSr.ISPrj.AWUE  9 

commenced.  The  time  and  circumstances  were,  however, 
the  same. 

About  eighteen  years  had  elapsed  since  the  first  year 
of  Cyrus,  when  a  remnant  of  those  who  were  carried  into 
captivity — both  of  Judah  and  of  Israel — returned  under  the 
leadership  of  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  the  high  priest. 

The  first  zeal  of  the  returned  exiles  was  most  beautiful. 
In  the  seventh  month  of  the  very  year  of  their  return  they 
already  rebuilt  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  and  thus  restored 
the  sacrificial  ritual  which  was  suspended  during  the  seventy 
years  of  captivity  ;  and  in  the  second  month  of  the  second 
year  they  solemnly  set  themselves  to  the  task  of  rebuilding 
the  Temple  amid  circumstances  of  great  national  joy — not 
unmixed  with  tears  and  sorrow  on  the  part  of  those  who 
remembered  the  Temple  "  in  its  first  glory." 

Soon,  however,  owing  to  causes  into  which  I  cannot 
enter  here,1  carelessness  and  indifference  took  possession  of 
their  hearts,  and  the  holy  task  of  building  the  House  which 
served  as  the  visible  symbol  of  fellowship  between  Jehovah 
and  His  covenant  people  was  neglected.  Then  was  raised 
up  Haggai,  the  first  of  the  great  trio  of  post-exilic  prophets, 
who,  by  scathing  denunciations,  blended  with  glorious 
promises  of  present  help,  and  announcements  of  a  special 
and  "  greater  glory,"  which  should  be  manifested  in  this 
"  latter  House,"  succeeded  in  rousing  the  nation  zealously 
to  resume  the  work  of  building  the  Temple.  It  was  then, 
right  in  the  midst  of  the  movement  inaugurated  by  Haggai, 
that  Zechariah  was  commissioned  by  God  with  further 
messages.  The  difference  between  the  two  prophets  seems 
to  be  this,  that  while  Haggai's  task  was  chiefly  to  rouse  the 
people  to  the  outward  task  of  building  the  Temple, 
Zechariah  took  up  the  prophetic  labours  just  where  Haggai 
had  left  it,  and  sought  to  lead  the  people  to  a  complete 
spiritual  change,  one  of  the  fruits  of  which  would  of 
necessity  be  increased  zeal  in  the  building  of  God's  House, 
the  completion  of  which  he  witnessed  four  years  later. 

In  structure  Zechariah's  prophecy  has  this  in  common 

1  See  Haggafs  Prophecy — a  Voice  to  the  Present  Time, 


io     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

with  Haggai's,  that  they  both  consist  of  only  four  addresses 
of  unequal  length. 

The  four  divisions  in  Zechariah  are  these : 

I.  The  introductory  address,  which  is  a  call   to  repent 
ance  (chap.  i.  1-6). 

II.  A  series  of    eight  visions,  followed    by  a  striking 
symbolical  transaction,  all    shown    to  the  prophet  in  one 
night,  mainly  of  a  consolatory  character,  and  though,  having 
an  historical  foreground,  lead  up  to  the  "  last  days,"  and  to 
the  finale  of   God's  dealings  with    Israel  and  the  nations 
(chap.  i.  6  to  end  of  chap.  vi.). 

III.  An    address   in    the   fourth    year   of  Darius — two 
years  after  his  first  message,  in  answer  to  a  question  on  the 
observance  of  the  national  fasts  put  by  a  deputation  from 
Bethel  (chaps,  vii.  and  viii.). 

IV.  A    prophecy   delivered   at    a    later   period,   which, 
starting  from  the  standpoint  of  a  more  immediate  future, 
brings  us  up  to  the  very  climax  of  things  when  "  the  Lord 
my  God  shall  come,  and  all  the  saints   with  Thee " ;  and 
when,  as  a  result,  "  Jehovah  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth, 
and  there  shall  be  but  one  Lord,  and  His  name  One." 

THE  PROPHET'S  INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS 

The  prophet's  first  words  were  startling  enough  to  rivet 
their  attention : 

"  With  great  displeasure  was  Jehovah  displeased  against 
your  fathers"  * 

That  this  was  a  fact,  those  to  whom  the  prophet  spoke 
could  not  deny.  They  had  seen  the  proofs  of  it  with  their 
own  eyes  in  the  desolations  of  the  land,  and  in  the  seventy 
years'  captivity  of  the  people. 

But  although  Jehovah  was  angry  against  them  on 
account  of  their  long-continued  apostasies  and  provocations, 

1  Literally,  "Jehovah  was  indeed  angry  with  your  fathers,"  or,  "  wroth  was 
Jehovah  against  your  fathers  with  wrath":  the  verb  *]$$,  qatsaph,  has  as  its 
object  the  noun  f]xg,  qatseph,  to  give  it  greater  force.  It  expresses  vehement 
displeasule»  almost  to  the  extent  of  abhorrence. 


A  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE  1 1 

His  anger  was  now  turned  away,  and  He  was  ready  to 
comfort  them  if  they  would  but  turn  from  the  evils  which 
had  brought  those  calamities  on  their  fathers,  and  return 
to  God  with  all  their  hearts.  To  such  a  turning  the 
prophet,  in  the  Name  of  God,  now  most  solemnly  invites 
them : 

"  Return  unto  Me,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  I  will " 
(or  '  that  I  may  ')  return  unto  you,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  " 
— the  repetition  of  the  august  Name  of  Jehovah  being 
meant  to  emphasise  the  Divine  authority  and  sanction  of 
the  call,  and  the  certainty  of  the  blessed  result  which  would 
follow  from  obedience  to  it ;  since  He  who  invites  them  to 
come  back  is  none  other  than  "  Jehovah  of  hosts,"  who, 
while  Lord  of  all  things,  at  whose  call  all  created  forces 
must  marshal  themselves  as  if  for  war,  is  at  the  same  time 
the  Covenant  God  of  the  history  of  Redemption,  whose 
very  Name  is  as  "  a  strong  tower "  for  the  righteous,  and 
who  is  only  "  waiting  to  be  gracious,"  and  would  therefore 
most  certainly  return  unto  them. 

The  gracious  invitation  and  assurance  is  followed  by  a 
warning  lest,  following  in  the  footsteps  of  their  fathers' 
disobedience,  they  would  incur  the  like  displeasure  of  God 
and  experience  the  like  punishment: 

"  Be  not  ye  like  to  your  fathers,  to  whom  the  former 
prophets  cried,  saying,  Turn,  we  beseech  you,  from  your  evil 
ways,  and  from  your  evil  doings  :  but  they  heard  not,  neither 
did  they  hearken  unto  Me,  saith  Jehovah? 

We  have  here  incidentally  given  us  a  kind  of  inspired 
re'sume'  of  one  great  part  of  the  work  "  of  the  former 
prophets  "  and  its  result.  The  mission  of  the  prophets  was 
comprehensive  and  many-sided ;  they  spoke  to  all  times, 
making  known  to  the  children  of  men  the  counsels  of  the 
Eternal.  They  spoke  from  the  mouth  of  the  Omniscient  God, 
foretelling  things  to  come ;  but  to  the  current  generations 
in  which  they  lived  they  were  chiefly  preachers  of  righteous 
ness,  and  their  constant  cry  was,  "  Repent." 

They  saw  Israel — and  in  this  respect  Israel  is  but  a 
type  of  man — wandering  ever  further  from  God,  and  they 


12     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

cried,  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye "  ;  for  why  will  ye  wander  from 
the  source  of  life  and  blessedness,  and  die,  O  House  of 
Israel  ?  That  repentance  was  the  keynote  in  the  preaching 
of  all  "  the  former  prophets  "  will  be  seen  at  a  glance  if  I 
quote  here  only  a  few  of  their  chief  utterances. 

Taking  the  books  as  they  are  now  arranged  in  the  Old 
Testament  Canon,  without  strict  regard  to  chronology  and 
beginning  with  Isaiah — his  chief  message  to  the  generation 
in  which  he  lived,  after  denouncing  their  sins,  may  be 
summed  up  in  the  proclamation  found  in  the  55th 
chapter : 

"  Seek  ye  Jehovah  wJiile  He  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon 
Him  while  He  is  near.  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and 
the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts  ;  and  let  him  return  unto 
Jehovah,  and  He  will  have  mercy  upon  him ;  and  to  our 
God,  for  He  will  abundantly  pardon" 

Jeremiah  was  again  and  again  sent  with  the  gracious 
message : 

"  Return,  tJiou  backsliding  Israel,  saith  Jehovah  ;  and  I 
will  not  cause  My  face  to  fall  upon  you  in  anger :  for  I  am 
the  gracious  One,  saitli  Jelwvah,  and  I  will  not  retain  anger 
for  ever.  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity,  that  thou  hast 
transgressed  against  JeJiovaJi  thy  God"  (Jer.  Hi.  12,  13). 

Ezekiel's  touching  appeal  to  the  people  in  the  Name  of 
God,  who  solemnly  bids  the  prophet  proclaim  that  He  has 
no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  sinner,  I  have  already 
quoted.  It  was  repeated  again  and  again  in  the  course  of 
his  ministry.  Hark,  for  instance,  to  his  cry  in  the 
1 8th  chapter : 

"  Repent,  and  be  turned  from  your  transgressions  whereby 
ye  have  transgressed,  and  iniquity  shall  not  be  your  ruin. 
Cast  away  from  you  all  your  transgressions  ;  and  make  you 
(or  '  get  you  ')  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit :  for  why  will  ye. 
die,  O  house  of  Israel  ?  " 

And  these  were  but  the  continuance  and  repetition  of 
the  still  earlier  voice  of  Hosea,  Joel,  Amos,  and  Zephaniah, 
who  cried  : 

"  O  Israel,  return  unto  Jehovah  thy  God ;  for  thou  hast 


A  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE  13 

fallen  by  thine  iniquity  "  (Hos.  xiv.  l).  "  Turn  ye,  even  to 
Me,  with  all  your  heart,  and  with  fasting,  and  with  weeping, 
and  with  mourning :  and  rend  your  heart,  and  not  your 
garments,  and  turn  unto  Jehovah  your  God ;  for  He  is 
gracious  and  -merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness, 
and  repenteth  Him  of  the  evil"  (Joel  ii.  12,  13).  "  Seek  ye 
Jehovah,  and  ye  shall  live"  (Amos  v.  4—6).  "Before  the 
decree  bring  forth,  before  the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before 
the  fierce  anger  of  Jehovah  come  upon  you,  before  the  day  of 
the  Lord's  anger  come  upon  you,  .  .  .  seek  righteousness,  seek 
meekness :  it  may  be  ye  s}iall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord's  anger"  (Zeph.  ii.  2,  3). 

But,  alas !  to  all  these  cries  Israel  lent  but  a  deaf  ear. 
The  result  of  all  the  ministry  of  the  former  prophets,  as 
far  as  the  nation  was  concerned,  is  summed  up  in  the 
words :  "  But  they  did  not  hear  nor  hearken  unto  Me,  saith 
Jehovah" 

On  the  last  page  of  pre-exilic  history  are  written  the 
following  solemn  words :  "  Moreover,  all  the  chiefs  of  the 
priests,  and  the  people,  transgressed  very  much  after  the 
abominations  of  the  nations ;  and  polluted  the  house  of  the 
Lord  which  He  had  hallowed  in  Jerusalem.  And  the  Lord 
God  of  their  fathers  sent  to  them  by  His  messengers, 
rising  up  betimes  and  sending ;  because  He  had  compassion 
on  His  people,  and  on  His  dwelling  place  :  but  they  mocked 
the  messengers  of  God,  and  despised  His  words,  and 
misused  His  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose 
against  His  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy "  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  14-16).  They  then  went  to  Babylon,  which 
inaugurated  the  period  called  in  the  New  Testament 
"  The  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  which  are  still  running ;  and 
when  at  the  end  of  the  seventy  years  a  remnant  was  in  the 
grace  and  faithfulness  of  God  brought  back,  the  tone  and 
substance  of  the  old  message  did  not  change.  The  cry 
was  taken  up  by  Haggai  and  Zechariah ;  and  with  the 
proclamation,  "  Return  unto  Me,  and  I  will  return  unto  you, 
saith  Jehovah"  (Mai.  iii.  7),  the  voice  of  Old  Testament 
prophecy  finally  dies  away. 


T4     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

For  the  sake  of  showing  that  the  preaching  of  repent 
ance  is  still  the  distinguishing  mark  of  God's  true 
messengers,  let  us  note  how  this  old  cry  is  carried  over,  also, 
into  the  pages  of  New  Testament  history.  After  Malachi 
a  pause  of  four  long  centuries  intervened,  during  which 
there  was  no  voice  nor  vision  nor  answer  of  God  ;  but 
when  the  long  silence  was  broken,  the  first  words  that  fell 
on  Israel's  ear  from  the  mouth  of  the  Baptist  were,  "  Repent  ; 
for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand"  \  and  when  at  last 
the  Greatest  and  last  of  the  prophets,  who  was  Himself  to 
inaugurate  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven "  on  earth,  stood  in 
their  midst,  His  first  public  utterance,  too,  was  the  same 
old  familiar  cry,  "  Repent ! "  (Matt.  iv.  1 7).  Oh,  that 
Israel  had  known  the  day  of  his  visitation,  and  hearkened 
at  last  to  this  gracious  invitation — at  least  when  uttered 
by  the  lips  of  the  Son  of  God  Himself!  But  they  knew 
not,  nor  did  they  understand.  The  proud  Pharisees  and 
scribes,  like  so  many  of  their  fathers  before,  did  not  think 
they  needed  to  repent.  Did  they  not  cry,  "  We  are  the 
Temple  of  the  Lord  "  ?  Were  there  not  the  many  voices 
of  the  false  prophets  who  cried,  "  Peace,  peace  "  ?  "  Have 
we  not  Abraham  to  our  father  ?  "  "  We  are  God's  favoured 
nation  ;  no  evil  will  befall  us."  And  so  again  they  showed 
themselves  the  successors  of  those  who  killed  the  prophets, 
and  stoned  them  that  were  sent  unto  them  and  cried — as 
they  did  of  all  the  prophets  before  Him — "  Away  with  this 
disturber  of  our  peace,  He  is  no  friend  of  our  nation ;  it  is 
expedient  for  us  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people, 
and  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not." 

Christ  died  and  rose  again,  according  to  the  Scriptures  ; 
but  before  His  ascension  He  entrusted  His  disciples  with 
a  message  for  the  world,  and  in  that  last  commission 
(Luke  xxiv.  46—49)  "  repentance  "  still  finds  a  prominent 
place.  And  the  keynote  in  the  Apostolic  preaching — 
whether  in  Jerusalem  or  in  Athens,  whether  to  Jew  or  to 
Greek— was,  "  God  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to 
repent."  "  Repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that 
your  sins  may  be  blotted  out,  when  the  time  of  refreshing 


A  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE  15 

shall  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  "  (Acts  iii.  1 9, 
xvii.  30). 

And  we  may  pause  and  ask,  Is  there  less  need  for  this 
kind  of  preaching  now  than  there  was  in  Jeremiah's  or  in 
Paul's  time?  Is  man's  attitude  and  tendency  more  God- 
ward  and  heavenward  now  than  it  was  then  ?  Is  man  all 
right,  or  is  he  radically  wrong  ?  Does  man's  natural  course 
lead  to  life,  or  does  the  end  of  it  lead  to  death  ?  Upon  the 
answer  to  these  questions  depends  the  answer  as  to  who 
are  the  true  prophets  and  genuine  friends  of  man  ;  whether 
those  who  cry,  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  ;  for  why  will  ye  die  ?  "  or 
those  who  speak  of  "  the  world's  progress,"  and  tell  corrupt, 
sinful  men  that  they  are  themselves  potentially  Christs,  who 
need  only  develop  "  the  good  that  is  in  them,"  and  who  still 
cry,  "  Peace,  peace,"  although  there  is  no  peace.  We  may  be 
forgiven  for  digressing  somewhat  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
passage  before  us ;  but  we  believe  that  this  question  of 
repentance  touches  the  very  heart  of  man's  relationship  to 
God.  It  shows  us,  as  we  have  seen,  man's  condition  as 
apostate  from  God,  with  his  face  turned  away  from  the 
fountain  of  light  and  life.  It  tells  us  that  man's  great  need 
is  to  forsake  not  only  his  outward  ways,  but  also  his 
thoughts,  and  to  return  to  the  Lord ;  and  it  reveals  to  us 
the  grace  and  love  of  God,  who  has  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  sinner,  but  yearns  for  his  return,  "  because  He 
delighteth  in  mercy,"  and  has,  at  the  cost  of  the  sacrifice  of 
His  own  Son,  devised  a  means  for  reconciliation,  "  that  His 
banished  be  not  expelled  from  Him  "  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14). 

Let  us  return,  therefore,  unto  the  Lord,  and  He,  accord 
ing  to  His  promise,  will  "  return  unto  us " — we  with  our 
sins,  He  with  His  grace  and  forgiveness ;  we  with  our 
poverty  and  need,  He  with  His  exceeding  "  riches "  and 
infinite  fulness ;  we  with  our  wretchedness  and  fears,  He 
with  His  "  everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope " — yea, 
with  His  peace,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  and  with 
His  joy,  which  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  And  if  we 
find  no  power  of  ourselves  to  come  to  Him,  let  us  pray,  as 
Israel  will  by  and  by :  "  Turn  Thou  us  unto  Thee,  O  Lord, 


1 6     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  we  shall  be  turned"  "  Cause  Thy  face  to  shine,  and  we 
shall  be  saved"  (Lam.  v.  2  I  ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  3). 

We  now  come  to  the  last  two  verses  of  Zechariah's 
preparatory  address,  which  may  be  summarised  as  a  warn 
ing  against  disobedience,  illustrated  and  enforced  by  the 
sad  experiences  of  their  fathers.  "  Your  fathers,  where  are 
they  ? "  "  They  did  not  hear  nor  hearken " ;  they  dis 
believed  and  disobeyed  My  word ;  but  what  was  the  con 
sequence  ?  What  good  did  they  gain  ?  what  success  did 
they  experience  in  resisting  Me  ?  "  Where  are  they  ? " 
Did  they  not  for  that  very  reason  spend  their  days  in 
wretchedness,  and  pine  away  in  captivity  ?  "  And  the 
propJiets,  do  they  live  for  ever  ?  " 

Probably  we  have  here  the  record  of  a  dialogue  between 
the  prophet,  speaking  in  the  Name  of  God,  and  the  people ; 
at  least  so  some  of  the  leading  Jewish  commentators 
understand  it — namely,  that  when  the  prophet  pointed  them 
to  their  fathers,  saying,  "  Where  are  they  ?  "  the  people 
impudently  answered,  "And  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for 
ever? "-—  have  they,  too,  not  shared  in  the  sorrows  of  the 
nation  and  passed  away  like  our  fathers  ? x  And  then  the 
prophet  replies,  "  Yes ;  the  prophets,  though  God's  mouth 
piece,  were  but  men,  and  are  gone,  '  but  My  words  and  My 
statutes,  which  I  commanded  My  servants  the  prophets,  did 
they  not  overtake  your  fathers,  so  that  they  had  to  return  and 
say,  that  as  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  thought  (or  "  determined  ")  to 

1  Kimchi,  in  his  commentary  on  Zeckariah,  says,  "  Our  Rabbis,  of  blessed 
memory,  have  interpreted  the  words,  '  The  prophets,  where  are  they  ? '  as  the 
answer  of  the  people.  They  say  that  the  congregation  of  Israel  gave  a  contro 
versial  reply  to  the  prophet.  He  said  to  them  :  '  Return  in  true  repentance,  for 
your  fathers  sinned  ;  and  where  are  they  ? '  The  people  answered  him  :  '  And 
the  prophets  who  did  not  sin,  where  are  they  ? '  But  they  afterwards  repented 
and  made  confession  to  him."  The  place  in  the  Talmud  to  which  he  refers  is 
Bab.  Sanhedrin,  105. 

Among  Christian  interpreters,  we  are  glad  to  see  Keil  adopting  this  view.  In 
Lowe's  Hebrew  Student's  Commentary  mi  Zechariah,  there  is  the  following  note  : 

"Another  interpretation  is  that  Zechariah's  words  are  equivalent  to  this  :  The 
light  of  prophecy  is  dying  out  ;  while  ye  have  the  light,  walk  as  children  of  the 
light.  But  to  us  it  appears  that  to  put  the  words,  ' Do  (or  "did  ")  the  prophets 
live  for  ever?'  into  the  mouth  of  Zechariah,  is  to  destroy  utterly  his  argument." 


A  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE  17 

do  unto  us,  according  to  our  ways,  and  according  to  our  doings, 
even  so  hath  He  dealt  with  us  ? '  " 

Oh,  that  men  would  learn  to  distinguish  between  the 
frailty  and  weakness  of  the  best  of  God's  messengers  and 
the  eternal  character  and  unfailing  veracity  of  His  message  ! 
The  prophets  are  no  more,  but  the  words  which  those  holy 
men  of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
are  still  with  us,  verifying  themselves,  and  in  spite  of  man's 
unbelief  accomplishing,  whether  in  judgment  or  in  mercy, 
that  whereunto  they  were  sent. 

Oh,  that  men  would  take  warning  from  the  past  history 
of  Israel,  and  note  the  faithfulness  of  God  in  carrying  out 
His  threatenings  as  well  as  His  promises ! 

Oh,  that  you  would  be  wise  and  "  give  glory  to  Jehovah 
your  God  before  He  cause  darkness,  and  before  your  feet 
stumble  upon  the  dark  mountains,  and  while  ye  look  for 
light  He  turn  it  into  the  shadow  of  death,  and  make  it 
gross  darkness"  (Jer.  xiii.  15-17). 


CHAPTER    II 
THE   FIRST    VISION 

THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH  AMONG  THE 
MYRTLE  TREES 

(CHAPTER  i.  7-17) 


Upon  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  eleventh  month,  which  is  the  month 
Shebat,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the  word  of  Jehovah  unto  Zechariah, 
the  son  of  Berechiah,  the  son  of  Iddo,  the  prophet,  saying,  I  saw  in  the  night, 
and  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse,  and  he  stood  among  the  myrtle 
trees  that  were  in  the  bottom  ;  and  behind  him  there  were  horses,  red,  sorrel, 
and  white.  Then  said  I,  O  my  lord,  what  are  these?  And  the  angel  that 
talked  with  me  said  unto  me,  I  will  show  thee  what  these  are.  And  the  man 
that  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees  answered  and  said,  These  are  they  whom 
Jehovah  hath  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth.  And  they  answered 
the  angel  of  Jehovah  that  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees,  and  said,  We  have 
walked  to  and  fro  through  the  earth,  and,  behold,  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and 
is  at  rest.  Then  the  angel  of  Jehovah  answered  and  said,  O  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
how  long  wilt  Thou  not  have  mercy  on  Jerusalem  and  on  the  cities  of  Judah, 
against  which  Thou  hast  had  indignation  these  threescore  and  ten  years  ?  And 
Jehovah  answered  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  with  good  words,  even  com 
fortable  words.  So  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  said  unto  me,  Cry  thou, 
saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts :  I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and  for  Zion 
with  a  great  jealousy.  And  I  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  nations  that  are 
at  ease  ;  for  1 1  was  but  a  little  displeased,  and  they  helped  forward  the  affliction. 
Therefore  thus  saith  Jehovah :  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies  ;  my 
house  shall  be  built  in  it,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  a  line  shall  be  stretched 
over  Jerusalem.  Cry  yet  again,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  My  cities 
shall  yet  overflow  with  prosperity ;  and  Jehovah  shall  yet  comfort  Zion,  and 
shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER    II 

ABOUT  three  months  after  the  introductory  address l 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  mainly  a  call  to 
repentance,  the  series  of  eight  visions,  followed  by 
the  very  significant  symbolical  transaction  of  the  crowning 
of  the  high  priest  Joshua,  the  son  of  Josedech,  was  given  to 
the  prophet.  In  this  case  the  exact  day  of  the  month  is 
indicated,  most  probably  because  it  was  a  day  of  special 
significance  and  of  sacred  association  to  the  restored 
remnant.  It  was  "  in  the  twenty  and  fourth  day  of  the 
eleventh  month,  that  is,  in  the  month  Shebat,  in  the  second 
year  of  Darius"  On  that  very  day  just  five  months  before, 
the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel  and  of  Joshua,  and  "  of  all  the  rest 
of  the  people,"  being  stirred  up  by  God  through  the  preach 
ing  of  Haggai,  commenced  to  work  again  in  the  rebuilding 
of  the  Temple  (Hag.  i.  14,  15). 

On  the  same  day  also  just  three  months  later — that  is, 
a  month  after  Zechariah's  introductory  address — the  same 
prophet  delivered  his  last  two  stirring  messages,  the  first 
ending  with  the  promise,  "  From  this  day  will  I  bless  you," 
and  the  second  containing  the  announcement  that  God 
would  shake  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  overthrow  the 
thrones  and  kingdoms  of  the  nations  all  with  a  view  to  the 
restoration  and  exaltation  of  the  Davidic  House,  which 
was  then  represented  by  Zerubbabel  (Hag.  ii.  10-23)  ;2  so 

1  The  exact  day  of  the  month  is  not  given  to  the  introductory  address,  but 
the  omission  is  probably  meant  to  imply  that  it  was  on  the  first  day,  or  on  the 
Feast  of  the  New  Moon,  that  it  was  delivered. 

2  It  was  also  on  the  24th  of  the  month  that  Daniel,  after  having  previously 
fasted  and  mourned  for  three  full  weeks,  had  received  the  vision  of  the  things 
noted  in  the  Scripture  of  truth  (Dan.  x.  4-21). 


22     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

that  there  is  probability  in  the  suggestion  that  it  is  on 
account  of  its  sacred  connection  with  Haggai's  ministry,  and 
especially  on  account  of  it  being  the  day  on  which  they 
earnestly  took  in  hand  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  Temple, 
that  it  was  chosen  as  a  day  for  further  Divine  revelations. 

This  24th  day  of  the  eleventh  month  was,  as  already 
stated,  exactly  two  months  after  the  last  promise  issued 
through  Haggai  to  the  people  that  the  Lord  would  hence 
forth  bless  His  nation,  and  would  glorify  it  in  the  future. 

"  To  set  forth  in  symbol  and  imagery  this  blessing  and 
glorification,  and  to  exhibit  the  leading  features  of  the 
future  conformation  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  was  the 
object  of  these  revelations." l 

These  visions,  which  addressed  themselves  more  to  the 
prophet's  mental  and  spiritual  sight  than  to  his  ears,  are 
called  debhar  Yehovah — "  the  word  of  Jehovah  " — because 
the  pictures  seen  in  the  spirit,  together  with  their  interpreta 
tion,  had  the  significance  of  verbal  revelations,  and  through 
them  the  will  and  purposes  of  Jehovah  were  communicated 
to  him. 

Divinely  communicated  visions  were  one  of  the 
"  divers  manners "  in  which  God  spake  in  times  past  in 
the  prophets  to  the  fathers,  even  as  we  read  in  Num.  xii.  6 : 
"  If  there  be  a  prophet  among  you,  I,  Jehovah,  will  make 
Myself  known  to  him  in  a  vision  ;  I  will  speak  with  him 
(literally,  '  in  him  ')  in  a  dream." 

The  whole  series  of  visions  which  were  granted  to  the 
prophet,  probably  in  rapid  succession  one  after  the  other 
with  only  short  pauses  between,  in  one  night,  though 
distinct  and  in  a  sense  each  one  complete  in  itself — "  form 
(as  we  shall  see)  a  substantially  connected  picture  of  the 
future  of  Israel  linked  on  to  the  then  existing  time,  and 
closing  with  the  prospect  of  the  ultimate  completion  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God." 

The  general  plan  in  all  these  visions  is  first  to  present 
the  symbol,  and  then,  on  a  question  being  put,  to  supply 
the  inteipretation. 

1  Keil. 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  23 

What  the  Prophet  saw 

In  the  dead  of  night — not  in  a  dream,  but  in  an 
ecstatic  condition,  in  which  his  mental  and  spiritual  faculties 
were  altogether  awake  and  attuned  to  God,  so  that  he 
could  fully  respond  to  the  operations  and  promptings  of 
the  Spirit,  and  pictures  of  divine  objects  could  be  reflected 
on  his  soul — he  saw  "  a  man  "  riding  upon  a  red  horse, 
standing  among  myrtles  "  in  the  bottom,"  or,  more  literally, 
"in"  (or  "by")  the  "deep,"  and  behind  him,  at  his 
command,  were  horses  (most  probably  with  riders  upon 
them),  red,  speckled  (or  "  sorrel,"  or  "  bay  "),  and  white. 

Now,  before  passing  from  this  verse  we  must  consider : 

(a)  Who  is  "  the  man  "  ?  (b}  What  is  represented  by 
the  myrtles  ?  and  (c]  the  significance  of  the  colour  of  the 
horses. 

I.  The  "man,"  as  we  are  told  in  ver.  11,  was  the 
Malakh  Yehovah — the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  who  is  none  other 
than  the  "  Angel  of  His  face,"  the  Divine  "  Angel  of  the 
Covenant,"  the  second  person  in  the  Blessed  Trinity, 
whose  early  manifestations  to  the  patriarch  and  prophets, 
as  the  "  Angel "  or  Messenger  of  Jehovah  in  the  form  of 
man,  were  anticipations  of  His  incarnation  and  of  that 
incomprehensible  humiliation  to  which  He  would  after 
wards  condescend  for  our  salvation.  Some  commentators 
(among  them  Keil  and  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright J)  do  indeed 
distinguish  between  the  two,  but  without  sufficient  reason. 
The  chief  ground  of  their  objection  to  the  identification  of 
"  the  man  "  in  the  8th  verse  with  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  in 
the  i  ith,  is  that  if  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  was  really  identi 
fied  with  the  rider  on  the  red  horse,  that  rider  would  have 
been  represented  as  standing  opposite  to  the  other  horse 
man  (when  giving  in  their  report  to  him  in  ver.  li),  and 
they  would  not  have  been  spoken  of  as  standing  behind 
him.2  To  which  surely  it  is  sufficient  to  reply  that  it  is 

1  "  Zechariah  and  his  Prophecies,"  being  the  Bampton  Lectures  for  1878. 
8  Dr.  Wright  further  adds  :  "  Moreover,  though  the  rider  on  the  red  horse  was 
the  leader  and  chief  of  the  band  of  angelic  riders,  he  was  also  a  member  of  one 


24     VISIONS  AND   PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

not  stated  that  they  were  behind  him  (or,  as  is  more  literal), 
"  after  him,"  when  giving  in  their  report ;  and  that  there  is 
no  necessity  to  suppose  that  their  captain  and  leader  could 
not  have  turned  his  face  toward  them  while  they  were 
speaking.  Certainly,  if  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  is  not 
identical  with  "  the  man,"  and  there  were  two  prominent 
commanding  figures  standing  among  the  myrtles,  apart 
from  the  cohort  of  angelic  riders,  it  would  have  been  not 
"  the  man  "  (who  in  that  case  would  have  been  an  inferior 
being),  but  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  who  would  have  attracted 
the  attention  of  the  prophet  most,  and  who  would  have 
been  mentioned  first. 

II.  It  is  pretty  generally  agreed  that  the  myrtles 
symbolise  Israel,  and  it  is  not  without  significance  that  this 
particular  symbol  is  chosen.  Not  the  proud  cedar,  not  the 
lofty,  far-spreading  oak — the  symbols  of  the  great  world- 
powers — but  the  lowly,  fragrant  myrtle,  growing  for  the 
most  part  in  the  shady  valley  out  of  the  world's  gaze,1  is 
chosen  to  represent  the  covenant  people.  Yes,  it  is  with 

of  the  subdivisions  of  which  that  band  was  composed,  inasmuch  as  he  was  mounted 
upon  a  steed  of  a  red  colour,  and  not  of  a  colour  distinct  from  the  rest "  :  but  he 
overlooks  the  fact  that  in  answer  to  the  prophet's  question,  "What  are  these, 
my  lord?"  "The  man,"  standing  among  the  myrtles,  answers,  "These  are 
they,"  etc.,  not  "  We  are  they,"  showing  that  though  he  was  the  Captain  of  the 
Lord's  host,  he  was  not  to  be  confounded  with  them.  That  he  was  mounted  on 
a  steed  of  a  red  colour,  and  not  a  colour  distinct  from  all  the  rest,  is  sufficiently 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  this  colour  symbolised  what  was  now  the  chief 
characteristic  of  his  attitude  to  the  nations  who  were  oppressing  Israel,  namely, 
judgment  and  vengeance. 

1  Hadassah  (Myrtle)  became  a  favourite  female  name.  Esther  bore  it,  perhaps 
on  account  of  the  humility  and  modesty  of  her  demeanour.  In  Kimchi's 
comment  on  this  verse  will  be  found  the  following  curious  passage  :  "We  have 
found  in  the  words  of  our  Rabbis,  of  blessed  memory,  the  following  exposition  " 
(it  will  be  found  in  Talmud  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  93,  col.  i) :  "I  saw  in  the 
night  that  the  Holy  One — blessed  be  He  !— sought  to  turn  the  whole  world  into 
night ;  and,  behold  !  a  man  riding.  This  man  is  no  other  than  the  Holy  One — 
blessed  be  He  ! — for  it  is  said,  '  The  Lord  is  a  man  of  war  '  "  (a  remarkable 
testimony  this  from  the  Talmud,  that  He  who  appeared  as  the  Angel  of  Jehovah 
in  the  form  of  man  was  the  God  of  Israel).  "  '  Upon  a  red  horse.'  The  Holy 
One — blessed  be  He  ! — sought  to  turn  the  whole  world  into  blood,  but  when  He 
looked  upon  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah,  His  anger  was  cooled,  for  it  is 
said,  'And  he  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees.'  The  Hadassim  can  mean  nothing 
else  but  the  righteous,  for  it  is  said,  '  He  brought  up  Hadassah,' "  i.e.,  Esther. 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  25 

the  lowly,  with  those  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit,  that 
the  High  and  Lofty  One  who  inhabits  eternity,  ever  dwells 
and  identifies  Himself  (Isa.  Ivii.  1 5,  Ixvi.  2). 

The  myrtles  among  which  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  is  seen 
standing  are  represented  as  growing  "  in  the  bottom,"  as 
the  Authorised  Version  has  it ;  but  the  word  is  metsulah, 
from  tsul — the  verb  tsollal  being  used  of  sinking  in  the 
water  (Ex.  xv.  10).  The  margin  in  the  Revised  Version 
suggests  the  rendering  of  "  shady  place,"  and  various  other 
translations  as  the  basis  of  different  interpretations  have 
been  given  by  Jewish  and  Christian  commentators. 

The  Jewish  Targum  and  the  Talmud,  followed  by 
Kimchi  and  some  Christian  interpreters,  translate  "  valley," 
and  say  that  it  represents  Babylon,  where  the  Jews  had 
been  banished  on  account  of  their  sin ;  and  some,  like 
Hengstenberg,  think  that  the  metsulah  was  symbolical 
of  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  its  then  outwardly  depressed 
condition,  but  still  under  the  gracious  protection  of  the 
Angel  of  Jehovah.  But  "Tp-fE)?,  bammetsuliah,  should,  we 
think,  be  certainly  rendered  "  in  "  or  "  by  "  "  the  deep."  It 
is  at  least  rightly  so  rendered  in  two  passages  in  the  Psalms. 
The  first  is  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  6 :  "  Thou  hast  laid  me  in  the 
lowest  pit,  in  the  dark  places  in  the  deeps  (bimetsoloth}" 
the  next  verse  showing  that  it  is  in  the  deeps  of  the  sea, 
since  the  writer  goes  on  to  say :  "  Thou  hast  afflicted  me 
with  all  Thy  waves."  And  the  second  passage  in  Ps.  cvii. 
23,  24,  where  we  read  that  "  they  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in 
ships,  that  do  business  in  great  waters — these  see  the  works 
of  Jehovah  and  His  wonders  in  the  deep  (bimetsulah}." 

It  might  thus  be  a  suitable  figure  of  the  unfortunate 
condition  of  Israel  over  whom  the  waves  of  troubles  and 
oppression  were  rolling  in  their  captivity  among  the 
Gentiles ;  but  where  dogmatic  certainty  is  out  of  the 
question,  we  would  venture  to  suggest  what  to  us  seems  the 
most  likely  meaning  of  this  symbol,  namely,  that  "  the  deep  " 
of  "  the  great  sea  "  represents  the  great  Gentile  world-power 
at  that  time,  with  whom  commenced  "  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles  " — "  the  abyss-like  power  of  the  kingdom  of  the 


26     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

world,"  as  Baumgarten  expresses  it.  By  the  side  or  in  the 
very  midst  of  the  great  deep,  or  ocean  of  humanity,  as  if 
threatened  to  be  swallowed  up  by  it,  stands  the  group  or 
thicket  of  lowly  myrtles ;  but  the  Angel  of  Jehovah — the 
second  Person  in  the  Blessed  Trinity,  who,  in  His  love  and 
in  His  pity  redeemed  and  bore  and  carried  them  of  old 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  9) — is  among  them,  in  fulfilment  of  His  word, 
"  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters  I  will  be  with  thee, 
and  the  rivers  they  shall  not  overflow  thee." 

How  rich  in  consolation  to  the  prophet's  own  heart, 
and  to  the  people  to  whom  he  was  to  make  known  what  he 
saw,  was  this  single  item  in  the  comforting  vision  !  In  the 
very  midst  of  that  remnant  of  His  oppressed  and  afflicted 
people — though  their  eyes  may  be  holden  so  that  they  can 
not  see  Him — afflicted  in  all  their  afflictions,  is  ever  Israel's 
Redeemer,  "  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,"  who  "  encampeth," 
with  an  invisible  host,  round  about  them  that  fear  Him,  to 
deliver  them. 

Note,  dear  reader,  governmental  power  and  even 
national  independence  had  already  been  taken  from  Israel. 
"  The  times  of  the  Gentiles  "  had  already  commenced  some 
seventy  years  before,  with  Nebuchadnezzar ;  but  that  did 
not  mean  Israel  being,  as  a  people,  altogether  cast  off  by 
God.  No ;  behold  Him,  not  in  the  midst  off  the  great 
world-powers,  into  whose  hands  the  sceptre  of  governmental 
rule  was  parenthetically  put,  but  identified  with  the  com 
parative  handful  of  people  who,  for  their  sins,  were  under 
His  severe  chastisement,  and  given  over  for  a  time  into  the 
hands  of  their  enemies. 

And  the  same  is  true  of  scattered,  storm-tossed  Israel 
in  the  present  day.  Sometimes  to  the  eye  of  man  it  would 
almost  appear  true  as  Zion  in  her  distress  says  of  herself, 
"  Jehovah  hath  forsaken  me ;  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me." 
And  many  Christian  commentators  even  start  with  the 
presupposition  that,  because  the  Jewish  people  is  banished 
and  scattered,  therefore  it  is  also  cast  off;  but  hear  the 
faithful  covenant-keeping  God  :  "  For  I  am  with  thee, 
saith  Jehovah,  to  save  thee  ;  for  I  will  make  a  full  end  of 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  27 

all  the  nations  whither  I  have  scattered  thee,  but  I  will  not 
make  a  full  end  of  thee ;  but  I  will  correct  thee  with 
judgment,  and  will  by  no  means  hold  thee  guiltless." 
"  And  yet  for  all  that,  when  they  be  in  the  land  of  their 
enemies,  I  will  not  cast  them  away,  neither  will  I  abhor 
them  to  destroy  them  utterly,  and  to  break  My  covenant 
with  them  ;  for  I  am  Jehovah  their  God  "  (Jer.  xxx.  1 1  ; 
Lev.  xxvi.  44). 

III.  Lastly,  before  passing  on  from  the  8th  verse,  just 
a  few  words  on  the  significance  of  the  colours  of  the  horses. 
That  they  symbolise  the  mission  on  which  these  angelic 
hosts  are  about  to  be  sent  forth,  there  can,  I  think,  be  no 
doubt,  in  spite  of  Dr.  Wright's  confident  statement  that 
"  any  attempt  to  assign  any  grounds  for  the  employment  of 
the  special  colours  is  futile." 

The  red  is  significant  of  judgment,  blood,  vengeance. 
It  is  to  an  angelic  rider  on  a  horse  of  this  colour  that  a  great 
sword  is  given,  in  Rev.  vi.  4,  to  take  peace  from  earth,  so  that 
men — the  enemies  of  God  and  of  His  Christ — should  slay 
one  another ;  and  in  Isa.  Ixiii.  it  is  in  garments  dyed  red 
that  the  Messiah  goes  forth  in  the  day  of  vengeance  to  tread 
the  nations  in  His  anger,  and  to  trample  them  in  His 
fury.  In  our  vision  it  doubtless  signifies  the  same  thing — 
namely,  the  readiness  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  to  go  forth 
with  His  angelic  cohorts  to  execute  swift  judgment  on 
Israel's  oppressors. 

The  exact  colour  to  be  understood  by  the  word 
seruqqim,  translated  in  the  A.V.  "  speckled,"  or  "  bay,"  as 
in  the  margin,  or  "  sorrel,"  as  in  the  R.V.,  cannot  be  fixed 
with  certainty.1  I  might  fill  several  pages  with  the  guesses 
and  suggestions  and  disputations  on  this  word  by  the 
learned,  but  it  most  probably  is  meant  to  describe 
a  mixed  colour — a  combination  of  the  first  and  last 
mentioned  in  the  passage — and  would  signify  that  those 
mounted  on  these  horses  were  to  be  sent  forth  on  a  mission 
of  a  mixed  character — namely,  of  judgment  and  mercy  ; 
while  the  white  is  the  symbol  of  victory/triumph,  and  glory 
1  The  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  Hebrew  as  an  adjective  of  colour. 


28     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

(Rev.  vi.  2),  which  shall  be  to  God's  people  after  their 
great  champion  rides  forth  "  conquering  and  to  conquer," 
and  executing  vengeance  on  their  enemies. 

And  the  vision  of  the  legions  of  angels  mounted  and 
ready  to  obey  the  command  of  their  great  Captain  was 
doubtless  intended  to  convey  to  the  prophet  the  message 
which  he  was  to  impress  on  the  people,  that  "  the  chariots 
of  God  are  twenty  thousand,  even  myriads  of  angels " ; 
that  with  Him  was  all  the  requisite  power  and  resources 
for  the  deliverance  of  His  people,  and  the  destruction  of 
their  foes.  It  was  not  because  His  hand  had  become 
shortened  and  His  ear  heavy,  or  that  there  was  a  lack 
either  of  might  or  willingness  to  save  on  His  part,  that 
they  had  become  subject  to  the  power  of  the  Gentiles ;  but 
because  their  sins  had  for  a  time  separated  them  from  their 
God,  and  their  iniquities  had  caused  His  protecting  and 
guiding  power  to  be  withdrawn  from  them. 

But  we  proceed  to  the  gth  verse. 

"  TJien  said  /,  O  my  lord,  what  are  these?  And  the 
angel  that  talked  with  me  said  unto  me,  I  will  show  tJiee 
what  these  be" 

Now,  here  we  are  introduced  for  the  first  time  to  this 
malakh  haddobher  bi — the  angel  that  talked  with  me,  or, 
literally,  "  in  me  " — and  the  question  to  decide  is  whether 
this  angel  who  interprets  is  the  same  as  the  Malakh 
Yehovah — the  Angel  of  Jehovah — whom  the  prophet  saw 
standing  among  the  myrtles,  as  some  contend,  or  is  he 
another  being,  simply  angelic  ?  The  arguments  advanced 
for  the  identity  of  the  two  are  these  : 

(i)  In  the  verse  under  our  examination  the  prophet 
addresses  this  angel  as  "  my  lord  "  (adoni},  and  as  no  other 
person  has  been  previously  mentioned  it  would  appear  that 
it  was  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  he  was  speaking  to.  But 
this  is  by  no  means  conclusive,  for  in  the  prophecies,  and 
especially  in  the  visions,  on  account  of  their  dramatic 
character,  persons  are  frequently  introduced  either  as 
speaking,  or  as  being  addressed  by  others,  without  having 
been  previously  mentioned.  Note  the  striking  fact  that  the 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  29 

prophet  does  not  address  this  angel  as  Adonai,  "  my  Lord  " 
— a  Divine  title  addressed  to  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  as,  for 
instance,  in  Gen.  xviii.  3 — but  adoni,  "  my  lord,"  which  may 
be  addressed  to  man,  or  any  created  being. 

(2)  This    angel   promises  to  show  or  explain  to    the 
prophet   the    meaning  of  the  vision.     Now,  in    the    next 
verse  the  explanation  is  given  by  the  Angel  of  Jehovah, 
therefore  it  is  urged  by  some  that  they  are  the  same.      But 
the    word  arekka,  translated  "  I   will  show  thee,"  literally 
means,  "  I  will  make  thee  see,"  that  is,  "  give  thee  an  under 
standing    heart  and  mind  to    understand  the  visions  and 
explanations  which  follow."      Indeed,  the  very  designation 
of  this  Angel  as  the  One  "  that  talked  in  me  "  *  seems  meant, 
as    Pusey  well  points  out,  to    convey  the  thought  of   an 
inward   speaking,  "  whereby  the    words   should    be  borne 
directly    into    the    soul    without    the    intervention    of    the 
ordinary  outward    organs."       An    example  as  to  how  the 
interpreting  Angel    prepared  the  heart   and    mind  of  the 
prophet  to  behold  and  to  understand  the  visions,  we  have 
in  chap.  iv.    I,  namely,  by  waking  him  out  of  his  ordinary 
condition  into  a  spiritually  ecstatic  one,  and  preparing  his 
heart  and  mind  subjectively  for  the  objects  presented  to 
him  in  the  visions,  and  for  the  explanations  which  should 
be  given. 

(3)  In  ver.  1 2  the  Malakh  Yehovah  offers  a  supplication 
to  God  on  behalf  of  Jerusalem  and  the  cities  of  Judah,  and 
in  the  next  verse  the   answer  is  given  to  the  interpreting 
angel ;  therefore,  it  is  argued,  they  must  be  the  same.     But 
to  this  it  may  be  replied  that  the  answer  is  addressed  to 
this  angel  because  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  asked  the  question, 
"  How    long  ? "    not  for    himself,  but  that  the  consolation 
contained  in  the  answer  may  through  the  interpreting  angel 
be  communicated  to  the  prophet,  and  through  the  prophet 
to  the  people. 

1  In  the  same  manner  the  Lord  says  to  Moses,  in  Num.  xii.  6-9,  "  If  there  is 
a  prophet  among  you,  I,  Jehovah,  will  make  Myself  known  to  him  in  a  vision  ;  I 
will  speak,  not  *  to  him,'  as  in  the  A.V.,  but  in  him,  in  a  dream.  My  servant 
Moses  is  not  so.  In  him  will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth  "  ;  and  Hab.  ii.  I  speaks 
of  the  same  inward  teaching  :  "  I  will  watch  to  see  what  He  will  speak  in  me." 


30     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

On  the  other  hand,  here  are  several  reasons  which 
seem  to  us  unanswerable  why  the  interpreting  angel  must 
not  be  confounded  with  the  Angel  of  Jehovah. 

(a)  The  title  Malakh  haddobher  bi  is  quite  different  from 
the  Angel  of  Jehovah.  That  it  is  a  title  there  can  be  no 
doubt,  for  the  prophet  uses  it  eleven  times  (i.  9,  13,  14,  19, 
ii.  3,  iv.  i,  4,  5,  v.  5,  10,  vi.  4)  without  any  variation, 
and  that  not  always  after,  or  when  conversation  of  any 
kind  takes  place,  as,  for  instance,  in  this  9th  verse  of 
chap,  i.,  and  in  chap.  ii.  3.  The  variation  in  the  Authorised 
Version,  "  The  angel  that  communed  with  me,"  introduced 
in  chap.  i.  14,  is  unjustifiable. 

(b}  In  chap.  ii.  1-4  the  prophet  sees  in  vision  "  a  man  " 
engaged  in  measuring  the  site  of  Jerusalem.  The  inter 
preting  angel  who  stood  beside  him  leaves  him  to  go 
forward,  perhaps  to  ask  the  meaning  of  the  vision,  but 
before  reaching  his  destination  he  is  met  by  another  angel, 
who  comes  forward  with  the  command  :  "  Run,  speak  to 
this  young  man  "  (the  prophet).  Now,  assuming  that  the 
interpreter  is  the  same  as  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  directions 
would  have  been  given  him,  and  that  too  in  word  of 
command,  by  an  inferior  angel — a  proceeding  altogether 
irreconcilable  with  the  Divine  dignity  ascribed  by  the 
prophet  to  the  Malakh  Yehovah. 

Moreover,  "  the  man "  with  the  measuring  line  in  his 
hand,  in  chap,  ii.,  is,  as  we  shall  see,  in  all  probability  the 
same  "  man "  whom  the  prophet  saw  in  his  first  vision 
(comp.  i.  8,  ii),  who,  as  we  saw,  was  no  other  than  the 
Angel  of  Jehovah  himself;  and  as  the  interpreting  angel 
was  standing  by  the  prophet  and  going  forward  toward  "  the 
man  "  with  the  measuring  line,  it  proves  that  they  are  two, 
and  not  one. 

(c]  To  "  the  angel  that  talked  with  (or  '  in  ')  me  "  there 
is  no  Divine  work  ascribed,  and  no  Divine  name  given  at 
all.1  Remarkable  in  this  connection  is  the  form  of  the 

1  This  precludes  the  idea  suggested  by  some  that  the  interpreting  angel 
was  the  Holy  Spirit,  though  the  work  of  this  angel  resembles  one  aspect  of  the 
mission  of  the  blessed  Paraclete. 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES     31 

prophet's  address  to  him,  which,  as  pointed  out  above,  is 
not  Adonai,  my  Lord,  but  adoni,  my  lord.  Nothing  higher 
is  ascribed  to  this  angel  than  the  explanation  of  visions. 
Sometimes  (as  in  i.  9,  ii.  3,  4)  not  even  that,  but  the  pre 
paration  of  the  prophet's  mind  to  understand  the  explanation 
which  is  given  by  the  Lord  Himself. 

(d}  To  the  same  conclusion  also  we  are  led  by  the 
analogy  of  other  apocalyptic  places  in  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures.  In  Dan.  viii.  16  and  x.  5—18,  for  instance, 
two  heavenly  beings  are  seen  by  the  prophet,  which  stand 
in  exactly  the  same  relation  as  "  the  angel  that  talked  with 
me "  stands  to  "  the  Angel  of  Jehovah "  in  the  visions  of 
Zechariah ;  and  in  the  last  apocalyptic  book  of  the  New 
Testament  we  have  another  parallelism  in  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ:  "The  Angel  of  Jehovah"  of  Old  Testament 
revelation,  sending  by  the  hand  of  an  angel,  to  signify 
"  unto  His  servant  John,"  for  him  in  his  turn  to  make 
known  to  the  Seven  Churches  the  Revelation  which  the 
Father  first  gave  to  Him. 

We  see,  then,  that  "  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  "  is 
not  the  same  as  the  Divine  Angel  of  Jehovah  —  the 
Messenger  of  the  Covenant — but  an  attendant  angel  whose 
mission  it  was  to  be  God's  expositor  to  the  prophet  of  the 
meaning  of  the  visions. 

The  answer  to  the  prophet's  question,  "  What  are  these  ?  " 
in  ver.  9,  is  given  by  "  the  man  "  that  stood  among  the 
myrtles,  in  the  I  oth  verse :  "  These  are  they  whom  Jehovah 
hath  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth"  How  full 
of  consolation  for  God's  people  is  a  statement  like  this ! 
Satan,  when  appearing  as  the  accuser  of  Job  in  the  presence 
of  God,  said  that  he  came  "  from  going  to  and  fro  in  the 
earth,  and  from  walking  up  and  down  in  it."  And  what 
the  aim  and  object  of  his  restless  activity  in  the  earth  is, 
we  are  told  by  the  Apostle  Peter  in  his  earnest  warning, 
"  Be  sober,  be  watchful,  for  your  adversary  the  devil  (full  of 
hatred  and  fiendish  cunning,  as  his  names  imply,  and  ever 
ready  with  fresh  traps  and  snares  for  our  destruction) — as 


32     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour." 
If  left  to  ourselves  and  his  devices  for  one  day,  where 
should  we  be  ?  But,  blessed  be  God,  "  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah  encampeth  (as  with  a  great  invisible  host)  round 
about  them  that  fear  Him,  and  delivereth  them  " ;  and  if 
there  are  evil,  malignant  spirits  (ever  restlessly  walking  to 
and  fro  in  the  whole  earth  on  their  mischievous  intent  of 
hindering,  if  they  cannot  frustrate,  the  gracious  purposes  of 
God  and  the  manifestation  of  His  Kingdom  on  the  earth), 
God  also  has  His  messengers  who  walk  to  and  fro  to 
counteract  and  frustrate  Satan's  designs,  and  to  succour  and 
shield,  and  in  many  more  ways  than  we  know,  to  be 
ministering  spirits  to  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation. 

In  our  vision,  however,  the  swift  messengers  were  in  the 
first  instance  only  sent  out  to  reconnoitre  the  earth  and  the 
state  of  the  nations  in  their  relation  to  the  land  and  people 
of  Israel ;  for,  as  far  as  God's  governmental  dealings  with 
the  nations  are  concerned,  all  things  must  be  viewed  in 
their  relation  to  that  people  in  whom  are  bound  up  the 
purposes  of  God  for  all  mankind. 

In  "answer"  probably  to  the  unexpressed  inquiry  of 
the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  these  angelic  messengers  give  in  their 
report :  "  We  have  walked  to  and  fro  through  the  earth,  and, 
behold,  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is  at  rest"  x 

This  description  of  the  Gentile  world  was  intended  by 
contrast  to  bring  more  strikingly  to  light  the  mournful 
condition  of  Israel.  All  the  nations  lived  in  undisturbed 

1  The  words  yoshebheth  veshoqateth  denote  the  peaceful  and  secure  con 
dition  of  a  land  and  its  inhabitants  undisturbed  by  any  foe.  Pusey  points  out 
that  the  last  of  the  two  words  is  used  in  the  Book  of  Judges  of  the  rest  given  to 
the  land  under  the  judges,  until  its  fresh  departure  from  God  (Judg.  iii.  II,  30, 
v.  31,  viii.  28) ;  of  the  undisturbed  life  of  the  people  of  Laish  (Judg.  xviii.  7, 
27)  ;  in  Josh.  xi.  23,  where  we  read  "the  land  had  rest  from  war";  and  in  a 
number  of  other  places,  in  later  history,  all  describing  a  condition  of  profound 
peace.  Keil  and  Dr.  Wright  regard  the  report  of  the  angelic  messengers  as 
having  reference  to  the  prophecy  of  Haggai  in  chap.  ii.  7>  8,  22,  23.  "  God  had 
then  announced  that  He  would  shake  heaven  and  earth,  the  whole  world  and 
all  nations,  with  a  view  to  the  overthrow  of  all  kingdoms  and  powers  hostile  to 
the  welfare  of  Israel "  ;  but  instead  of  any  such  general  commotion  being  apparent, 
the  report  which  the  angelic  riders  bring  is  that  the  whole  world  is  quiet  and  at 
rest. 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  33 

peace  and  prosperity.  In  short,  all  were  at  rest  except  the 
"  tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary  breast " ;  who, 
though  a  remnant  of  them  had  returned,  were  ground  down 
under  the  yoke  of  the  Gentiles,  while  Judea  was  still,  for 
the  most  part,  lying  waste,  and  Jerusalem  was  still  without 
walls — exposed  in  a  most  defenceless  manner  to  all  the 
insults  of  Israel's  enemies.1  The  nations  had  scattered 
God's  people  and  had  taken  possession  of  their  land,  and 
were  now  in  undisturbed  enjoyment  of  it.  No  one  cared 
for  the  afflictions  of  Zion,  or  troubled  himself  for  the  sorrows 
of  Israel. 

"  Then  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  answered  (i.e.,  '  the  implied 
longing'  wJiich  was  in  his  heart}  and  said,  O  Jehovah  of 
hosts,  how  long  wilt  Thou  not  have  mercy  on  Jerusalem  and 
on  the  cities  of  Judah,  against  which  Thou  hast  had  indigna 
tion  these  threescore  and  ten  years  ?  "  2 

If  the  very  fact  of  the  presence  amongst  them  of  the 
Angel  of  Jehovah,  who  in  ancient  times  led  His  people  and 
brought  them  into  the  promised  land,  and  smote  all  their 
enemies  before  them,  was  intended,  as  we  saw  when  dealing 
with  the  8th  verse,  to  be  in  itself  a  message  of  comfort  to 
the  now  oppressed  and  depressed  Israel,  how  much  more 
full  of  consolation  must  have  been  the  fact  of  His  appearing 
as  the  Advocate  and  Intercessor  on  their  behalf? 

And  He  who  here  cries,  "  How  long,  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
wilt  Thou  not  have  compassion  on  Jerusalem  and  on  the 
cities  of  Judah  ? "  has  not  changed  in  His  attitude  of 
longing  and  concern  for  His  own  nation.  When  in  the 
fulness  of  time  He  permanently  took  upon  Himself  our 
human  form,  and  became  real  man,  we  still  read  of  Him  as 
being  moved  with  compassion  on  beholding  Israel's  weary 

1  This  was  the  lament  of  even  the  restored  remnant  in  the  land  :  "Behold, 
we  are  servants  this  day,  and  as  for  the  land  that  Thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers  to 
eat  the  fruit  thereof  and  the  good  thereof,  behold,  we  are  servants  in  it"  (Neh. 
ix.  36). 

a  "The  fact  that  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  addresses  an  intercessory  prayer  on 
behalf  of  Judah  is  no  more  a  disproof  of  his  essential  unity  with  Jehovah,  than 
the  intercessory  prayer  of  Christ  in  John  xvii.  is  a  disproof  of  His  divinity. "- 
Keil. 


34     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

multitudes,  who  were  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd,  and  as 
weeping  over  Jerusalem  ;  and  we  may  be  sure,  also,  that  in 
those  whole  nights  of  prayer  and  intercession  before  the 
Father,  the  people  which  are  "  His  own,"  and  the  city 
which  was  to  be  the  seat  of  His  throne,  had  a  large  and 
central  place.  Even  on  the  cross  He  prayed,  u  Father, 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  " ;  and  when 
He  rose  and  ascended  to  the  right  hand  of  God  as  the 
great  High  Priest  of  His  people,  Israel  is  still  a  subject  of 
His  intercessions.  "  For  Zion's  sake  He  doth  not  hold 
His  peace ;  for  Jerusalem's  sake  He  doth  not  rest  until  her 
righteousness  go  forth  as  brightness,  and  her  salvation  as 
a  lamp  that  burneth." 

We  will  not  enter  into  the  chronological  points  which 
might  be  raised  in  connection  with  the  words,  "  against 
which  Thou  hast  had  indignation  these  seventy  years"  and 
would  merely  point  out  in  passing  that  there  are  different 
starting-points  from  which  the  period  roughly  spoken  of  as 
"  the  seventy  years'  captivity  "  in  Babylon  may  be  reckoned. 
But  as  these  visions  of  Zechariah  were  granted  to  the 
prophet  in  the  2nd  year  of  Darius  Hystaspes,  in  B.C.  519, 
the  "  seventy  years "  foretold  by  Jeremiah  had  already 
expired,  even  if  we  calculate  from  the  latest  of  the  possible 
starting-points.1  The  Divine  Advocate  might  well  there- 

1  The  definite  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  was  that  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine  and 
neighbouring  lands  "shall  serve  the  king  of  Babylon  seventy  years."  This 
began  in  the  3rd  year  of  Jehoiakim,  which  was  the  ist  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
i.e.,  in  B.C.  606,  or  before  the  ist  of  Nisan  (April)  605.  Starting  with  this 
definite  date  the  "seventy  years"  were  brought  to  an  end  by  the  decree  of  Cyrus 
in  the  1st  year  of  his  reign,  in  B.C.  536  (Dan.  i.  i;  Jer.  xxiv.  i,  9-11; 
Ezra  i.  1-3). 

Another  starting-point  may  be  made  with  Jehoiachin's  captivity  in  the  8th 
year  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  i.e.,  in  B.C.  597  (598),  when  the  city  was  taken  and  "all 
Jerusalem  and  all  the  princes  and  all  the  mighty  men  of  valour,  even  10,000 
captives,  and  all  the  craftsmen  and  the  smiths,"  together  with  the  king  and  his 
mother  and  his  wives,  and  the  vessels  of  the  Temple  and  the  treasures  of  the 
palace  were  carried  to  Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiv.  10-17).  From  this  date  the 
"seventy  years"  came  to  an  end  in  B.C.  528. 

Then,  finally,  in  the  I7th  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  gth  of  Zedekiah's 
reign,  in  B.C.  589  (588),  commenced  the  final  terrible  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
Chaldeans  which  lasted  about  a  year  and  a  half,  and  ended  with  the  destruction 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  35 

fore  express  "  the  reverent  wonder  "  that  the  seventy  years 
being  accomplished,  the  complete  restoration  was  not  yet 
brought  to  pass,  and  that  though  a  remnant  had  returned, 
"  Jerusalem  and  the  cities  of  Judah  "  were  still  practically 
desolate.  This  pitiable  condition  of  things  moves  the 
Angel  of  Jehovah  to  intercession  on  their  behalf. 

The  answer  to  the  intercession  of  the  Angel  of  Jeho 
vah,  given  in  the  I4th  verse,  is  addressed  to  the  interpret 
ing  angel  that  he  might  make  them  sink  in,  so  to  say, 
into  the  prophet's  heart  and  mind,  so  that  he  might  be 
able  to  proclaim  them  to  the  people.  What  these 
"  debharim  fob  him,  debharim  nichummim  "  (literally,  "  words 
good  ones,  words  comforting  ones  ")  were,  we  see  in  the 
last  four  verses:  (i)  Jehovah  is  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and 
for  Zion  with  a  great  jealousy — and  He  is  very  sore  dis 
pleased  (or,  literally,  "  with  great  anger  am  I  angered ") 
against  the  nations  that  are  at  ease,  "  for  I  was  but  a  little 
displeased,"  He  says,  "  and  they  helped  forward  the 
affliction  "  (or,  as  it  may  also  be  rendered,  "  they  helped 
for  evil ").  It  is  as  if  while  a  father  was  reluctantly 
punishing  his  froward  but  still  beloved  child  with  a  stick, 
a  stranger  were  to  come  and  begin  to  smite  him  with  an 
iron  rod.  No  wonder  that  the  father's  jealousy  is  stirred, 
and  that  a  quarrel  ensues  between  him  and  the  inter 
meddling  stranger  who  dared  to  mix  himself  up  in  the 
controversy,  and  increase  his  child's  sufferings.  This  is 
ever  God's  attitude  to  the  oppressors  of  Israel. 

That  the  nations  from  the  very  commencement  of  "  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  "  have  been  guilty  of  helping  forward 
the  affliction,  let  the  history  of  Israel,  written  for  the  most 

of  the  city  and  Temple  and  the  carrying  away  of  the  remnant  of  the  people  into 
captivity.  With  this  date  very  probably  begins  more  particularly  the  seventy 
years  of  "Indignation"  referred  to  in  this  passage  in  Zechariah.  Reckoning 
from  this  starting-point,  the  seventy  years  came  to  an  end  in  the  and  year  of 
Darius  Hystaspes,  in  B.C.  519 — the  year  in  which  Zechariah  saw  these  visions. 
A  distinction  is  made  by  some  between  "  the  Captivity  "  and  "  the  Desolations  "  ; 
but  the  first  has  special  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  people,  and  the  other 
to  the  land  during  the  same  period.  In  post-Biblical  Jewish  literature  the  whole 
period  of  the  subjection  to  Babylon  is  spoken  of  as  the  niSa,  "captivity,"  and 
loosely,  as  "the  seventy  years." 


36     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

part  in  their  blood,  testify.  God  scattered  Israel  (Jer. 
xxxi.  10);  but  the  nations  among  whom  they  have  come 
trampled  upon  them,  and  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  their 
necks,  and  made  them  "  to  howl "  all  the  day  long  (Isa. 
Hi.  5),  because  of  their  oppressions.  God  gave  them  over 
to  punishment,  but,  at  the  same  time,  warned  the  nations, 
saying,  "  Make  not  a  full  end"  (Jer.  v.  10);  but  they  have 
tried,  if  possible,  to  destroy  them,  and  to  cut  off  their  very 
remembrance  from  the  earth.  God  gave  over  for  a  time 
"  the  dearly  beloved  of  His  soul  into  the  hand  of  her 
enemies "  (Jer.  xii.  7) :  "I  was  wroth  with  My  people," 
He  says,  addressing  Babylon,  the  first,  and  also  in  many 
Scriptures  the  great,  representative  of  all  Gentile  world- 
powers  :  "  I  polluted  mine  inheritance  and  gave  them  into 
thine  hand,  and  thou  didst  show  them  no  mercy"  (Isa. 
xlvii.  6). 

And  this  was  not  merely  the  attitude  of  the  great 
nations  of  antiquity  who  have  now  for  the  most  part 
perished  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth — Israel's  lot  in  the 
midst  of  Christendom  has  been  even  worse. 

"  Where  shall  we  begin,"  writes  an  American  brother, 
"  in  treating  the  awful  truth  which  is  put  here  in  such  simple 
language  ?  Where  shall  we  find  words  earnest  enough  to 
picture  the  terrible  facts  in  connection  with  it,  and  sound  a 
warning  for  our  times  ?  Some  time  ago  a  person  said, 
1  The  Jews  are  to-day  more  stiff-necked  and  blinder  than 
ever  before.'  Who  has  made  them  thus  ?  Surely  judicial 
blindness  and  hardness  of  heart :  ears  which  do  not  hear, 
are  given  by  God  ;  but,  alas  !  the  nations,  or  so-called  Chris 
tendom,  have  helped  forward  their  affliction ;  they  have 
made  matters  worse  a  thousand  times :  and  Satan,  who 
hates  Israel,  has  been  the  author  of  all  things  calculated  to 
increase  the  affliction  of  this  downtrodden  nation.  Surely 
the  cause  of  the  increased  stiff-neckedness  and  the  increased 
blindness  of  the  Jewish  people  is  one  which  is  traceable  to 
the  nations.  Every  reader  knows  something  of  the  history 
of  the  Jews,  what  it  has  been  since  they  were  driven  from 
their  land — a  long,  long  tale  of  suffering,  tears,  and  blood. 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  37 

Most  unjust  outrages  have  been  committed  against  them  : 
torture  upon  torture,  the  stake,  and  worse  than  that — and 
all  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  It  is  a  shameful  history.  Many 
a  time  Jews,  after  hearing  the  Word  preached,  have  stood 
up  and  opened  in  answer  this  awful  book  of  history  with 
its  blood-stained  pages,  asking  the  question,  '  Can  He  be 
our  Redeemer  whose  followers  have  treated  us  thus  in  His 
name  ? '  And  not  a  few  can  tell  us  of  their  own  sufferings 
in  being  banished  from  foreign  lands.  Hardly  a  month 
passes  without  some  new  outrage  upon  this  people.  Cruelty, 
injustice,  wickedness,  and  crime  are  practised  against  them, 
and  thus  their  affliction  has  been  increased." 

And  all  this  the  Gentile  nations  have  done  to  Israel  out 
of  cruel,  selfish  motives,  and  not  out  of  regard  for  God  at 
all.  We  are  sometimes  asked,  "  But  have  not  the  sufferings 
of  Israel  all  been  minutely  foretold  by  Moses  and  the 
prophets  in  advance  ?  "  Yes,  certainly  they  have  all  been 
foretold ;  but  have  not  the  sufferings  of  Christ  been  even 
more  minutely  foretold  and  described  also?  And  yet  we 
read  that  it  was  "  with  wicked  hands  "  that  they  took  and 
crucified  Him,  and  Israel  was  held  responsible  for  their 
conduct  and  dealings  in  relation  to  Him.  Prophecy,  my 
dear  reader,  is  given  to  us,  not  that  it  may  be  fulfilled,  but 
because  the  omniscient  God,  who  sees  the  end  from  the 
beginning,  knows  that  it  will  be  fulfilled,  and  man  is  left  a 
free  and  responsible  agent ;  and  the  nations  who  know  not 
that  the  great  God  is  overruling  all  things,  even  their 
wicked  actions,  to  the  fulfilment  of  His  predetermined 
counsel,  are  held  accountable  for  their  deeds. 

And  that  the  jealousy  and  hot  displeasure  of  Jehovah 
against  the  nations  because  of  their  attitude  to  Israel  are 
to  be  dreaded,  history  also  testifies.  Where  are  the  great 
nations  of  antiquity  who  have  lifted  up  their  hands  against 
the  Jewish  people?  And  in  modern  times  the  ancient 
word  which  He  spoke  to  Abraham  is  still  verifying  itself 
in  the  experience  of  nations  as  of  individuals  :  "  I  will  bless 
them  that  bless  thee,  and  him  that  curseth  thee  will  I 
curse." 


38     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  not  only  is  the  prophet  to  proclaim  the  negative 
comfort  that  Jehovah  is  very  angry  with  the  nations  at 
ease  who  help  forward  the  affliction,  but  He  has  wonderful 
purposes  of  grace  concerning  His  people  to  announce : 
"  Therefore,  thus  saith  Jehovah,  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem 
with  mercies" — which,  on  account  of  its  certainty,  is 
expressed  in  the  present  or  perfect  tense.  This,  which  has 
been  already  symbolically  set  forth  to  the  prophet  by  the 
standing  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  in  the  midst  of  the 
myrtles,  is  the  very  heart  and  substance  of  "  the  good 
words  and  comforting  words  "  which  are  the  message  of  this 
vision.  It  was  the  hiding  of  His  face — the  withdrawal  of 
Himself — that  occasioned  all  these  calamities  in  their 
night  of  darkness.  So  long  as  Jehovah  was  with  them, 
neither  Assyria  nor  Babylon,  nor  all  the  forces  of  the 
universe,  could  have  prevailed  against  them  ;  but  when  His 
glory  was  withdrawn,  then  they  became  a  prey  to  the 
Gentiles — "  the  boar  out  of  the  wood  "  came  and  wasted  it ; 
the  "  wild  beast  of  the  field  "  came  and  devoured  it.  But 
not  for  ever  has  Jehovah  forsaken  His  people  and  the  land 
which  He  has  chosen  as  the  centre  of  the  unfolding  of  His 
purposes  of  mercy  to  all  mankind.  "  I  will  go,"  He  says, 
"  and  return  to  My  place  till  they  acknowledge  their 
offence  "  (or  literally,  "  till  they  declare  themselves  guilty  "), 
"  and  seek  My  face ;  in  their  affliction  "  (literally,  "  in  their 
tribulation ")  "  they  shall  seek  Me  early "  (or  earnestly), 
and  then  He  will  return  unto  them  with  mercies ;  and 
"  His  going  forth  is  sure  as  the  morning,  and  He  shall  come 
unto  us  as  the  rain,  as  the  latter  rain  that  watereth  the 
earth"  (Hos.  v.  15,  vi.  1-3). 

In  its  fulness  this  promise  will  only  be  fulfilled  when 
"  this  same  Jesus,"  whom  at  His  first  coming  they  handed 
over  to  the  Gentiles  to  be  crucified,  and  who,  after  His 
resurrection,  ascended  back  into  heaven  into  the  glory 
which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was,  shall 
"  return "  in  the  manner  and  under  the  circumstances 
described  by  this  same  prophet  in  the  last  three  chapters 
of  this  prophecy.  Then,  in  the  once  marred  face,  and  in 


THE   ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES     39 

the  wounded  hands  and  feet  of  Him  whom  they  once 
pierced,  shall  they  fully  learn  the  fulness  and  manifoldness 
of  God's  "  mercies." 

Two  or  three  particular  instances  and  outward  signs 
of  "  that  all-containing  mercy "  of  His  restored  presence 
in  their  midst,  are  specially  named  :  (a)  "  My  house  shall 
be  built  in  it,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts"  as  the  visible  sign  and 
pledge  of  the  restored  fellowship  between  Him  and  His 
people  ;  (b}  And  "  a  line  sJiall  be  stretched  forth  over  Jeru 
salem"  to  mark  off  the  space  it  is  to  occupy  in  its  restored 
condition,  and  the  plan  upon  which  it  is  to  be  arranged. 
(c)  And  not  only  shall  His  house  be  rebuilt  and  Jerusalem 
be  restored  on  a  grander  scale  than  before,  but  all  the  land 
is  to  feel  the  blessed  effect  of  the  restored  relations  between 
Jehovah  and  His  people.  "  Cry  yet  again,  saying,  Thus 
saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  MY  cities  " — yes,  they  are  peculiarly 
His,  as  is  the  case  with  no  other  land  and  no  other  cities, 
even  as  the  people  which  shall  inhabit  it  is  peculiarly  His, 
above  all  other  nations  of  the  earth — "  through  prosperity 
shall  yet  be  spread  abroad" — or  "overflow,"  the  word  being 
used  of  the  "  gushing  forth  of  a  fountain  "  in  Prov.  v.  1 6, 
i.e.,  they  shall  overflow,  not  only  with  spiritual  prosperity, 
but  with  houses  filled  with  citizens,  and  with  abundance 
and  plenty,  (d)  Finally,  both  as  the  ground  and  climax  of 
all,  come  the  last  of  the  "good  words."  "  And  Jehovah 
shall  yet  comfort  Zion"  after  her  long  night  of  sorrow,  and 
however  contrary  to  all  appearance  and  human  probability, 
"  shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem"  or,  by  the  above  enumerated 
and  many  other  acts  of  loving-kindness  toward  her, 
demonstrate  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  world  the  fact  and 
the  immutability  of  His  original  choice  of  her — this  last 
sentence  being  the  first  of  a  threefold  inspired  repetition  by 
Zechariah1  of  the  words  of  Isa.  xiv.  I,  where  we  read, 
"  For  Jehovah  will  have  compassion  on  Jacob,  and  yet  choose 
Israel,  and  set  them  in  their  own  land :  and  the  stranger 
shall  be  joined  with  them,  and  they  shall  cleave  to  the  house  of 
Jacob." 

1  Here  and  in  ii.  12  and  iii.  2. 


40     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Now,  there  was  no  doubt  a  message  in  this  vision  and 
in  the  plain  words  of  comfort  with  which  it  closes  to  the 
generation  to  which  the  prophet  spoke,  and  in  a  very 
partial  manner  there  was  a  fulfilment  of  these  promises  in 
the  then  immediate  future.  Thus  God's  "  House,"  as 
applied  to  the  Temple  which  they  were  then  building, 
was  completed  about  four  years  later,  in  the  6th  year  of 
Darius  (Ezra  vi.  15);  and  some  time  later  Nehemiah 
succeeded  also  in  rebuilding  the  city  wall. 

There   is   some  truth  also   in   the  contention    of  those 
commentators  who  argue  that  there  was  a  fulfilment  of  the 
good  and  comforting  words  about  Jehovah's  returning  to 
Zion  with  mercies  in  the  first  advent  of  our  Saviour.      Thus, 
to  quote  one  of  them  :  "  What  is  the  highest  good  ?  what 
the  sweetest  of  solace  in   life?  what  the  subject  of  joys? 
what  the  oblivion  of  past  sorrow  ?      That  which  the  Son  of 
God  brought  upon  earth  when  He  illumined  Jerusalem  with 
the  brightness  of  His  light  and  heavenly  discipline.      For  to 
that  end  was  the  city  restored,  that  in  it  by  the  ordinance 
of  Christ,  for  calamity,  should  abound  bliss  ;  for  desolation, 
fulness  ;  for   sorrow,   joy ;  for  want,  affluence  of  heavenly 
goods  " — all  which  is  beautiful   and  true  ;  but  to  deny  that 
in  its  fulness  it  will  yet  find  an  exhaustive  fulfilment  in  the 
Jewish   people,  which    for  nearly  two  thousand  years  has 
been  in  much  greater  bondage  than  they  were  during  the 
seventy  years   in    Babylon,  is   to   misapprehend   and   mis 
interpret  the  scope  of  this  as  of  all  the  other  visions.     No ; 
these  words  which  Zechariah  is  here  commanded  to  "  cry," 
or  proclaim,  are  a  summary  and  divine  reiteration  of  the 
permanent  and  irrevocable  "  good  words  "  of  Jehovah  through 
the   former   prophets    in    reference   to    Israel's    future,   and 
will  assuredly  be  fulfilled,  as  already  shown  above,  when, 
"  after  these  things,"  our  Lord  Jesus  shall  return  and  will 
"  build    again    the   tabernacle    of    David    which    is    fallen ; 
and    will    build    again    the    ruins    thereof,    and    will   set   it 
up,  that  the  residue  of  men  may  seek  after  the  Lord  and 
all  the  Gentiles  upon  whom  My  name  is  called  "  (Acts  xv. 
14-18). 


THE  ANGEL  AMONG  THE  MYRTLE  TREES  41 

"For  Jehovah  shall  comfort  Zion  ;  He  will  comfort  all 
her  waste  places,  and  He  will  make  her  wilderness  like 
Eden,  and  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  Jehovah ;  joy  and 
gladness  shall  be  found  therein,  thanksgiving  and  the  voice 
of  melody  "  (Isa.  li.  3). 


CHAPTER    III 
THE   SECOND   VISION 

THE   HORNS   AND   THE   "CARPENTERS" 
(CHAPTER  i.  18-21  HEBREW  CHAPTER  n.  1-4) 


And  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and  behold  four  horns.  And  I  said 
unto  the  angel  that  talked  with  me,  What  are  these  ?  And  he  answered  me,  These 
are  the  horns  which  have  scattered  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem.  And  Jehovah 
showed  me  four  smiths.  Then  said  I,  What  come  these  to  do  ?  And  he  spake, 
saying,  These  are  the  horns  which  scattered  Judah,  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his 
head  :  but  these  are  come  to  terrify  them,  to  cast  down  the  horns  of  the  nations, 
which  lifted  up  their  horn  against  the  land  rf  Judah  to  scatter  it. 


CHAPTER    III 

THIS  second  short  vision  is  in  a  sense  a  continuation 
of  the  comforting  message  contained  in  the  first, 
for  it  shows  how  the  Gentile  nations  against  whom 
Jehovah  is  "  very  sore  displeased,"  because  they  have  each 
in  turn  "  helped  forward  the  affliction  "  by  scattering  Israel 
and  treading  down  Jerusalem,  shall  themselves  be  broken 
and  dissipated.  The  prophet  had  probably  been  absorbed 
in  thought  and  meditation  en  what  he  saw  and  heard  in  the 
first  vision  ;  but  being  directed,  perhaps,  by  the  interpreting 
angel  to  look  up  again,  he  beheld — not  only  with  the  outer 
eye,  but  with  the  eyes  of  his  soul  and  whole  inner  being, 
which  had  been  prepared  for  the  reception  of  these  Divine 
revelations — "four  horns"  and  on  his  appealing  to  his 
angelic  teacher,  who  stood  by  his  side,  for  the  meaning  of 
these,  the  brief  answer  is  given :  "  These  are  the  horns 
which  have  scattered  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem." 

The  "Horns" 

Let  us  briefly  ponder  over  the  symbolism  of  these  two 
verses  before  proceeding  to  the  second  part  of  the  vision. 

"  Horns  "  are  used  in  Scripture  as  emblematic  of  power 
and  pride  of  conscious  strength  (Amos  vi.  13;  Ps.  Ixxv. 
4,  5,  xcii.  10),  and  are  sometimes  explained  by  the  sacred 
writers  themselves  as  representing  the  ruling  powers  of  the 
world  (Dan.  viii. ;  Rev.  xvii.  3—12). 

The  number  "  four  "  may  also,  but  in  a  secondary  sense, 
stand,  as  some  contend,  for  the  four  directions  of  heaven,  or 
the  four  "  corners  "  of  the  earth,  and  be  designed  to  indicate 
the  universality  of  the  enmity  which  is  directed  against 


46     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Israel.  In  that  case,  to  use  the  language  of  a  learned 
commentator  who  thinks  only  of  the  past,  the  four  horns 
would  "  represent  the  enemies  of  Israel  on  every  side : 
Edom  and  Egypt  in  the  south ;  the  Philistines  in  the  west ; 
the  Ammonites  and  Moabites  in  the  east ;  and  from  the 
north  the  Syrians,  Assyrians,  and  especially  the  Chaldeans." 
Or,  according  to  another  commentator  who  views  this 
prophecy  in  relation  to  the  then  present,  "  the  number 
'  four '  refers  to  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  horizon, 
indicating  that  wherever  God's  people  turned  there  were 
enemies  to  encounter." 

But  there  can  be  no  doubt,  according  to  our  judgment, 
especially  if  we  remember  the  fact  that  it  is  the  character 
istic  of  Zechariah's  visions  and  prophecies,  that  the  Divine 
messages  contained  in  them  are  generally  based  on  revela 
tions  already  granted  to  the  former  prophets,  that  in  this 
vision  of  the  four  horns  there  is  a  direct  reference  to  the 
four  great  world-powers,  differently  represented  by  the  four 
metals  in  the  great  image,  and  four  great  beasts  in  chaps, 
ii.  and  vii.  of  Daniel's  prophecies — the  only  four  empires 
which  were,  or  are,  to  rise  till  the  kingdom  of  Messiah,  the 
fifth  of  Daniel's  visions,  overthrows  and  absorbs  all  others 
in  its  universal  dominion.  This  was  the  view  of  the  most 
authoritative  of  Jewish  commentators.  Thus  Kimchi  says, 
"  These  are  the  four  monarchies — and  they  are  the  Baby 
lonian  monarchy,  the  Persian  monarchy,  and  the  Grecian 
monarchy,  and  so  the  Targum  of  Jonathan  has  it  (instead 
of  four  horns),  the  four  monarchies."  : 

Some  commentators  have  raised  an    objection  to  this 

1  He  does  not  name  the  fourth.  Abarbanel's  explanation  is  to  the  same 
effect.  The  following  passage  is  from  Hengstenberg  :  "If  we  inquire  more 
particularly  what  four  empires  are  referred  to,  the  first  must  be  the  Babylonian, 
which  was  not  yet  completely  humbled,  as  the  third  vision  shows,  although  it 
had  received  a  fatal  wound  from  the  Persian  smith  (or  'carpenter').  The 
second  is  the  Persian.  That  the  Grecian  must  have  been  recognised  by  the 
prophet  as  the  third,  is  evident  from  the  expression  in  chap.  ix.  13,  'I  stir  up 
thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy  sons,  O  Javan.'  The  fourth  is  not  named.  The 
connection  with  Daniel  is  apparent  here  also,  for  in  his  prophecy  the  approaching 
dominion  of  Greece  is  expressly  and  amply  referred  to ;  whilst  the  fourth 
monarchy,  on  the  other  hand,  is  left  without  a  name," 


THE  HORNS  AND  THE  "CARPENTERS"   47 

view  on  the  ground  that  the  power  which  overthrew  the 
Israel  of  the  northern  kingdom  was  Assyria,  and  that  other 
powers  besides,  such  as  Egypt,  etc.,  have  had  their  share  in 
breaking  up  the  two  Israelitish  states,  and  have  argued 
from  the  use  of  the  perfect,  or  preterite  zeru  ("  have 
scattered "),  that  the  dispersion  was  presented  to  the 
prophet  as  an  already  accomplished  fact  by  powers  which 
had  already  then  been  in  existence ;  but  to  this  objection 
it  is  sufficient  to  answer  that,  though  it  is  true  that  other 
powers  beside  had  had  a  share  in  afflicting  and  scattering 
Israel,  and  that  the  northern  kingdom  had  been  overthrown 
by  Assyria,  the  prophetic  Scriptures,  and  especially  the 
prophecies  of  Daniel,  upon  which  this  vision  of  Zechariah 
is  based,  deal  with  a  definite  and  particular  period  as  pre 
eminently  the  one  during  which  Israel  is  "  scattered  "  and 
Jerusalem  "  trodden  down,"  and  that  these  "  times  of  the 
Gentiles "  begin,  not  with  Shalmaneser,  nor  with  Senna 
cherib,  but  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  Babylon,  "  the 
head  of  gold  "  of  the  great  image  which  he  himself  beheld 
in  a  dream  (Dan.  ii.  i). 

It  is  true  that  Israel,  as  far  as  the  northern  kingdom  of 
the  ten  tribes  is  concerned,  had  been  overthrown  and  a 
considerable  number  transported  into  Assyria  ;  but  it  was 
not  till  a  hundred  and  thirty  years  later,  when  the  sceptre 
was  finally  plucked  out  of  the  hands  of  the  last  king  of 
the  House  of  David  who  reigned  in  Jerusalem,  by  Nebuchad 
nezzar,  that  the  united  dispersion  of  Judah  and  Israel 
commenced,  and  the  special  period  of  their  national  woes 
and  humiliations  which  were  to  extend  during  the  whole 
course  of  these  four  great  Gentile  world-empires,  was 
inaugurated. 

As  for  the  use  of  the  perfect  or  preterite,  and  the  fact 
that  the  prophet  sees  the  four  horns  together,  we  have  to 
remember  that  it  is  the  tense  of  prophetic  vision  to  which 
everything  appears  present.  In  the  same  way  the  prophets, 
for  instance,  described  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Messiah 
— the  perfect  Servant  of  Jehovah  who  was  to  appear 
centuries  after  their  day — as  already  past,  and  speak  of  the 


48     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

future  glory  of  Israel  as  already  come.  And  thus,  also, 
these  four  powers,  though  successive  in  time,  are  exhibited 
to  Zechariah  together,  and  their  antagonism  and  cruelty  to 
God's  people  as  already  past  and  gone,  "  as  each  would 
be  at  the  last,  having  put  forth  his  passing  might  and 
perishing." 

But  the  question  may  be  asked,  What  consolation  could 
the  prophet  derive  or  communicate  to  the  people  from  a 
vision  of  four  powers,  two  of  whom  at  least  had  not  yet 
arisen,  who  would  in  turn  take  up  the  work  of  scattering 
Israel?  And  the  answer,  dear  reader,  is,  that  though  it 
may  have  been  intended  as  an  indication  to  the  prophet, 
and  a  forecast  that  the  final  deliverance  of  Israel  and  the 
overthrow  of  Israel's  foes,  was,  from  the  prophet's  point  of 
time,  yet  remote,  the  wonderful  and  consoling  fact  set  forth 
in  the  vision  remains ;  that  in  spite  of  all  the  great  Gentile 
powers,  who  would  each  in  turn  take  up  the  work  of 
scattering  and  afflicting  Israel,  Israel  would  not  be  wholly 
swallowed  up  nor  be  overwhelmed,  but  would  remain 
when  all  those  powers  should  have  disappeared,  and  would 
triumph  in  God's  deliverance  when  the  memory  of  their 
mighty  enemies  should  be  buried  in  shame  and  oblivion. 

To  us,  looking  back  upon  a  period — the  length  of  which 
was  unforeseen  even  by  prophets,  embracing  some  two  and 
a  half  millenniums — during  which  this  comparative  handful 
of  people  have  been  "  scattered  "  and  "  tossed  "  about,  by 
and  among  the  nations,  without  being  destroyed  from  off 
the  earth,  and  without  losing  its  national  characteristics  and 
identity,  the  marvel  of  Israel's  continued  preservation  must 
appear  much  greater  than  to  any  one  living  in  the  time  of 
Zechariah  or  Daniel,  and  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the 
special  providences  and  interpositions  of  Him  who  swore 
that  so  long  as  the  sun  and  the  ordinances  of  the  moon  and 
the  stars  continue,  so  long  should  Israel  continue  a  nation 
before  Him  "  for  ever " ;  and  who  said  in  advance,  even 
before  the  course  of  these  four  great  Gentile  world-powers, 
who  would  be  permitted  to  scatter  Israel,  commenced  :  "  For 
I  am  with  thee,  saith  Jehovah,  to  save  thee:  for  I  will 


THE  HORNS  AND  THE  "CARPENTERS"   49 

make  a  full  end  of  all  nations  whither  I  have  scattered  thee  ; 
but  I  will  not  make  a  full  end  of  thee,  but  I  will  correct 
thee  in  measure  (or  '  with  judgment '),  and  will  in  no  wise 
leave  thee  unpunished"  (Jer.  xxx.  I  i).  Well  might  the 
inspired  writer  of  Ps.  cxxix.,  looking  back,  not  only  on 
the  particular  period  embraced  in  the  prophetic  "  times  of 
the  Gentiles,"  but  on  the  whole  course  of  Gentile  oppression, 
exclaim  in  the  name  of  the  remnant  of  Israel : 

"  Many  a  time  (or,  more  literally,  '  greatly ')  have  they 
afflicted  me  from  my  youth  ;  yet  they  have  not  prevailed 
against  me." 

"  Israel's  national  youth,  or  childhood,"  to  borrow  words 
of  our  own  from  elsewhere,  "  was  in  Egypt,  even  as  we  find 
in  Hos.  xi.  I,  which  literally  reads,  '  When  Israel  was  yet  a 
child'  (the  word  being  the  same  as  'youth '  in  the  I2pth 
Psalm),  I  loved  him,  and  from  the  time  that  he  was  in 
Egypt  I  called  him  my  son " — that  is,  from  the  very 
beginning  of  their  history,  when  God  began  to  love  Israel, 
the  nations  began  to  hate  them ;  and  from  the  very  time 
when  God  first  called  them  "  His  son,  His  first-born  "  (Ex. 
iv.  22,  23),  the  nations  began  "to  afflict  them"  (Ex.  i. 
1 2),  and  to  lay  plans  for  their  extermination.  Yes,  from 
the  very  commencement  of  their  history  have  the  plowers 
mercilessly 

"  Plowed  upon  his  back  ; 

"  They  made  long  and  deep  their  furrows  "  (Ps.  cxxix.  3). 

And  "  yet,"  in  spite  of  it  all,  "  they  have  not  prevailed 
against  him" 

This  is  Israel's  final  shout  of  triumph,  even  as  in  a 
sense  it  has  been  their  national  song  and  their  defiant 
answer  to  the  nations  all  through  the  ages. 

To  commence  with  Israel's  "  youth  " — deep  and  terrible 
was  the  pain  and  laceration  when  Egypt  plowed  upon  his 
back  ;  but  who  came  off  worst  in  the  end  ?  Egypt  was 
plagued  ;  Pharaoh  and  his  host  were  drowned  ;  but  of  Israel 
we  read,  "  The  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more  they 
multiplied  and  grew."  Truly  Egypt,  with  all  its  world- 
power,  did  "  not  prevail  against  him" 
4 


50     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Then — not  to  mention  Canaanites,  Philistines,  Midian- 
ites,  and  other  small  powers — there  came  Syria,  Assyria, 
Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome,  each  of  whom  in  turn 
afflicted  Israel  much,  and  made  deep  and  long  their 
furrows ;  but  where  are  all  these  powers  ?  They  have 
crumbled  away  and  died,  but  Israel  lives,  and  they  have 
"  not  prevailed  over  him" 

Then  came  the  centuries  of  dispersion,  when  it  might 
be  supposed  that  a  comparative  handful  of  men,  scattered 
on  the  great  ocean  of  humanity,  would  soon  be  swallowed 
up  of  the  multitude.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  every  force  was 
brought  to  bear  against  them  with  terrible  severity.  Their 
enemies  were  united,  and  seemed  confident  of  success. 
The  Crusaders  went  from  west  to  east  with  the  cry  "  Hiero- 
solyma  est  perdita  !  "  1  and  perpetrated  wholesale  massacres 
of  the  Jews  as  a  commencement  of  their  "  holy "  wars. 
Again  and  again  apostate  Christendom  in  the  dark  ages 
showed  its  zeal  for  the  Jewish  Messiah,  who  teaches  His 
followers  to  love  even  their  enemies,  by  burning  whole 
communities  of  Jews,  numbering  sometimes  thousands  of 
souls,  on  one  huge  scaffold ;  but  in  spite  of  it  all  Israel  lives 
— "  they  Jiave  not  prevailed  over  him  "  ;  for  there  are  more 
Jews  in  the  world  after  all  the  centuries  of  banishments, 
massacres,  and  untold  sufferings,  than  there  have  been  at 
any  previous  point  of  the  world's  history  ;  and  the  Jews 
at  the  present  day,  as  is  proved  from  official  statistics, 
in  some  parts  of  the  world  increase  in  proportion  to 
their  Gentile  neighbours  at  the  ratio  of  three  and  four  to 
one. 

Alas !  the  sufferings  of  Israel  are  not  ended,  and  even 
in  this  twentieth  century  we  read  almost  daily  of  Jewish 
massacres  and  atrocities  worse  than  any  which  disgrace  the 
annals  of  the  dark  ages ;  but  Czardom 2  and  the  corrupt 
bureaucracy  of  that  unhappy  empire  will  pass  away,  while 
Israel  will  still  sing,  "  Yet  they  have  not  prevailed  against  me'' 

1  Or,  "  Hep  !  Hep  !  "  which  is  an  abbreviation  formed  from  the  three  initial 
letters  of  this  Latin  phrase  ;  the  English  corruption  of  it  is  "  Hip  !  Hip  !  " 
*  This  was  written  in  1908. 


THE  HORNS  AND  THE  "CARPENTERS         51 

And  there  is  yet  a  future,  or  final,  culminating  "  affliction," 
"  trouble,"  or  "  tribulation,"  as  the  same  Hebrew  word  is 
elsewhere  rendered,  awaiting  Israel  after  a  large  remnant  of 
them  are  returned  to  their  land  in  a  condition  of  unbelief, 
when  all  nations  will  be  gathered  in  a  final  siege  of 
Jerusalem  (Zech.  xiii.,  xiv.) ;  but  even  then,  when  the 
nations  cry,  "  Come,  let  us  destroy  them  from  being  a  nation, 
that  the  name  of  Israel  be  no  more  held  in  remembrance  " 
(Ps.  Ixxxiii.  4) — one  more  blow,  and  the  Jewish  nation 
will  be  no  more — the  answer  of  the  saved  remnant,  who 
are  delivered  by  the  sudden  appearance  of  their  Messiah, 
will  be :  "I  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the 
works  of  Jehovah  " —  Yet  they  ttave  not  prevailed  against 
me. 

Israel  is  indestructible.  The  bush  may  burn,  but  it 
cannot  be  consumed,  because  God  has  said :  "  Though  I 
make  a  full  end  of  all  nations  whither  I  have  scattered  thee, 
yet  will  I  not  make  a  full  end  of  thee." 

But  to  come  to  the  other  points  in  this  vision  which 
need  explanation.  The  peculiar  structure  of  the  sentence 
and  the  unusual  designation  of  the  chosen  people  as 
"Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem,"  in  ver.  19,  has  given 
ground  to  many,  and  some  of  them  very  fanciful  interpreta 
tions,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  an  all-inclusive 
term  for  the  whole  nation  which  for  a  time,  as  a  punishment 
on  the  House  of  David,  had  been  rent  asunder  and  divided, 
so  long  as  the  northern  kingdom  continued,  into  "Judah" 
and  "  Israel,"  but  which  after  "  Jerusalem  "  (which  was  the 
metropolis  and  religious  centre  of  those  who  feared  Jehovah 
in  both  kingdoms,  and  is  therefore  mentioned  separately) 
was  overthrown,  were  together  sharing  the  same  destiny 
of  being  "  scattered "  by  the  horns  of  the  Gentiles,  even 
as  they  are  included  in  the  same  common  and  united 
hope  of  restoration  and  blessing,  no  longer  as  two 
separate  kingdoms,  but  as  one,  under  the  true  Son  of 
David. 


52     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  "  Carpenters  "  or  Smiths 

Apart  from  the  final  and  total  overthrow  of  confederated 
Gentile  world-power  at  the  time  of  the  end,  the  prophet  is 
also  made  to  see  what  we  may  describe  as  the  gradual 
process  of  the  decay  and  overthrow  of  the  four  great 
empires  in  turn. 

"  And  Jehovah  showed  me  four  'carpenters?"  literally, 
"  workmen,"  or  "  smiths,"  as  the  R.V.  renders  the  word. 
The  Hebrew  Knn}  harash,  designates  a  cunning  workman 
or  artificer  in  either  wood,  stone,  or  metal.  And  as  the 
prophet  evidently  sees  them  coming  on  the  stage  of  his 
prophetic  vision  in  readiness  for  work,  with,  perhaps,  the 
tools  or  implements  of  their  trade  in  their  hands,  he  asks  : 
"  What  come  these  to  do  ?  "  And  the  answer,  evidently  of 
the  Lord  Himself,  though  it  may  have  been  through  the 
interpreting  angel,  is :  "  These  (are)  the  horns  whicJi  have 
scattered  Judah" 

This  first  sentence  in  the  reply  is  a  repetition  of  the 
statement  in  the  preceding  verse,  but  words  are  added 
which  are  meant  to  emphasise  the  greatness  of  Israel's 
sorrow  and  affliction  during  the  period  of  their  being  tossed 
about  by  these  "  horns " ;  for  their  sufferings  have  been 
such  (literally,  "  according  to  the  measure,"  i.e.,  in  such  a 
manner)  "  tJtat  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head"  so  heavily  did 
oppression  weigh  upon  them,  but  these  (the  harashim,  or 
"  workmen ")  are  come  to  fray  (literally,  "  to  terrify ") 
"  them,  and  to  cast  down  the  horns  of  the  nations  ivhich  are 
lifting  up  their  horn  against  the  land  of  Judah  to  scatter  it " 
(i.e.,  the  inhabitants  or  population  of  if]. 

Who  are  these  workmen,  or  smiths  ?  "  Symbols  of 
Divine  judgment "  in  a  general  way,  says  one  learned  com 
mentator.  "  Symbols  of  the  instruments  of  the  Divine 
Omnipotence  by  which  the  imperial  power  in  its  historical 
forms  is  overthrown,"  says  another.  But  while  it  is  true 
that  this  part  of  the  vision  is  designed  to  show  to  the 
people  of  God  in  a  general  way,  "  that  every  hostile  power 
of  the  world  which  has  risen  up  against  it,  or  shall  rise  up, 


THE  HORNS  AND  THE  "CARPENTERS"       53 

is  to  be  judged  and  destroyed,"  the  number  four  standing 
over  against  the  four  horns  does  not  only  suggest  that  "  for 
every  enemy  of  God's  people  God  has  provided  a  counter 
acting  power  adequate  to  destroy  it," *  but  points  to  four 
powers  also  successive,  though  in  the  vision,  like  the  four 
horns,  presented  together.  And,  if  I  am  asked  to  state  more 
definitely  which  four  powers,  I  answer  the  first  was  the 
Medo-Persian,  which  by  the  hand  of  Cyrus  broke  down  the 
horn  of  Babylon ;  the  second  was  the  Grecian,  which  by 
the  hand  of  Alexander  terrified  and  humbled  the  power  of 
Persia ;  the  third  was  Rome,  which  in  its  turn  prostrated 
and  trod  down  the  power  of  Greece.2 

This  last,  the  most  terrible  of  all,  not  only  acted  as  one 
of  the  "  workmen  "  or  "  smiths  "  to  terrify  and  break  down 
the  great  world-power  which  immediately  preceded  it,  but, 
in  relation  to  the  Jewish  people  and  the  Church  of  God, 
still  exists  as  the  last  of  the  four  horns  ;  and  in  its  revived 
form,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Satan-possessed  head  of 
the  final  confederacy  of  apostate  Gentile  world-powers,  will 
bring  about  the  climax  of  all  the  sorrows  and  the  sufferings 
of  Israel  in  the  last  "  great  tribulation,  such  as  hath  not 

1  Lange. 

2  The  following  curious  passage  about   the  four  carpenters  or  "smiths"  is 
from  Kimchi's  Commentary : 

"  And  the  Lord  showed  me  four  workmen,  ...  in  order  to  cut  off  the  horns 
— that  is  to  say,  each  kingdom  shall  he  a  carpenter,  to  cut  off  the  kingdom  that 
preceded  it,  for  the  Babylonian  monarchy  fell  by  the  hand  of  the  Persians,  and 
the  Persian  by  the  hand  of  the  Greek,  etc.  Or,  the  carpenters  may  signify  in  a 
parable  the  angels — the  supernatural  princes  who  are  appointed  over  the  king 
doms  ;  and  our  Rabbis  of  blessed  memory  have  interpreted  the  verse  of  the  days 
of  the  Messiah,  saying,  '  Who  are  the  four  carpenters  ?  R.  Simon  Chasida  says 
they  are  Messiah  the  Son  of  David,  the  Messiah  the  Son  of  Joseph,  and  Elias, 
and  the  righteous  priest.'  This  passage,  quoted  by  Kimchi,  is  found  in  the 
Talmud,  Succah,  fol.  52,  col.  2,  where  Rashi  says,  in  his  commentary  on  the 
authority  of  Bereshith  Rabha,  that  '  the  righteous  priest '  means  Shem  the  son  of 
Noah,  who  is  there  supposed  to  be  identical  with  Melchizedek.  The  legend 
about  the  angels  is  thus  given  in  the  Pirke  Eleazar :  '  The  Holy  One,  blessed  be 
He,  descended  with  the  seventy  angels  who  surrounded  the  throne  of  His  glory,' 
and  confounded  their  language  into  seventy  nations  and  seventy  languages,  each 
nation  with  its  own  writing  and  language,  and  over  each  nation  He  appointed  an 
angel,  but  Israel  fell  to  His  portion  and  lot,  and  therefore  it  is  said,  'The  Lord's 
portion  is  His  people.'" 


54     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

been   from   the  beginning  of  the  world  until  now,  no,  nor 
ever  shall  be."      It  is  to  that  time  that  the  7th  chapter  of 
Daniel  refers :  "  After  this   I   saw  in  the  night  vision,  and 
behold  a  fourth   beast,  dreadful    and    terrible   and    strong 
exceedingly,  and  it  had  great  iron  teeth  ;  it  devoured  and 
brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped  the  residue  with  his  feet,  and 
it  was  diverse  from  all  the  beasts  that  were  before  it ;  and 
it  had  ten  horns"  (explained  in  ver.  24  of  the  same  chapter 
as  signifying  "  ten  kings  "  or  "  kingdoms  ").      "  I  considered 
the  horns,  and  behold  there  came  up  among  them  another, 
a  little  horn,  before  whom  there  were  three  of  the  first  horns 
plucked  up  by  the  roots,  and  behold  in  this  horn  were  eyes 
like  the  eyes  of  a  man,  and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things  " 
(Dan.  vii.  6-8).      But  it  is  just  then — when  the  strength 
and  pride  and  ruthless  cruelty  and  blasphemy  of  apostate 
world-power  summed  up  in  its  head  reaches  its  climax,  that 
"  the  horn  of  the  Gentiles "  shall  finally  and  for  ever  be 
broken    and    cast    out ;    for   then    the   last   "  workman "    or 
"  smith "  who,  though  seen  by  the  prophet   with  the  other 
three,  is  altogether  diverse  from  them,  and  is  only  included 
in  the  vision  with  the  others  in  order  to  present  a  full  and 
complete  view  of  the  overthrow  of  all  the   four  horns,  shall 
suddenly  appear  to  accomplish  His  terrible  work  of  judg 
ment.      "  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and,  behold,  there  came 
with  the  clouds  of  heaven  one  like  unto  a  Son  of  Man,  and 
He  came  even  to  the  Ancient  of  Days,  and  they  brought 
Him   near  before   Him  (to  be  invested  formally  with  the 
Kingdom   immediately  before   He  comes  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven  to  take  possession  of  it) ;  and  there  was  given  Him 
dominion   and   glory  and   a  kingdom,  that  all  the  peoples, 
nations,  and   languages  should  serve   Him :   His  dominion 
is  an  everlasting  dominion,"  and   His  kingdom  "  shall  never 
be  destroyed,  nor  shall   the  sovereignty  thereof  be  left  to 
another  people,  but  it  shall  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all 
these    kingdoms,   and    it    shall    stand    for    ever "   (Dan.    vii. 
13,  14,  ii.  44,  45,  R.V.). 


CHAPTER    IV 
THE  THIRD   VISION 

THE   MAN   WITH   THE   MEASURING   LINE 
(CHAPTER  n.   1-13  HEBREW  CHAPTER  n.  5-17) 


And  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and  behold  a  man  with  a  measuring 
line  in  his  hand.  Then  said  I,  Whither  goest  thou  ?  And  he  said  unto  me,  To 
measure  Jerusalem,  to  see  what  is  the  breadth  thereof,  and  what  is  the  length 
thereof.  And,  behold,  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth,  and  another 
angel  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said  unto  him,  Run,  speak  to  this  young  man, 
saying,  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  as  villages  without  walls,  by  reason  of  the 
multitude  of  men  and  cattle  therein.  For  I,  saith  Jehovah,  will  be  unto  her  a 
wall  of  fire  round  about,  and  I  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her.  Ho,  ho, 
flee  from  the  land  of  the  north,  saith  Jehovah  ;  for  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as 
the  four  winds  of  the  heavens,  saith  Jehovah.  Ho  Zion,  escape,  thou  that  dwellest 
with  the  daughter  of  Babylon.  For  thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts :  After  glory 
hath  He  sent  Me  unto  the  nations  which  plundered  you  ;  for  he  that  toucheth  you 
toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye.  For,  behold,  I  will  shake  My  hand  over  them, 
and  they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  those  that  served  them  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that 
Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  sent  Me.  Sing  and  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Zion  ;  for,  lo, 
I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith  Jehovah.  And  many 
nations  shall  join  themselves  to  Jehovah  in  that  day,  and  shall  be  My  people  ; 
and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  and  thou  shall  know  that  Jehovah  of  hosts 
hath  sent  Me  unto  thee.  And  Jehovah  shall  inherit  Judah  as  His  portion  in  the 
holy  land,  and  shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem.  Be  silent,  all  flesh,  before  Jehovah  ; 
for  He  is  waked  up  out  of  His  holy  habitation. 


CHAPTER    IV 

THE  second  and  third  visions  stand  in  closest  possible 
connection  with  the  first.  "  The  good  words  and 
comfortable  words"  (i.  I  3),  which  were  God's  answer 
to  the  intercession  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  on  behalf  of 
"  Jerusalem  and  the  cities  of  Judah,"  contained  a  twofold 
message :  First,  that  Jehovah  is  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and 
for  Zion  with  a  great  jealousy,  and  is  sore  displeased  (or 
"  very  angry ")  with  the  nations  who  are  at  ease,  who 
helped  forward  the  affliction  of  Israel  (i.  14,  15). 
Secondly,  that  He  would  "  return  to  Jerusalem  with 
mercies,"  the  outward  proofs  of  which  would  be  (a)  that 
His  house  would  again  be  built  in  it,  as  the  visible  sign 
and  pledge  of  the  restored  communion  between  Him  and 
His  people.  (b}  And  "  a  line  shall  be  stretched  forth 
over  Jerusalem,"  i.e.,  as  already  explained  in  my  notes 
on  that  vision,  "  to  mark  the  space  it  is  to  occupy  in 
its  restored  condition,  and  the  plan  on  which  it  is  to  be 
arranged." 

And  not  only  should  Jerusalem  itself  be  rebuilt,  but 
the  whole  land  should  feel  the  blessed  effects  of  Jehovah's 
return  to  His  people  with  mercies ;  and  its  cities,  which 
He  calls  "  My  cities,"  should  "  through  prosperity  yet 
be  spread  abroad,"  or  "  yet  overflow  with  prosperity "  (i. 
1 6,  17). 

Now,  just  as  the  second  vision  of  the  "  horns,"  and 
"  carpenters,"  or  "  workmen,"  is  a  continuation  and  sequel 
to  the  first  part  of  the  consoling  message — for  it  shows 
how  the  Gentile  nations,  who  "  have  helped  forward  the 
affliction "  by  scattering  Israel  and  treading  down 
Jerusalem,  shall  themselves  be  broken  up  and  finally  over- 

57 


58     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

thrown — so  the  third  vision  of  the  man  with  the 
measuring  line  is  an  amplification  and  realistic  unfolding 
of  the  other  "  comfortable  words  "  in  the  second  part  of  the 
consoling  message  in  reference  to  the  future  of  the  city, 
and  the  land,  and  the  people,  when  Jehovah,  in  the  Person 
of  Messiah,  shall  "  return  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies." 

The  Vision 

Lifting  up  his  eyes,  the  prophet  sees  a  man  with  a 
measuring  line  in  his  hand,  and  on  asking,  "  Whither  goest 
thou  ?  "  the  answer  is,  "  To  measure  Jerusalem,  to  see  what 
(or  '  how  great ')  is  the  breadth  thereof  and  what  (or  how 
great)  is  the  length  thereof."  While  "  the  man "  is  thus 
actually  engaged,  the  interpreting  angel  "  goes  out,"  or 
forward,  from  the  prophet  by  whose  side  he  had  been 
standing,  evidently  in  the  direction  of  the  measuring  which 
was  going  on,  to  inquire  the  meaning  of  the  symbolism,  so 
as  to  communicate  it  to  the  prophet ;  but  is  met  on  the 
way  by  "  another  angel,"  evidently  sent  forth  by  "  the  man  " 
with  the  measuring  line,  who  commands  him  to  run  and 
tell  "  this  young  man  "  from  whose  side  he  had  just  come, 
saying,  "  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  as  towns  (or  '  villages  ') 
without  walls,  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle 
therein.  For  I,  saith  Jehovah,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of 
fire,  and  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her." 

The  Interpretation 

In  the  above  summary  we  have  already  indicated  the 
character  of  the  dramatis  personce  in  this  prophetic  vision, 
but  it  is  necessary  also  to  explain  it  in  detail.  First,  who 
is  "  the  man  "  with  the  measuring  line  ? 

Some  interpreters  have  confused  him  with  the  inter 
preting  angel,  though  in  the  text  itself  this  angel  is  clearly 
distinguished  from  "  the  man,"  since  he  does  not  "  go  out " 
till  the  latter  had  already  gone  to  measure  Jerusalem. 
Others,  again,  have  regarded  this  "  man  "  as  "  a  mere  figure 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     59 

in  the  vision  " ;  while  still  others  have  confused  him  with 
the  "  young  man  "  in  ver.  4.  Thus  Dr.  Wright  says,  rather 
dogmatically,  "  The  man  with  the  measuring  line  is  not  to 
be  regarded  as  an  angel  ;  he  was  sent  forth  on  no  mission 
from  above.  He  appears  as  a  mere  figure  in  the  vision, 
and  one  represented  as  acting  unwisely.  He  may  have  been, 
as  Neumann  imagines,  termed  '  this  young  man  '  by  the 
angel,  in  allusion  to  his  simplicity." 

But  the  suggestion  of  a  "  mere  figure  "  in  the  vision  is 
altogether  out  of  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  whole 
series  of  these  prophetic  dramas  in  which  every  actor  is  of 
significance,  and  there  is  nothing  whatever  in  the  text  of  the 
vision  to  justify  the  above  statement  that  this  "  man  "  was 
sent  "  on  no  mission  from  above,"  and  is  represented  as 
acting  "  unwisely  "  or  in  "  his  simplicity." 

In  opposition  to  the  above,  it  seems  to  me  very  clear 
that  "  the  man  "  is  none  other  than  the  One  whom  the 
prophet  beheld  in  the  first  vision  riding  upon  the  red  horse, 
and  standing  among  the  myrtles  "  in  the  bottom "  or 
"by  the  deep"  (chap.  i.  8),  who  in  the  iith  verse  of  that 
same  chapter  is  identified  with  the  MalakJi  Yehovah — the 
Angel  of  Jehovah — who,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  same 
as  "  the  Angel  of  His  Face,"  the  Divine  "  Messenger 
of  the  Covenant,"  the  Second  Person  in  the  Blessed 
Trinity. 

Nor  are  these  the  only  places  where  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah  is  called  "  the  man  "  in  these  series  of  visions,  for 
in  the  symbolical  transaction  which  follows  the  visions  in 
chap,  vi.,  which  is  an  indisputably  Messianic  passage,  we  read: 
"  Behold  the  Man,  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  and  He  shall 
grow  up  out  of  His  place,  and  He  shall  build  the  temple 
of  Jehovah."  Now,  He  who  in  that  scripture  is  represented 
as  the  builder  of  the  true  Temple  of  Jehovah,  as  the 
ultimate  fulfilment  of  the  "  comfortable  words  "  of  promise 
in  the  first  vision,  "  My  house  shall  be  built  in  it,"  is  "  the 
man  "  who  in  this  third  vision  is  represented  as  the  Author 
of  that  future  restoration  and  enlargement  of  the  city 
expressed  in  the  words  which  immediately  follow  in  that 


60     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

first  comprehensive  message  of  consolation  :  "  And  a  line 
shall  be  stretched  over  Jerusalem"  (i.  i6).x 

Some  (as  Neumann,  Lange,  and  others)  identity  the 
"  other  angel,"  in  ver.  3,  with  the  Angel  of  Jehovah ;  but  in 
that  case  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  he  should  not  have  been 
called  simply  by  the  title  Malakh  Yehovah,  if  he  were  that 
Divine  Being,  instead  of  by  an  indefinite  designation  which 
suggests  in  itself  the  idea  that  he  was  an  angel  of  inferior 
dignity.  Besides,  the  expression,  "went  out,"  in  ver.  3, 
which  is  the  same  as  "  went  forth,"  as  used  of  the  inter 
preting  angel,  seems  to  me  to  indicate  that  just  as  the 
latter  "  went  out "  from  the  side  of  the  prophet  by  whom  he 
was  standing,  so  this  "  other  angel  "  was  by  the  side  and  in 
attendance  on  the  man  with  the  measuring  line,  by  whom 
he  was  sent  to  meet  the  interpreting  angel  with  the  message 
with  which  the  latter,  in  his  turn,  was  to  run  to  the 
prophet. 

The  "  young  man,"  therefore,  is  neither  "  the  man " 
with  the  measuring  line,  nor  any  other  angelic  being,  as 
some  have  supposed ;  for,  apart  from  the  fact  that  such  an 
interpretation  confuses  the  whole  vision,  the  term  naar,  as 
Pusey  well  observes,  "  Common  as  our  English  term 
'  youth/  in  regard  to  man,  is  inapplicable  and  unapplied  to 
angels,  who  have  not  our  human  variations  of  age,  but 
exist  as  they  were  created." 2  The  probable  reason  why 

1  The  word  translated  a  "  line,"  in  chap.  i.  16,  is  not  the  same  as  the  one 
rendered  "  a  measuring  line  "  in  chap,  ii.,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  in  our  judg 
ment  that  the  idea  expressed  in  that  part  of  the  consoling  message  of  the  first  vision 
is  taken  up  in  this  third  vision,  and  the  fulfilment  realistically  set  forth  by  the 
symbolical  act  of  the  actual  measuring.  It  is,  moreover,  very  probable  that  there 
is  a  reference  in  this  second  chapter  of  Zechariah  to  Ezekiel's  vision  in 
chaps,  xl. ,  xliii.,  where  "  the  man  whose  appearance  was  like  the  "appearance  of 
brass,"  who  was  going  forth  "with  a  line  of  flax  in  his  hand  and  a  measuring 
reed  "  on  the  same  errand,  namely,  to  measure  the  site  of  the  Jerusalem  that  is  to 
be  restored,  is  also  the  Angel  of  Jehovah.  In  Rev.  xxi.  15-27  the  same 
symbolism  is  used  in  reference  to  the  Jerusalem  which  is  above — the  city  which 
hath  foundations,  "whose  builder  and  maker,"  in  a  very  special  sense,  is  God  in 
Christ. 

•  The  term  in  Hebrew  denotes  a  male  from  infancy,  as  Moses  was  in  the  ark 
of  bulrushes,  to  the  prime  of  life  ;  and  is  occasionally  used  for  "  minister'"'  or 
"  servant,"  without  reference  to  age. 


THE  MAN   WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     61 

106     the  prophet  is  thus  styled,  and  the  practical  lessons  which 
we  may  learn  from  this  fact,  I  have  already  pointed  out  in 
^e     my  introductory  remarks  on  the  personality  of  Zechariah, 
in     at  the  commencement  of  these  expositions. 


j^  The  Message 

The  joyful  tidings  in  explanation  of  the  symbolical  act 
j!  of  the  measuring  of  the  city,  with  which  the  interpreting 
er-  angel  is  to  "  run,"  that  he  may  quickly  communicate  them 
Ke  to  the  prophet,  that  he  also  in  his  turn  may  communicate 
^  them  to  the  people,  contain  a  twofold  message. 
in  I.  Jerusalem  shall  not  only  be  restored  but  greatly 

3ffl  enlarged,  extending  much  beyond  the  boundaries  of  its 
lCe  ancient  walls,  "  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle 
'^  therein"  it  will  "  dwell "  or  "  be  inhabited "  as  perazoth, 

rendered  in  the  A.V.  "  towns  without  walls,"  and  in  the 
'•'  R.V.  "  villages."  But  the  word  strictly  describes  "  plains," 
25  or  an  open  country  in  which  there  is  nothing  to  circum- 
M  scribe  the  inhabitants,  or  to  prevent  them  from  spreading 
as  themselves  abroad :  thus  in  Ezek.  xxxviii.  1 1  it  is  used  of 
rm  the  land  where  people  dwell  in  peace  and  prosperity, 
to  "  without  walls,  bolts,  and  gates,"  in  contrast  to  those  in 
3'.it  walled  cities ;  and  in  Esth.  ix.  1 9  the  inhabitants  of  the 
hy  perazoth  (the  unprotected  towns  and  villages) are  distinguished 

from  those  living  in  the  fortified  capital,  Susa.      It  denotes 
'    also  a  condition  of  confidence  and  safety,  since  in  danger 
;ion    men  resort  to  strong  cities  and  fortified  towns. 

This  again  is  in  accord  with  the  words  of  the  former 

prophets    in    reference   to   the   marvellous    increase   of  the 

;C,f   people,  and  the  extended  boundaries  of  the  city  and  the 

nig   land  after  the  restoration  :  thus,  for  instance,  we   read  in 

'   Isa.  xlix.    IQ.   20,  "For  as  for  thy  waste  places   and  thy 

018        « 

'.h  desolate  places,  and  thy  land  that  hath  been  destroyed,  surely 
;:»  now  shalt  thou  be  too  strait  for  the  inhabitants,  and  they 

that  swallowed  thee  up  shall  be  far  away.  The  children  of 
j  thy  bereavement  "  ("  the  children  that  thou  shalt  have  instead 

of  those  of  which  thou  hast  been  bereaved  " — it  is  addressed 


62     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

to  Jerusalem)  "  shall  yet  say  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too 
strait  for  me ;  give  place  to  me  "  ("  make  room  ")  "  that  I 
may  dwell,"  so  that  the  limits  of  the  city  and  the  land 
shall  be  ever  wider  extended,  and  Jerusalem  shall  resemble 
a  succession  of  "  villages  "  on  the  open  plains. 

II.  But  a  promise  much  greater  than  mere  outward 
enlargement  and  material  prosperity  follows  in  the  5th 
verse  :  "  For  /,  saith  Jehovah,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about,  and  will  be  the  glory  (or  'for  glory ')  in  the 
midst  of  her."  This  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  com 
prehensive  promises  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  contains 
an  assurance  of  protection — though  inhabited  as  "  villages  " 
in  an  open  plain,  without  visible  walls  or  fortifications,  it 
shall  be  "  a  strong  city  "  and  perfectly  safe  from  all  attacks 
and  danger  ;  for  not  only  will  Jehovah  in  that  day  "  appoint 
salvation  for  walls  and  bulwarks"  (Isa.  xxvi.  i),  but  He; 
Himself  (the  "  I  "  in  ver.  5  being  very  emphatic)  will  be  a 
wall  of  fire — "  as  an  inner  circle  "  of  perfect  defence  to 
those  within,  but  for  sure  destruction  to  enemies  who  shall 
dare  to  approach  from  without. 

And  as  He  shall  be  her  protection  from  without,  so 
shall  He  be  her  glory  from  within,  for  "  Jehovah  shall  be 
unto  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory " 
(Isa.  Ix.  19);  and  what  is  said  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem 
shall,  in  a  degree,  be  true  also  in  that  day  of  the  restored 
earthly  city,  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  lighten  it,  and 
the  Lamb  shall  be  the  lamp  thereof"  (Rev.  xxi.  23). 

But  it  might  be  as  well,  before  proceeding  further,  to 
pause  and  inquire  if  there  is  any  truth  in  the  assertion  that 
this  promise  has  already  been  fulfilled,  and  to  make  quite 
sure  that  it  is  of  the  literal  Jerusalem  that  these  beautiful 
words  are  primarily  spoken  ;  for  there  are  some  interpreters 
who  even  deny  this.  Thus  Pusey  (whose  otherwise  devout 
and  scholarly  work  on  the  Minor  Prophets  is  vitiated  by 
the  so-called  spiritualising  method  which  seeks  persistently 
to  explain  away  even  the  plainest  prophecies  about 
Jerusalem,  and  applies  every  promise  to  "  the  Church/' 
while  it  carefully  leaves  the  curses  to  the  Jews),  after 


THE  MAN   WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     63 

explaining  the  words,  "  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  as 
towns  without  walls,"  exclaims :  "  Clearly,  then,  it  is  no 
earthly  city.  To  be  inhabited  as  villages  would  be  weak 
ness,  not  strength ;  a  peril,  not  a  blessing.  The  earthly 
Jerusalem,  as  long  as  she  remained  unwalled,  was  in 
continual  fear  and  weakness.  God  put  it  into  the  heart  of 
His  servant  (Nehemiah)  to  desire  to  restore  her ;  her  wall 
was  built,  and  she  prospered.  .  .  .  This  prophecy,  then, 
looks  on  directly  to  the  time  of  Christ.  Wonderfully  does 
it  picture  the  gradual  expansion  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ 
without  bound  or  limit.  ...  It  should  dwell  as  villages, 
peacefully  and  gently  expanding  itself  to  the  right  and  to 
the  left,  through  its  own  inherent  power  of  multiplying 
itself,  as  a  city  to  which  no  bounds  were  assigned,  but 
which  was  to  fill  the  earth."  And  another,1  who,  in  an 
able  and  elaborate  work,  which,  however,  is  chiefly  a 
summary  of  the  explanations  and  speculations  of  German 
commentators  who,  with  very  rare  exceptions,  have  no 
place  at  all  in  their  theological  and  exegetical  schemes  for 
any  future  for  Israel — admitting  that  it  is  of  the  earthly 
Jerusalem  that  the  words  were  spoken — tells  us  coolly  that : 
"  There  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  the  prophecy  refers  to 
a  still  future  period,  as  Von  Hoffmann  imagines.  The 
prophecy  was  fulfilled  by  the  restoration  of  the  city  of 
Jerusalem  under  the  protection  of  God  even  in  troublous 
days. 

"  Though  surrounded  indeed  by  walls,  Jerusalem  grew 
so  fast  that  a  considerable  number  dwelt  in  villages  outside 
the  walls.  Its  population  continually  increased — the  city 
was  noted  for  its  splendid  appearance  in  the  time  of 
Ptolemy  Philadelphus.  ...  In  the  troublous  times  which 
intervened  between  the  days  of  Zechariah  and  those  of  our 
Lord,  notwithstanding  the  disasters  which  occasionally  fell 
upon  the  holy  city,  abundant  proof  was  given  that  the 
Lord  was  not  forgetful  of  His  promises,  specially  to  shield 
and  to  protect  it.  The  promises,"  he  proceeds,  "  would 

1  Dr.  C.  H.  II.  Wright,  "Zechariah  and  his  Prophecies,"  Bampton  Lectures 
for  1878. 


64     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

have  been  fully  accomplished  if  the  people  had  kept  the 
covenant  committed  to  them,  and  they  were  accomplished 
in  a  great  measure,  notwithstanding  their  many  sins." 

A  good  deal  is  made  of  a  letter  of  Aristeas,  an 
Egyptian  Jew,  to  Philocrates,  which  is  referred  to  by 
Josephus  in  the  I2th  book  of  his  Jewish  Antiquities,  in 
which  a  description  of  Jerusalem  after  the  restoration  is 
given  ;  also  of  a  fragment  of  Hecataeus,  who  lived  in  the 
time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  who  describes  the  Jews 
at  the  time  as  possessing  "  many  fortresses  and  towns, 
moreover  one  fortified  city,  by  name  Jerusalem,  fifty  stadia 
in  circumference  and  inhabited  by  120,000  men";  and  of 
Josephus'  statement  (sec  his  Jewish  Wars,  v.  4.  2)  that 
at  the  time  of  Herod  Agrippa,  "  as  the  city  grew  more 
populous  it  gradually  crept  beyond  its  old  limits,  and  those 
parts  of  it  that  stood  northwards  of  the  temple  and  joined 
that  hill  to  the  city  made  it  considerably  larger,  and 
occasioned  that  hill,  which  is  in  number  the  fourth,  and  is 
called  '  Bezetha,'  to  be  inhabited  also."  All  of  which, 
according  to  these  interpreters,  show  that  the  glorious 
prophecy  in  Zech.  ii.  has  been  fulfilled,  and  has  no  more 
reference  to  a  future  period. 

But  first,  in  reference  to  those  who  explain  away  the 
application  to  the  literal  Jerusalem  altogether,  we  would  say 
that  this  method  of  interpretation  does  not  "  spiritualise " 
but  pJiantomise  Scripture,  for  it  does  not  really  bring  out 
the  meaning  and  true  application  of  the  Spirit,  which  alone 
makes  the  Word  of  God  "  spiritual "  and  profitable  to  the 
reader,  but  substitutes  an  unnatural  and  shadowy  meaning 
for  what  is  plain  and  obvious,  and  thereby  throws  a  vague 
ness  and  uncertainty  over  all  the  prophetic  oracles.  Surely 
the  fact  that  the  Jerusalem  whose  greatly  extended  future 
site  is  here  measured  is  to  overflow  not  only  with  men, 
but  with  "  cattle,"  who  are  to  dwell  therein,  ought  to  be 
sufficient  proof  that  it  is  an  earthly  and  not  a  heavenly 
city  that  is  spoken  about.  Was  the  "  Jerusalem,"  against 
which  Jehovah  had  indignation  "  these  threescore  years  and 
ten "  of  the  captivity,  for  which  the  Angel  of  Jehovah 


65 

intercedes  in  the  first  vision  "  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  "  ? 
And  is  not  the  third  vision,  as  already  shown,  the  ex 
pansion  and  sequel  of  the  good  and  comfortable  words 
which  are  God's  answer  to  that  intercession  ? 

It  is  beside  the  mark  to  argue  that  it  can  be  no 
earthly  city,  because  "  to  be  inhabited  as  villages  would  be 
weakness,  not  strength — a  peril,  not  a  blessing."  So  it 
would  in  ordinary  circumstances,  but  surely  the  words 
which  immediately  follow  make  all  the  difference :  "  For  I, 
saith  Jehovah,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  about " ; 
and  this  is  more  than  all  visible  walls  and  literal  bulwarks. 

It  is  true  that  at  the  time  this  prophecy  was  uttered, 
and  all  along  till  now,  "  so  long  as  Jerusalem  remained 
unwalled  it  was  in  continual  fear  and  weakness,"  because 
it  was  encompassed  by  enemies  on  every  side,  and  its 
inhabitants  had  not  yet  learned  that  it  was  Jehovah  who 
was  in  truth  their  refuge  and  strength,  and  that  "  Except 
the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  watcheth  but  in 
vain  " ;  but  prophecy  points  to  a  time  when,  after  "  Jehovah 
will  have  mercy  on  Jacob  and  choose  Israel  again,  and  set 
them  in  their  own  land,"  their  enemies  shall  no  more  be 
permitted  to  afflict  or  molest  them,  and  they  shall  have 
rest  from  their  sorrow  and  their  fear,  and  from  the  hard 
bondage  wherein  they  were  made  to  serve  (Isa.  xiv.  1—3). 
Then  also  Jehovah,  in  the  Person  of  their  Messiah  Jesus, 
shall,  from  Jerusalem  as  the  centre,  "judge  among  the 
nations,  and  rebuke  many  peoples :  and  they  shall  beat 
their  swords  into  plowshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruning- 
hooks :  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation, 
neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more " ;  and  it  will  be 
quite  safe  for  even  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  with  "  the  King," 
"the  Lord  of  hosts,"  in  its  midst,  to  be  inhabited  as 
villages  in  an  open  plain,  without  visible  walls  or  forti 
fications. 

Then,  secondly,  in  reference  to  those  who  tell  us  that 
there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  there  is  any  reference  in 
this  prophecy  to  a  future  period,  I  would  repeat  my 
remarks  at  the  close  of  the  exposition  of  the  first  chapter, 

5 


66     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

that  though  there  was  doubtless  a  message  in  this  vision  to 
the  generation  to  which  the  prophet  was  first  commissioned 
to  relate  it,  and  there  was  a  very  partial  and  shadowy 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  the  rebuilding  of  the  house  and 
the  city  in  the  work  accomplished  by  Zerubbabel  and 
Joshua  the  son  of  Jehozadak,  and  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah, 
yet  to  limit  this  glorious  prophecy  to  any  period  of 
Jerusalem's  history  while  it  is  still  being  "  trodden  down 
of  the  Gentiles,"  which  has  never  ceased  to  be  the  case 
from  the  time  of  the  Babylonian  Captivity  to  this  day,  is 
to  misapprehend  and  misinterpret  the  scope  of  this  as  well 
as  of  all  prophecy. 

But,  in  truth,  these  beautiful  words,  "  For  I,  saith 
Jehovah,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  about,  and 
the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her,"  are  really  an  announce 
ment  of  the  return  of  the  Glory  of  the  Personal  Presence 
of  Jehovah  to  Jerusalem,  and  an  amplification  of  the  words 
in  the  first  vision,  "  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with 
mercies."  I  have  elsewhere  tried  to  show  the  full  signifi 
cance  of  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  departure  of  the  Glory 
of  Jehovah  from  Jerusalem,  which  synchronised  with  the 
removal  of  governmental  power  from  Judah,1  and  the 
special  characteristics  of  the  present  "  Ichabod  "  period  of 
Israel's  history. 

It  was  the  withdrawal  of  Himself  from  their  midst 
which  has  been  the  cause  of  all  the  helplessness  and  the 
sorrow  and  the  darkness  of  the  Jewish  nation  since  the 
commencement  of  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  " ;  and  that 
this  period  did  not  terminate  with  the  first  advent  of  our 
Lord  is  clear  from  Christ's  own  prophetic  forecast  of  future 
events,  in  which  He  says :  "  And  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden 
down  of  the  Gentiles  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be 
fulfilled."  It  is  true  that  if  Israel's  eyes  had  been  opened 
to  see  the  true  character  and  divine  majesty  of  that  royal 
Babe  born  in  Bethlehem  and  of  the  "  mysterious  man  of 
Nazareth "  (as  a  Jewish  Rabb»  has  recently  styled  Him), 

1  See  the  chapter,  "The  Ichabod  Period  and  the  Return  of  the  Glory  of 
Jehovah,"  in  The  Ancient  Scriptures  and  the  Modern  Jew, 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     67 

they  would  have  seen  in  Him  a  glory  greater  than  that 
which  dwelt  in  the  symbolic  cloud  which  led  our  fathers  in 
the  wilderness  and  which  dwelt  between  the  cherubim,  and 
the  promises  of  the  return  of  the  Personal  Presence  of 
Jehovah,  no  more  to  depart  from  their  midst,  might  have 
been  fulfilled ;  but  Israel's  eyes  were  holden  then,  and  only 
a  few  Jewish  disciples  there  were  who  saw  the  Glory  of 
God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  and  could  joyfully  exclaim  : 
"  We  beheld  His  Glory,  the  Glory  of  the  Only-begotten  of 
the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  The  nation  as  a 
whole  saw  "  no  form  nor  comeliness "  to  desire  Him,  so 
they  "  despised  and  esteemed  Him  not."  In  the  end,  after 
He  had  for  three  and  a  half  years  with  outstretched  arms 
continued  to  call  Israel  to  Himself,  but  without  response — 
that  which  was  symbolised  by  the  departure  of  the  Glory 
from  the  Mount  of  Olives,  depicted  by  Ezekiel,  received  a 
second  personal  and  more  striking  fulfilment,  when  Jesus 
also,  slowly  and  reluctantly,  after  shedding  tears  of  sorrow 
for  Jerusalem,  and  from  the  same  spot  whence  the  prophet 
saw  the  Glory  depart,  finally  ("after  His  atoning  death  and 
glorious  resurrection)  ascended  out  of  sight. 

But  has  the  purpose  of  God  been  frustrated  by  Israel's 
unbelief,  and  will  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises 
in  reference  to  the  establishment  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom 
on  this  earth,  with  Jerusalem  as  its  centre,  fail  for  evermore 
because  (as  the  writer  quoted  above  asserts)  the  Jewish 
people  has  not  "  kept  the  covenant  committed  to  them  "  ? 
Oh  no ;  man's  unbelief  and  disobedience  may,  in  accord 
with  the  foreknowledge  and  infinite  wisdom  of  God,  cause 
the  delay  and  postponement  of  God's  predetermined  counsel, 
which  in  this  particular  instance  has  been  the  occasion  of 
salvation  and  blessing  to  untold  millions  of  Gentiles  (Rom. 
xi.  11  —  15),  but  it  can  never  frustrate  it. 

Jesus  Christ  came  as  a  minister  of  the  circumcision  for 
the  truth  of  God  (not  to  annul  or  transfer),  but  to  confirm 
the  promises  made  unto  the  fathers  (Rom.  xv.  8) ;  and 
since  their  ratification  in  His  own  precious  blood,  all  the 
promises  of  God  in  relation  to  the  people  and  the  land  of 


68     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Israel,  as  well  as  in  relation  to  the  "  mercy "  which  He 
purposed  from  the  beginning  to  show  unto  the  Gentiles, 
have  been  made  doubly  sure. 

Both  the  New  Testament  as  well  as  the  Old  teach  us 
to  expect  and  look  for  the  revelation  of  the  Glory  of 
Jehovah,  when  "  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together  " ;  and  then, 
when  the  Malakh  Ye/iovak,  with  whom  the  symbolic  cloud 
of  glory  was  associated  from  the  very  first  mention  of  it  in 
the  Scriptures  (comp.  Ex.  xiii.  21,  22  with  xiv.  12,  20), 
shall  appear  in  His  glory,  not  only  in  the  form  of  man,  but 
as  "  the  same  Jesus,"  visibly  to  establish  God's  rule  over 
this  earth,  and  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  His  father  David 
— these  visions  and  prophecies  of  the  return  of  the  Glory  of 
Jehovah  shall  be  fulfilled:  <l  And  Jehovah  will  create  over 
the  whole  habitation  of  Mount  Zion,  and  over  her  assemblies, 
a  cloud  of  smoke  by  day,  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by 
night :  for  over  all  the  Glory  shall  be  as  a  {marriage}  canopy. 
And  there  shall  be  a  pavilion  for  a  shadow  in  the  daytime 
from  tJie  heat,  and  for  a  refuge  and  for  a  covert  from  storm 
and  from  rain."  1 

But  though  not  in  the  form  of  visibility,  as  shall  be  the 
case  in  restored  Jerusalem  by  and  by,  the  precious  promise 
of  outward  protection  and  inward  illumination,  contained  in 
the  words,  "  For  I,  saith  the  Lord,  will  be  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about,  and  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her,"  is  true  to 
every  one  of  you  also,  dear  readers,  who  know  experimentally 
the  truth  of  the  Apostle's  words,  "  Whom,  having  not  seen 
ye  love,  in  whom  though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  believing, 
ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  The 
Angel  of  Jehovah  even  now  "  encampeth  "  (with  an  invisible 
host)  round  about  them  that  fear  Him  and  delivereth  them 
(Ps.  xxxiv.  7) ;  and  because  He  Himself  is  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about  us,  and  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God, 
therefore  "  when  the  wicked,  even  mine  enemies  and  foes  " 
(whether  visible  or  invisible,  whether  evil  men  or  "  wicked 
spirits  "),  "  come  upon  me  "  (full  of  determination  and  fury) 
"  to  eat  up  my  flesh,  it  is  they "  (the  "  they "  is  very 

1  Isa.  iv.  5,  6. 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     69 

emphatic)  "  who  stumble  and  fall,"  and  we  can  confidently 
say: 

"  Though  an  host  should  encamp  against  me,  my  heart  shall  not  fear ; 
Though  war  should  rise  against  me,  even  then  will  I  be  confident" 

Ps.  xxvii.  2,  3. 

And  as  He  is  our  protection  from  without,  so  He  is  our 
light  and  our  salvation  within  ;  for  even  now  the  word  is 
true  to  those  who  walk  with  Him,  "Jehovah  shall  be  unto 
thee  an  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory." 

But  to  return  to  the  exposition.  Because  Jehovah  hath 
spoken  well  concerning  Zion,  and  hath  such  purposes  of 
grace  concerning  Jerusalem,  while  the  nations  which  were 
then  "  at  ease,"  and  in  apparently  undisturbed  peace,  were 
about  to  be  visited  with  judgment,  those  still  in  the  lands 
of  the  exile  are  exhorted  to  hasten  back  to  their  home. 

"  Ho,  ho,  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north,  saith  Jehovah  ; 
for  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  winds  of  heaven, 
saith  Jehovah,  Ho  Zion,  escape,  thou  that  dwellest  with  the 
daughter  of  Babylon" 

The  Hebrew  Mn,  ho  or  hoi,  which  has  not  always 
the  same  meaning,  is  here  used  simply  as  a  particle  of 
exhortation,  and  for  calling  attention. 

"  The  land  of  the  north  "  is  the  same  as  Babylon  in  the 
next  verse,  which,  though  really  more  an  eastern,  or  south 
eastern,  power  in  relation  to  Palestine,  is  so  called  because, 
like  Assyria  before,  it  always  invaded  the  Holy  Land  from 
the  north,  and  the  great  caravan  route  entered  the  country 
from  the  same  quarter.  The  whole  passage  seems  to  be 
made  up  of  inspired  echoes  of  similar  utterances  in  the 
"former  prophets";  as,  for  instance,  Isa.  xlviii.  20  :  "  Go 
ye  forth  of  Babylon,  flee  ye  from  the  Chaldeans  ;  with  a  voice 
of  singing  declare  ye,  tell  ye  this,  utter  it  even  to  the  end  of 
the  earth  :  say  ye,  Jehovah  Iiath  redeemed  His  servant  Jacob." 
And  again  in  chap.  Hi.  1 1  of  the  same  prophet :  "  Depart 
ye,  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from  thence,  touch  no  unclean  thing  ; 
go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her ;  be  ye  clean,  that  bear  the 
vessels  of  Jehovah"  It  is  almost  an  exact  reiteration  also 
of  the  solemn  words  of  Jeremiah  :  "  Flee  out  of  the  midst  of 


70     VISIONS   AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Babylon,  and  save  every  man  his  life :  be  not  cut  off  in  her 
iniquity.  .  .  .  My  people,  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her,  and 
save  yourselves  every  man  from  the  fierce  anger  of  Jehovah  " 
(Jer.  H.  6,  45). 

This  also  had  a  primary,  though  only  a  partial, 
reference  to  the  time  in  which  the  prophet  wrote  his  visions. 
Though  a  remnant  had  returned,  by  far  the  greater  number 
were  still  in  the  land  to  which  they  had  been  exiled. 
Some  of  them  had  grown  rich  and  prosperous  in  the  strange 
land.  Their  love  for  Jerusalem  and  all  that  it  stood  for 
had  cooled  down,  and  they  were  content  to  become 
dwellers  "  with  the  daughter  of  Babylon."  They  were 
reluctant  to  leave  their  comfortable  homes  and  vineyards 
(which  they  had  indeed  been  encouraged  to  build  and  to 
plant,  but  only  as  temporary  possessions  during  the  seventy 
years  of  the  Captivity,  Jer.  xxix.)  for  the  rough  journey 
and  hard  life  in  the  desolated  land. 

And  so  they  are  exhorted  to  flee  out  of  Babylon,  not 
only  because  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  which  is  to  be 
shown  to  His  people  in  their  own  land,  but  because  of  the 
evil  which  was  about  to  overtake  the  country  of  their 
sojourn,  and  the  calamities  which  would  come  on  its  people, 
occasioned  probably  by  the  two  great  rebellions  in  Baby 
lonia,  and  the  t\vo  captures  of  the  city  of  Babylon — one  by 
Darius  in  person,  and  the  other  by  one  of  his  generals — 
which  had  just  taken  place  when  the  prophet  wrote  his 
visions.1 

At  the  same  time,  this  call  to  come  out  of  the  Babylon 

1  An  account  of  these  events  is  given  in  the  great  inscription  of  Darius  cut 
into  the  rock  at  Behistun,  which  was  discovered  by  Sir  H.  Rawlinson,  and 
supposed  by  him  to  have  been  made  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius,  i.e. , 
about  three  years  before  Zechariah's  visions.  The  first  of  these  rebellions  was  that 
of  Nadinta-belus,  or  Nidantabel,  as  it  is  in  the  Median  text.  He  pretended  to  be 
Nebuchadnezzar,  raised  a  powerful  army  and  fought  a  pitched  battle,  in  which 
he  was  utterly  routed  and  slain  after  the  capture  of  Babylon.  The  second 
rebellion  was  that  of  Aracus  (Arakua),  who  also  became  King  of  Babylon  on  the 
same  pretence  (of  being  Nebuchadnezzar)  ;  but  who  was  afterwards  defeated  by 
Nitaphernes  and  crucified.  Sir  H.  Rawlinson's  translations  of  the  Behistun 
inscription  will  be  found  in  Records  of  the  Past,  vol.  i.  ;  and  the  translation 
of  the  Median  text  by  Dr.  Oppert,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  vol.  ii. 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     71 

of  that  time,  which  met  with  only  a  very  partial 
response,  was  also  a  foreshadowing  of  the  future,  when 
Jehovah  shall  lift  up  His  hand  again  a  second  time  to 
recover  the  remnant  of  His  people  which  shall  be  left  from 
Assyria  and  from  Egypt,  and  from  Pathros  and  from  Cush, 
and  from  Elam  and  from  Shinar,  and  from  Hamath  and 
from  the  islands  of  the  sea  :  "  And  when  they  shall  no  more 
say,  Jehovah  liveth  which  brought  up  the  children  of  Israel 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  but  Jehovah  liveth  which  brought 
up  and  which  led  the  seed  of  the  House  of  Israel  from 
the  north  country,  and  from  all  countries  whither  I  had 
driven  them ;  and  they  shall  dwell  in  their  own  land." 
This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  this  passage  in  Zechariah 
is  based  on  those  prophecies  in  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  which 
are  quoted  above,  and  which  link  the  last  great  judgment 
of  Babylon  with  the  final  deliverance  and  salvation  of 
Israel,  as  may  be  seen  from  a  study  of  the  context,  and 
also  from  the  expression :  "  For  I  have  spread  you  abroad 
as  the  four  winds  of  heaven  " ;  which  in  the  passage  we  are 
considering  immediately  follows  a  call  to  come  out  of 
Babylon,  and  which,  therefore,  as  it  seems  to  me,  looks  on 
to  a  return  subsequent  to  the  time  when  the  scattering 
shall  have  been  universal,  which  was  not  the  case  till  the 
second  stage  in  the  dispersion  was  inaugurated  with  the 
destruction  of  the  second  temple.1 

The  verses  which  follow  are  among  the  most  important 

1  Keil,  Hitzig,  Kliefoth,  Lange,  etc.,  and  among  English  interpreters,  Dr. 
Wright,  W.  H.  Lowe,  and  others,  in  order  to  get  over  the  apparent  difficulty — 
why  the  exiles  should  be  especially  exhorted  to  return  from  the  north  if  they  had 
been  "scattered  to  all  the  four  winds  of  heaven  "  (as  Hitzig  expresses  it),  treat 
the  word  perasti  as  a  prophetic  perfect,  and  translate  it  in  a  good  sense  of  the 
future,  that  is,  "I  shall  spread  you  abroad,"  or  "greatly  multiply  you  as  the 
four  winds  of  heaven  "  ;  but  the  verb  is  nowhere  used  of  multiplying  or  diffusing, 
but  generally  "of  spreading  out  what  remained  coherent — as  hands,  wings,  a 
garment,  tent,  veil,  cloud,  letter,  and  light."  In  Ezek.  xvii.  21  we  have  the 
same  word  and  almost  exactly  the  same  phrase,  and  there  it  means  certainly  not 
to  multiply  or  spread  out,  but  to  scatter  towards  every  wind.  It  is  probable  that 
this  expression  in  Ezekiel  was  in  Zechariah's  mind  when  he  wrote  this  vision. 
Besides,  this  is  not  the  only  place  where  the  north  country  in  relation  to  Israel's 
scattering  and  gathering  stands  connected  with  the  other  lands  of  their  dispersion 
— it  is  so  in  the  passage  quoted  from  Jeremiah. 


72     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

in  the  Old  Testament  in  reference  to  Messiah's  character, 
and  they  sum  up  that  part  of  His  mission,  in  relation  to 
Israel  and  the  nations,  which  in  the  prophetic  scriptures  is 
always  connected  with  His  yet  future  glorious  appearing. 

"  For  thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts :  After  glory  hath 
He  sent  Me  unto  the  nations  which  spoiled  you  ;  for  he 
that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye. 

"  For,  behold,  I  will  shake  Mine  hand  over  them,  and 
they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  those  that  served  them  ;  and  ye 
shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  Me. 

"  Sing  and  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Zion  ;  for,  lo,  I  come, 
and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith  the  Lord. 

"  And  many  nations  shall  join  themselves  to  the  Lord 
in  that  day,  and  shall  be  My  people,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  thee,  and  thou  shalt  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts 
hath  sent  Me  unto  thee. 

"  And  the  Lord  shall  inherit  Judah  as  His  portion  in  the 
holy  land,  and  shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem." 

First,  about  His  character. 

The  One  who  speaks  is  a  Divine  being,  for  it  is  He 
who  lifts  up  His  hand  in  judgment  over  the  nations  and 
makes  them  a  spoil  to  those  who  formerly  served  them  ;  it 
is  He  who,  as  "  Jehovah,"  comes  to  dwell  in  the  midst 
of  His  people,  in  fulfilment  of  the  many  promises  of  the 
reign  of  God  on  Mount  Zion,  and  before  His  ancients 
gloriously,  and  who  shall  receive  the  many  nations  in 
that  day  as  "  His  people " ;  and  yet  He,  who  in  the 
whole  series  of  promises  in  this  chapter  affirms  of  Himself 
what  belongs  to  Almighty  God  only,  shall  in  that  day 
be  known  as  the  One  whom  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  sent 
unto  them. 

Mystery  of  mysteries — here  is  Jehovah,  yet  sent  by 
Jehovah  !  but  it  is  the  mystery  of  light  and  not  of  darkness 
to  those  who  have  learned  to  know  the  blessed  Triune  God 
of  Israel  as  He  is  self-revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  and  whose 
eyes  have  been  opened  to  see  in  Him  Who,  in  that 
synagogue  of  Nazareth,  applied  to  Himself  the  words  from 
the  ancient  Hebrew  scroll :  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     73 

upon  Me ;  because  Jehovah  hath  anointed  Me  to  preach 
good  tidings  unto  the  meek  ;  He  hath  sent  Me  to  bind  up 
the  broken-hearted,"  etc. — none  other  than  "  Jehovah 
Tzidkenu  " — the  "  Wonderful  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God, 
the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace,"  whose  goings 
forth  are  from  of  old,  even  "  from  the  days  of  eternity  " — 
who  as  the  Malakh  Yehovah,  the  Divine  Messenger  of  the 
Covenant,  appeared  of  old  to  patriarchs  and  prophets,  and 
in  the  fulness  of  time  became  incarnate,  and  was  "  sent " 
of  God  with  the  message  of  peace  and  salvation  to  man, 
and  to  be  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession. 

But  it  is  no  wonder  that  to  modern  Jews,  who  have  lost 
the  knowledge  of  the  living,  personal  God  of  their  fathers, 
and  substituted  for  the  scriptural  faith  of  the  unity  of  God 
the  dogma  of  an  abstract  unicity,  such  a  scripture  is  an 
enigma  and  insoluble  mystery. 

Secondly,  the  mission  which  He  is  to  accomplish  is 
described  in  the  words,  Achar  kabhod  shelahani,  "  After 
glory  hatk  He  sent  Me " — a  sentence  which  has  been  very 
variously  interpreted  by  different  writers,  but  which  most 
probably  means  to  vindicate  and  to  display  the  glory  of  God, 
first  in  the  judgments  which  He  is  to  inflict  on  the  nations 
who  have  oppressed  Israel,  and  then  in  the  exhibition  of 
His  grace  in  the  deliverance  and  salvation  of  His  own 
people,  and  also  in  the  blessing  which  is  to  come  to  the 
Gentile  nations  after  Israel  is  restored,  and  Mount  Zion 
becomes  not  only  the  seat  of  Messiah's  governmental  rule 
over  the  nations,  but  the  centre  of  the  true  worship  of  God 
on  the  earth.  This  is  further  explained  by  the  words  which 
follow  :  "  For,  behold,  I  will  shake  Mine  hand  over  them  " — 
even  as  in  Isa.  xi.  i  5  and  xix.  1 6,  where  the  same  Hebrew 
word  is  used,  God  promised  of  old  to  do  against  Israel's 
enemies.1  "  And  they  shall  become  a  spoil  to  those  that  served 
them"  which  is  also  an  inspired  echo  of  Isa.  xiv.,  where  we 

1  The  figure  also  includes  the  almighty  power  of  this  Divine  champion  of  His 
people's  cause.  lie  has  only  to  shake  (literally  "wave")  His  hand,  and  the 
enemies  of  God  and  of  His  people,  however  formidable  they  may  seem,  become 
as  women  (Isa.  xix.  16). 


74     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

read  that,  after  Jehovah  shall  have  had  compassion  on  Jacob, 
and  have  chosen  Israel  again,  and  set  them  in  their  own 
land,  that  "  the  stranger  shall  join  himself  with  them,  and 
they  shall  cleave  to  the  house  of  Jacob  ;  .  .  .  and  the  house 
of  Jacob  shall  possess  them  in  the  land  of  the  Lord  for 
servants  and  for  handmaidens,  and  they  shall  take  them 
captive  whose  captives  they  were ;  and  they  shall  rule  over 
their  oppressors." 

And  the  reason — "the  subjective  motive"  of  His  lifting 
up  His  hand  in  judgment  over  the  nations — is  expressed 
in  a  phrase  which  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  God's  tender  love 
for  His  people:  "  For  he  that  toucheth you  toucheth  the  apple 
of  His  eye" — the  word  literally  is  "the  gate,"  the  opening 
in  which  the  eye  is  placed,  but  it  is  generally,  and  most 
probably  correctly,  understood  to  mean  the  pupil  of  the  eye  : 
"  The  aperture  through  which  rays  pass  to  the  retina  is  the 
tenderest  part  of  the  eye — the  member  which  we  so  care 
fully  guard  as  the  most  precious  of  our  members,  the  one 
which  feels  acutely  the  slightest  injury,  and  the  loss  of 
which  is  irreparable."  This  is  how  God  felt  about  Israel  at 
the  beginning ;  for  already,  in  Deut.  xxxii.,  Moses,  in 
summing  up  their  high  privileges  and  God's  great  loving- 
kindness  to  them  as  a  nation,  says  :  "  He  found  him  in  a 
desert  land,  and  in  the  waste,  howling  wilderness.  He 
compassed  him  about,  He  cared  for  him,  He  kept  him  as  the 
apple  of  His  eye''  Many  and  terrible  have  been  Israel's 
sins  and  apostasies  since,  but  He  has  never  ceased  to  care 
and  yearn  for  them. 

Zion  in  her  desolation  may  indeed  sometimes  say  to 
herself,  "  Jehovah  hath  forsaken  me,  and  the  Lord  hath 
forgotten  me  "  ;  but  God's  answer  comes  :  "  Can  a  woman 
forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  com 
passion  on  the  son  of  her  womb  ?  Yea,  they  may  forget, 
yet  will  I  not  forget  thee.  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee 
upon  the  palms  of  My  hands  ;  thy  walls  are  continually 
before  Me."  And  even  while  "  the  dearly  beloved  of  His 
soul "  is  in  the  hand  of  her  enemies,  He  jealously  watches 
the  conduct  of  the  nations  toward  her,  and  wishes  it  to  be 


THE  MAN   WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     75 

proclaimed  that  he  that  toucheth  her  toucheth  the  apple  of 
His  eye,  and  is  accounted  as  His  enemy. 

And  in  this  tender  love  and  faithfulness  of  Jehovah  to 
His  unworthy  Israel,  you  may  see  a  picture  of  His  un 
changeable  love  and  faithfulness  to  you  also,  dear  reader ; 
for  if  you  have  learned  to  put  your  trust  under  the  shadow 
of  His  wings,  and  in  Christ  have  been  brought  into  covenant 
relationship  with  Him,  then  you  are  loved  of  Him  with  the 
same  love  with  which  He  loves  His  only-begotten  Son,  and 
are  as  dear  and  indispensable  to  Him  as  the  dearest 
member  of  your  body  can  be  to  you.  You  may  therefore 
apply  this  figure  also  to  yourself  individually,  and  pray 
with  David — 

' '  Keep  me  as  the  apple  of  Thine  eye  ; 
Hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings." 

But  the  greatest  promise  in  this  vision  and  prophecy  is 
that  expressed  in  the  words,  "  Lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell 
in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith  the  Lord"  (ver.  10);  which  not 
only  formed  the  ground  and  object  of  the  expectations  of 
the  godly  remnant  of  Israel  in  ancient  times,  but  is  still 
"  the  Blessed  Hope  "  in  the  New  Testament 

The  speaker  is  still  the  Malakh  Yehovah,  the  blessed, 
Divine  Angel,  in  and  through  whom  is  fully  manifested 
God's  name  (Ex.  xxiii.  21),  "the  Angel  of  His  Face," 
because  he  that  seeth  Him  hath  seen  the  Father.  It  is  the 
same  who  speaks  in  the  4Oth  Psalm  :  "  Lo,  I  come ;  in  the 
scroll  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  Me,"  on  which  Luther 
well  observes :  "  There  is  but  one  Person,  and  that  is  the 
Messiah ;  and  there  is  but  one  Book,  and  that  is  the  Bible 
— in  the  whole  of  which  it  is  written  of  Him." 

And  it  is  no  wonder  that  in  the  glorious  anticipation  of 
His  Advent,  and  the  blessed  consequences  which  are  to 
follow,  "  the  daughter  of  Zion  "  is  called  upon  to  "  sing 
(or  '  shout  for  joy ')  and  rejoice " ;  which  again  (as  is 
characteristic  of  the  whole  of  Zechariah)  is  a  terse  summary 
of  the  joyful  exclamations  of  the  former  prophets,  whose 
hearts  also  glowed  with  joy  and  yearning  whenever  (though 
as  yet  from  afar)  they  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  King  in  His 


76 

beauty,  and  their  mouths  were  opened  to  announce  His 
near  approach.  Thus  Isaiah,  at  the  close  of  the  Book  of 
Immanuel,1  after  describing  the  Glorious  Person,  and  blessed 
reign  of  Him  whose  Name  is  "  Wonderful,"  calls  out,  "  Cry 
aloud  and  shout,  thou  inJiabitress  of  Zion,  for  great  is  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee"  (Isa.  xii.  6) ;  which 
again  is  repeated  by  Zephaniah,  who  exclaims :  Sing,  O 
daughter  of  Zion  ;  shout,  O  Israel ;  be  glad  and  rejoice  with 
all  the  heart,  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem  /  .  .  .  the  King,  even 
Jehovah,  is  in  the  midst  of  thee  ;  thou  shalt  not  fear  evil  any 
more"  (Zeph.  iii.  14,  15). 

But  there  is  a  necessity,  perhaps,  once  again  to  point 
out  that  the  "  Lo,  I  come,"  of  these  passages  in  Isaiah, 
Zechariah,  and  Zephaniah,  are  not  the  same  as  the  "  Lo,  I 
come,"  of  the  4Oth  Psalm  ;  for  though  in  Old  Testament 
prophecy  the  principle  of  perspective  is  not  observed,  and 
events  of  the  most  distant  future  are  sometimes  linked  on 
to  those  which  are  near,  or  nearer,  the  prophet's  own  time, 
yet  the  great  fact  of  the  two  separate  advents  of  the  Messiah 
— once  in  humiliation  to  suffer  and  die ;  and  a  second  time 
in  glory  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Zion  and  to  rule  over  the 
nations — stand  out  clear  and  distinct  enough  on  the  pro 
phetic  page,  and  to  confound  them  is  to  throw  the  whole 
plan  of  God  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures  into  confusion. 

The  ancient  Rabbis,  puzzled  by  the  two  apparently 
contradictory  series  of  prophecies  in  reference  to  Messiah's 
Person  and  mission — those  which  described  Him  as  a  Babe 
born  in  Bethlehem,  and  as  a  Man  of  Sorrows  and  acquainted 
with  grief,  who  is  stricken  for  the  transgressions  of  His 
people,  and  in  the  end  pours  out  His  soul  unto  death ;  and 
those  which  depict  Him  descending  as  a  full-grown  "  Son 
of  Man  "  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  in  great  power  and  glory, 
to  build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David,  and  to  establish  His 
kingdom — have  formulated  the  belief  in  two  Messiahs :  a 
Messiah  ben  Joseph,  who  should  suffer  and  die ;  and  a 
Messiah  ben  David,  who  should  come  to  conquer  and  reign. 
But  we  know  that  there  are  not  two  persons,  but  only  two 

1  Consisting  of  Isa.  vii.  to  xii. 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     77 

advents,  and  that  it  is  "  this  same  Jesus  "  who  was  born  of  a 
Jewish  virgin,  and  who  minutely  fulfilled  the  things  written 
in  the  scroll  of  the  book,  in  reference  to  Messiah's  sufferings 
and  atoning  death,  who  shall  "  so  and  in  like  manner " 
come  again — that  is,  literally,  visibly,  bodily — to  the  Mount 
of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east,  and  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  even  as  the  disciples  saw  Him  go  up  into 
heaven. 

And  this  is  the  hope,  not  only  of  the  Church,  which  is 
His  body,  consisting  of  the  whole  blessed  company  of  the 
redeemed, — whether  those  who  through  the  ages  have  fallen 
asleep  in  Him,  or  those  who  shall  be  alive  and  remain  till 
the  day  of  His  appearing,  who  shall  only  be  perfected 
together  "  in  that  day," — but  of  Israel  and  the  nations  ;  for 
then  Israel's  long  night  of  weeping  shall  end — the  true 
"  King,"  even  Jehovah  Jesus,  shall  be  "  in  the  midst  of 
them,"  and  the  many  great  and  precious  promises  in  refer 
ence  to  Messiah's  reign,  and  the  time  of  peace  and  blessed 
ness  for  this  earth,  shall  be  fulfilled. 

One  great  and  blessed  consequence  of  His  judgments 
which  shall  then  be  abroad  in  the  earth,  and  of  His  coming 
to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Zion,  is  that  the  original  purpose  of 
God  in  the  call  and  election  of  Abraham  and  his  seed — 
namely,  that  in  them  all  the  families  of  the  earth  shall  be 
blessed — shall  be  fulfilled:  "And  many  nations  shall  join 
themselves  unto  Jehovah  in  that  day,  and  shall  be  My  people  ; 
and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee  ;  and  thou  shalt  know 
that  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  sent  Me  unto  thee."  Yes,  when 
the  Lord  in  His  mercy  shall  rebuild  Zion,  and  appear  in 
His  glory,  "  then  the  nations  shall  fear  the  name  of  Jehovah, 
and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  His  glory"  (Ps.  cii.  13-22). 
And  not  only  shall  they  fear  Him,  but  they  shall  willingly 
"join  themselves  unto  Him" — the  word  being  the  same  as 
that  used  of  the  "  son  of  the  stranger"  who  shall  "join  him 
self"  to  the  Lord  "  to  serve  Him,  and  to  love  the  name  of 
Jehovah  "  (Isa.  Ivi.  3-6) ;  and  of  Israel  themselves,  who  in 
that  day  "  shall  join  themselves  to  Jehovah  in  a  perpetual 
covenant  which  shall  not  be  forgotten"  (Jer.  1.  4,  5). 


78     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

During  the  present  Dispensation,  through  Israel's  tempor 
ary  "  fall,"  salvation  has  come  to  the  Gentiles,  and  the  "  dimin 
ishing  of  them"  has  been  overruled  of  God  to  "  the  riches  of  the 
Gentiles."  But  this  "  salvation  "  and  "  riches  "  extend  only  to 
individuals.  God  hath  visited  the  "  Gentiles  "  to  "  take  out 
of  them  a  people  for  His  Name."  It  is  only  ignorance  of 
God's  plan,  and  self-delusion,  which  can  boast  of  the 
gradual  conversion  of  the  world  and  of  "  Christian  nations  " 
in  this  present  age.  And  even  the  partial  blessing  now 
experienced  by  the  Gentiles  has  been  brought  to  them,  not 
only  indirectly  and  passively  (through  Israel's  unbelief),  but 
directly  and  actively  through  those  "  who  were,  of  faith  "  in 
the  chosen  nation. 

Through  individual  Jews  whose  hearts  were  set  on  fire 
with  love  and  devotion  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth  whom  their 
nation  despised  and  rejected,  who  went  forth  into  the 
world,  taking  their  lives  in  their  hands,  to  preach  Him 
among  the  Gentiles ;  and  through  the  inspired  writings  of 
Jewish  apostles  and  evangelists  —  individuals  from  all 
nations — a  multitude  which  no  man  can  number  have  been, 
and  are  being,  brought  into  the  knowledge  and  fellowship  of 
their  Messiah.  What  migJit  Jiave  been  if  the  nation,  as  a 
nation,  instead  of  rejecting,  had  accepted  Christ,  we  can 
only  guess  and  speculate  about. 

"Judging  from  the  work  accomplished  by  one  Jew, 
Paul,"  says  a  Hebrew  Christian  brother  in  a  recent  ably- 
written  work,  "  we  can  imagine  what  might  have  been 
achieved  if  the  intellectual  acumen  and  great  learning  of 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  together  with  the  enthusiasm 
of  the  young  patriotic  zealots,  had  been  enlisted  in  the 
cause  of  spreading  Messiah's  Kingdom  in  the  world.  If, 
instead  of  one  Paul,  there  were  thousands  of  Pauls.  If  the 
great  learning,  industry,  and  spiritual  zeal  which  for 
centuries  has  been  employed  in  rearing  that  great  monu 
ment  of  wasted  human  industry,  the  immense  literature 
of  the  Talmud,  were  used  rather  in  the  living  work  of 
propagating  the  gospel  of  Christ !  If  Jerusalem,  instead 
of  Rome,  had  remained  the  capital  of  Christendom,  and 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     79 

the  Jew,  instead  of  the  Greek  and  Roman,  the  guiding 
spirit  in  the  councils  of  the  Church  !  "  1 

But  our  human  "  if"  does  not  reach  deep  enough  to 
fathom  God's  inscrutable  purposes,  nor  is  it  high  and  broad 
enough  to  unravel  all  the  thoughts  and  hidden  counsels  of 
the  Infinite  and  Eternal  One.  This,  however,  we  do  know, 
that  while  Israel  is  held  responsible  for  its  rejection  and 
present  attitude  to  Christ  and  the  gospel,  that  unto  God 
all  things  were  known  from  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
and  that  it  was  clearly  forecast  on  the  prophetic  page  that 
so  it  would  be ;  it  is  only  "  after  these  things"  when 
Messiah  returns  to  build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David 
which  is  fallen,  and  builds  again  the  ruins  thereof,  and  sets 
it  up,  that  the  residue  of  men  shall  seek  after  the  Lord,  and 
all  the  Gentiles  upon  whom  His  name  shall  then  be  called" 
(Acts  xv.  13-18). 

Then,  when  "all  Israel  shall  be  saved";  when  the 
miracle  of  a  whole  nation  being  born  in  a  day  shall  first 
be  witnessed  on  the  earth  in  the  case  of  the  Jews ;  when 
the  full  significance  of  the  precious  Name  "  Immanuel " 
shall  be  realised  in  Jesus  "dwelling  in  the  midst"  of  His 
own  people,  so  that  the  name  of  Jerusalem  from  that  day 
shall  be  "Jehovah  Shammah "  (Ezek.  xlviii.  35);  when 
there  shall  at  last  be  not  only  "  thousands  of  Pauls,"  but 
a  whole  nation  who  shall  burn  with  the  same  love  and  zeal 
for  the  glorious  Person  of  their  Messiah,  and  for  the  ex 
tension  of  His  Kingdom,  which  characterised  the  blessed 
apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  who  in  so  many  respects  is  the 
type  of  His  nation, — then  nations,  as  nations,  "  shall  join 
themselves  unto  Jehovah,"  and  the  day  of  which  prophets 
and  psalmists  sang,  and  for  which  they  yearned,  the  day 
of  universal  peace  and  righteousness,  when  God's  way  shall 
be  known  in  all  the  world,  and  His  saving  health  among 
all  nations,  shall  at  last  break  on  this  earth. 

But  even  when  all  nations  of  the  earth  shall  walk  in 
the  light  of  Jehovah,  the  special  position  of  Israel,  as  God's 
peculiar  people  on  the  earth,  shall  still  be  made  manifest. 

J  The  Jewish  Question  and  the  Key  to  its  Solution,  by  Dr.  Max  Green, 


8o     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  And  Jehovah  shall  inherit  Judah  His  portion  in  the  holy 
land,  and  shall  choose  Jerusalem  again  " :  which  reminds  us 
of  Isa.  xix.  25,  where  we  read  that  even  after  the  blessing 
comes  to  the  saved  of  the  nations  whom  Jehovah  of  hosts 
shall  bless,  saying :  "  Blessed  be  Egypt,  My  people,  and 
Assyria,  the  work  of  My  hands,"  He  will  still  say  of 
Israel,  "  Mine  inheritance,"  for  the  Lord's  inalienable 
"  portion  "  from  among  all  the  other  nations  of  the  earth 
"  is  His  people,  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  His  inheritance  "  (Deut. 
xxxii.  9) ;  in  which  respect,  again,  Israel  nationally  is  the 
type  and  counterpart  of  the  Church,  which,  made  up  of 
saved  individuals  from  among  all  men,  is  "  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the  saints  "  (Eph.  i.  1 8), 

The  expression  lal  admath  haqodesh — "  in  the  holy 
land  " — is  very  beautiful,  and  reminds  us  of  the  fact  that 
the  land  also  which  has  been  defiled  and  polluted,  perhaps, 
above  all  others,  shall  then  be  cleansed  of  its  defilement, 
and  hallowed  and  sanctified  by  the  presence  of  Immanuel, 
to  correspond  with  the  people  who  are  to  inhabit  it ;  who 
throughout  their  future  existence  on  the  earth  shall  be 
known  and  called  by  all  other  nations  as  "  the  holy  people  " 
(Isa.  Ixii.  12),  on  whose  persons  and  homes  and  possessions, 
down  to  the  very  "  bells  of  the  horses,"  shall  be  written 
qodesh  layehovah — "  Holiness  (or  '  holy')  to  the  Lord." 

The  words,  "  and  shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem  again,"  so 
to  say,  "  round  off"  the  glorious  promises  in  this  chapter, 
and  are  the  second  of  a  threefold  reiteration  by  Zechariah 
of  Isa.  xiv.  I.  The  meaning,  as  already  explained  in  my 
notes  on  the  First  Vision,  is,  that  Jehovah  shall  then,  by 
the  various  acts  of  lovingkindness  to  His  people  and  to  the 
land,  which  are  enumerated  in  this  prophecy,  demonstrate 
in  the  sight  of  the  whole  world  the  fact  and  the  immutability 
of  His  original  choice  of  them. 

The  first  cycle  of  these  wonderful  "  visions  "  ends  with 
the  most  solemn  announcement  of  the  great  fact  which 
forms  the  climax  of  all  prophecy,  namely,  the  visible 
appearing  of  Almighty  God  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah 
as  the  Judge  and  Redeemer  of  men:  "Be  silent,  all  flesh, 


THE  MAN  WITH  THE  MEASURING  LINE     81 

before  Jehovah ;  for  He  is  waked  up  out  of  His  holy 
Jiabitationl' 

The  word  on,  Jias,  is  almost  equivalent  to  the  English 
"  hush,"  only  that  there  is  more  of  solemnity  and  power 
expressed  in  the  Hebrew.  "Kal  basar  " — "  all  flesh  " — 
is  not  only  a  universal  term  for  all  mankind,  but  is  meant 
to  express  the  weakness  and  impotence  of  man  in  presence 
of  Almighty  God.  Neor>  which  is  the  Niphal  of  ur,  is 
"  to  wake  up,"  "  to  rise  up,"  from  rest  or  sleep,  and  is,  so  to 
say,  a  response  to  the  many  cries  of  His  waiting,  oppressed 
people.  "  Awake,  why  sleepest  Thou,  O  Lord  ?  Arise, 
cast  us  not  off  for  ever  !  "  (Ps.  xliv.  23). 

Mimmeon  qadsho — "  His  holy  habitation,"  or,  literally, 
"  the  habitation  of  His  holiness,"  an  expression  found 
also  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  6;  Jer.  xxv.  30;  and  Deut.  xxvi.  15 — is 
"  heaven,"  the  special  and  permanent  dwelling-place  of  His 
glory.  There  are  two  somewhat  parallel  passages  in  the 
prophetic  Scriptures — one  in  Hab.  ii.  20,  "  But  Jehovah  is 
in  His  holy  temple ;  be  silent  before  Him,  all  the  earth  " ; 
and  the  other  in  Zeph.  i.  7,  "  Hold  thy  peace "  (has,  the 
same  word  as  "  be  silent "  in  the  other  passages)  "  at  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  God." 

The  present  Dispensation  is  the  period  of  God's  long- 
continued  silence.  How  wonderful,  how  long,  how  deep, 
how  mysterious,  is  this  silence  of  God  ever  since  the  sound 
of  the  last  words  of  Christ,  "  Surely  I  come  quickly,"  and 
the  inspired  echo  and  response,  "  Even  so,  come,  Lord 
Jesus,"  died  away  on  the  barren  rock  of  Patmos  nineteen 
centuries  ago !  How  often  have  the  hearts  of  God's  people 
grown  impatient  under  the  strain  !  How  often  has  not  the 
Church  cried,  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  how  long  ?  "  But  there 
has  been  neither  audible  voice,  nor  sound,  nor  any  visible 
interposition  on  the  part  of  God.  Moreover,  while  God 
has  remained  "  silent,"  man  has  taken  the  opportunity  of 
"  speaking,"  and  his  words  are  becoming  ever  more  foolish, 
arrogant,  and  blasphemous  against  the  Most  High ;  but 
"  our  God  cometh  and  shall  not  keep  silent"  and  then  it  will 
not  only  be  the  turn  of  "  all  flesh "  to  keep  silent,  but  to 
6 


82     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAtt 

stand  in  solemn  awe  while  "  out  of  his  own  mouth  "  man 
shall  be  judged,  and  all  his  thoughts  and  words  which  spell 
out  his  own  condemnation  are  set  in  order  before  him.1 

But  not  only  the  ungodly  and  the  sinners  who  have 
spoken  "  hard  things  "  against  God  and  His  Anointed,  but 
men  in  general,  are  called  in  a  spirit  of  reverence  and  godly 
fear  to  await  the  solemn  event  announced  ;  for  the  coming 
and  visible  interposition  of  God  on  this  earth,  while  it  will 
mean  judgment  to  some,  will  mean  the  consummation  of 
grace  and  fulness  of  blessedness  to  others ;  and  when 
prophecy  and  vision  is  at  last  fulfilled,  and  "  our  God 
shall  arise  and  His  enemies  are  scattered,  and  they  also 
that  hate  Him  shall  flee  before  His  face  " — then,  also,  "  the 
righteous  shah"  be  glad,  they  shall  exult  before  the  face  of 
God,  yea,  they  shall  rejoice  exceedingly." 2  The  last 
practical  word  on  this  Scripture  to  you,  dear  Christian 
reader,  is,  "  Abide  in  Him,"  that  when  He  shall  appear 
(when  He  shall  be  manifested)  we  may  have  confidence, 
and  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming. 

1  See  the  chapter,  "  The  Silence  of  God  :  how  it  shall  be  Broken,"  in  The 
Ancient  Scriptures  and  the  Modern  Jew. 

2  See  the  Hebrew  of  Ps.  xviii.  1-3. 


CHAPTER    V 
THE  FOURTH   VISION 

JOSHUA   BEFORE   THE   ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH 

(CHAPTER  in) 


And  he  showed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest  standing  before  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah,  and  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  be  his  adversary.  And 
Jehovah  said  unto  Satan,  Jehovah  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan  ;  yea,  Jehovah  that  hath 
chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee  :  is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  Now 
Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments,  and  was  standing  before  the  Angel. 
And  He  answered  and  spake  unto  those  that  stood  before  Him,  saying,  Take  the 
filthy  garments  from  off  him.  And  unto  him  He  said,  Behold,  I  have  caused 
thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee,  and  I  will  clothe  thee  with  rich  apparel.  And  I 
said,  Let  them  set  a  clean  mitre  upon  his  head.  So  they  set  a  clean  mitre  upon 
his  head,  and  clothed  him  with  garments ;  and  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  was 
standing  by. 

And  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  protested  unto  Joshua,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah 
of  hosts :  If  thou  wilt  walk  in  My  ways,  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  My  charge,  then 
thou  also  shalt  judge  My  house,  and  shalt  also  keep  My  courts,  and  I  will  give 
thee  a  place  of  access  among  these  that  stand  by.  Hear  now,  O  Joshua  the  high 
priest,  thou  and  thy  fellows  that  sit  before  thee  ;  for  they  are  men  that  are  a 
sign  :  for,  behold,  I  will  bring  forth  My  servant  the  Branch.  For,  behold,  the 
stone  that  I  have  set  before  Joshua  ;  upon  one  stone  are  seven  eyes  :  behold,  I 
will  engrave  the  graving  thereof,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  I  will  remove  the 
iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  day.  In  that  day,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  shall  ye 
invite  every  man  his  neighbour  under  the  vine  and  under  the  fig-tree. 


-4 


CHAPTER    V 

THE  fourth  and  fifth  visions  form  a  new  chapter  in 
this  series  of  symbolic  prophecies,  which,  though 
in  a  sense  standing  by  themselves,  are  in  the  true 
psychological  order,  and  in  the  closest  possible  relation  with 
the  wonderful  things  which  had  already  been  unfolded  before 
the  prophet's  spiritual  sight.  "The  good  words,  and  comfort 
able  words  "  (i.  i  3),  which  formed  the  message  in  the  first 
three  visions,  contained  the  promises,  not  only  of  the  over 
throw  of  the  Gentile  world-powers  "  who  lift  up  their  horn  to 
scatter  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem  "  (i.  1 8—21)  ;  not  only  of 
the  restoration  of  the  still-dispersed  people  to  Palestine,  and 
of  the  future  enlargement  and  prosperity  of  the  Promised 
Land,  and  of  the  Holy  City,  which  shall  then  be  inhabited 
as  villages  in  an  open  plain  "  for  the  multitude  of  men  and 
cattle  therein  "  (ii.  4) ;  but  of  the  restored  spiritual  relation 
ship  between  God  and  His  people,  and  of  the  return  of  the 
glory  of  the  personal  Presence  of  Jehovah  in  the  Person  of 
Messiah,  for  evermore  to  dwell  in  their  midst,  the  result  of 
which  would  be  that  "  many  nations  shall  be  joined  to 
Jehovah  in  that  day "  and  be  His  people,  and  the  whole 
earth  be  made  to  know  the  immutable  fact  and  gracious 
purpose  in  His  election  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  as  His 
peculiar  "portion  "  (ii.  5,  10,  1 1). 

But  the  question  might  well  have  suggested  itself  to 
the  prophet's  mind,  How  can  these  things  be  ?  Has  not 
Israel  by  his  grievous  sins  and  moral  defilement  for  ever 
forfeited  his  place  and  made  himself  unfit  to  be  again 
Jehovah's  sanctuary  and  appointed  minister  of  blessing  to 
the  nations  ? 

As  if  in  answer  to  this  probable  inward  questioning, 


86     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

this  fourth  vision  is  shown  to  the  prophet,  from  which  he 
might  learn  for  himself  and  communicate  to  the  people 
(isf)  the  blessed  fact  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises  in  reference  to  Israel's  future, 
rests,  not  on  their  own  merits  or  worthiness,  but  on  the 
immutable  purpose  of  Jehovah,  who  in  His  sovereign  grace 
hath  "chosen  Jerusalem";  and  (2nd}  how  the  moral 
problem  will  be  solved,  and  the  sinful,  defiled  people  be  yet 
made,  not  only  fit  to  be  the  sanctuary  of  the  Holy  One, 
but  to  be  "the  priests  of  Jehovah"  and  "the  ministers  of 
our  God "  in  relation  to  the  other  nations,  in  accordance 
with  His  original  purpose  in  their  call  and  election  :  "  Ye 
shall  be  unto  Me  a  kingdom  of  priests  and  an  holy  nation  " 
(Ex.  xix.  6  ;  Isa.  Ixi.  6).  In  brief,  this  vision  depicts  in  a 
symbolic  but  very  graphic  manner  the  inner  salvation  of 
Israel  from  sin  and  moral  defilement,  answering  to  their 
outward  deliverance  from  captivity  and  oppression  set  forth 
in  the  preceding  three  visions. 

A  somewhat  similar  thought  is  expressed  in  the  3rd 
chapter  of  Jeremiah,  where,  after  a  series  of  sublime 
promises  of  the  restoration  and  conversion  of  "  backsliding 
Israel,"  and  how  "  at  that  time  they  shall  call  Jerusalem 
the  throne  of  Jehovah,  and  all  the  nations  shall  be  gathered 
unto  it,  to  the  name  of  Jehovah  to  Jerusalem,"  the  question 
is  asked  :  "  But  I  said,  How  shall  I  put  thee  among  the 
children  (who  art  so  unchildlike)  and  give  thee  a  pleasant 
(or  '  delightsome ')  land,  the  goodliest  heritage  of  the 
nations  ?  "  (who  hast  forfeited  all  claims  on  God's  favour). 
Then  there  follows  the  answer :  "  And  I  said,  Ye  shall  call 
Me  '  my  Father}  and  shall  not  turn  away  from  following 
Me."  "I  said  .  .  .  ye  shall":  for  what  in  His  eternal 
counsels  He  has  purposed,  that  His  grace  and  power  shall 
yet  accomplish  in  His  people,  and  Israel  shall  yet,  not  only 
be  blessed,  but  be  fitted  to  be  the  instrument  in  God's  hand 
to  spread  abroad  the  blessings  of  their  Messiah's  gospel 
throughout  the  earth. 

But  now  to  come  to  the  exposition  of  the  fourth 
vision  ; 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH   87 

"And  he  showed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest  standing 
before  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  and  Satan  standing  at  his  right 
hand  to  be  his  adversary" 

It  cannot  be  decided  with  certainty  whether  the  subject 
of  the  verb  "  showed "  was  Jehovah,  or  the  interpreting 
angel,  but  most  probably  it  was  the  Lord  Himself,  as  the 
office  of  the  interpreter  was  not  to  introduce  but  to  explain 
the  visions.  "  Joshua  "  was,  of  course,  the  high  priest  who 
returned  with  Zerubbabel  at  the  head  of  the  first  colony  of 
49,697  exiles  from  the  Captivity  some  sixteen  years  before. 

He  was  standing  before  the  Malakh  Yehovah,  whose 
divine  character  shines  out  in  this  vision  in  a  most  striking 
manner,  and  whose  identity  with  the  "  Angel  of  His  Face," 
the  Second  Person  in  the  blessed  Trinity,  who  in  a  special 
sense  is  the  Sent  One  of  the  Father,  we  have  already  seen. 

The  words  'omed  liphnei,  "  standing  before,"  whether  in 
relation  to  man  or  God,  express  attendance  upon^  and  when 
used  of  the  priests,  and  especially  of  the  high  priest,  is 
almost  a  technical  term  for  their  priestly  ministry  and 
service.  Thus  we  read  that  the  tribe  of  Levi  was  separated 
"  to  stand  before  Jehovah,  to  minister  unto  Him,  and  to  bless 
in  His  Name." 

But  it  is  important  at  the  outset  to  note  that  it  is  not 
in  his  individual  or  personal  capacity  that  Zechariah  beholds 
the  high  priest  "standing"  thus  before  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah — an  erroneous  supposition  which  has  led  some 
commentators  into  absurd  and  fanciful  guesses  as  to  the 
nature  of  the  guilt  of  which  Joshua  stood  accused  2 — but  as 
the  type  and  representative  of  the  nation. 

1  Thus,  for  instance,  it  is  used  of  Joseph  before  Pharaoh  (Gen.  xli.  46),  of 
Joshua  before   Moses   (Deut.  i.  38),  of  David   before   Saul  (i  Sam.  xvi.  21), 
of  Abishag  the  Shunammite  before  David  (i  Kings  i.   2-4),  and  many  other 
instances. 

Of  standing  to  minister  before  God,  the  expression  is  used  of  the  tribe  of  Levi 
in  Deut.  x.  8 ;  of  the  high  priest  in  Judg.  xx.  28  ;  of  Elijah,  I  Kings  xvii.  I  ;  of 
Elisha,  2  Kings  iii.  14-16  ;  and  other  instances.  It  is  used  also  of  "  standing  " 
to  intercede  with  God,  Gen.  xviii.  22  ;  Jer.  vii.  10.  It  is  used  also  as  an  attitude 
of  worship. 

2  Thus  Ewald  has  invented  a  theory  (which  has  for  its  support  nothing  but  his 
own  fancy,  based  on  a  misinterpretation  of  this  sublime  Scripture)  that  Joshua 


88     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

This  is  brought  out  first  by  the  emphasis  on  his 
official  title,  ha-kohen  lia-gadol,  the  high  priest ;  secondly, 
from  the  fact  that  the  plea  of  the  great  Advocate,  and  His 
answer  to  Satan's  accusations  in  the  2nd  verse,  is  made, 
not  on  behalf  of  Joshua,  but  for  "Jerusalem"  which,  as  in 
so  many  places,  stands  not  only  for  the  city  but  for  the 
people ;  and  thirdly,  from  a  comparison  of  the  4th  verse 
with  the  pth,  from  which  we  see  that  the  words  addressed 
to  Joshua,  "  I  have  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass,"  are 
meant  to  set  forth  the  blessed  fact  that  God  "  will  remove 
the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  day" 

Standing  thus  as  the  high  priest  and  mediator  of  the 
people,  it  is  the  nation  of  Israel  which  is  on  its  trial.  If  he  is 
rejected,  they  are  rejected  ;  if  he  is  justified,  they  are  accepted. 

The  scene,  then,  to  make  free  use  of  words  of  another 
writer,  may  be  imagined  as  follows :  "  The  high  priest  is  in 
the  sanctuary,  the  building  of  which  had  already  com 
menced,  and  is  engaged  in  some  part  of  his  priestly  duty 
or  prayer  for  mercy  (on  behalf  of  the  people).  The  '  Angel 
of  Jehovah '  comes  down  and  condescends  to  appear  in  the 
Temple,  as  a  proof  of  His  favour,  attended  by  a  company 
of  angels  (ver.  7).  Satan,  the  sworn  enemy  of  the  Church 
of  God,  looks  on  with  jealous  eyes,  .  .  .  and  prepares  to 
interrupt  by  his  accusations."  But,  while  this  is  in  the 
main  true,  the  fact  that  Satan  was  there  to  accuse  invests 
the  symbolic  transaction,  which  is  here  presented  to  the 
prophet's  spiritual  sight,  with  a  judicial  character,  and  the 

"  was  actually  accused  at  the  time,  or  was  then  dreading  an  accusation  at  the 
Persian  Court,"  and  that  this  accusation  formed  the  superstructure  on  which  the 
vision  is  based.  "Zechariah,  with  peculiar  sympathy,  depicts  the  high  priest  as 
suffering  under  grievous  accusations,  and  promises  him  a  glorious  acquittal. 
The  garments  of  the  high  priest  are  represented  as  dirty  because  robes  of  that 
character  were  usually  worn  by  accused  persons  as  indications  of  mourning  " 
(which,  by  the  way,  though  a  Roman  custom,  was  not  at  all  the  case  among  the 
Jews).  According  to  this  father  among  German  critics,  "  the  ardent  hopes  of 
the  prophet  were  soon  to  be  justified  by  the  event.  On  receipt  of  the  Governor's 
report,  which  presented  an  impartial  statement  of  facts,  an  inquiry  was  instituted 
by  authority  into  the  case,  the  accusation  was  repelled,  and  the  decree  of  Cyrus, 
which  had  given  permission  for  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple,  was  duly  confirmed 
and  ordered  to  be  carried  into  execution  "  ;  for  all  which,  as  already  observed, 
there  is  not  even  a  shadow  of  historic  ground. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH   89 

high  priest  may  be  regarded  also  as  "  standing  "  on  his 
trial  before  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  as  Judge.1 

Ha-Satan,  which,  with  or  without  the  definite  article, 
is  a  proper  name  for  the  Evil  One,  is  the  same  who  in  the 
New  Testament  is  described  as  our  "  adversary  "  the  devil, 
the  Hebrew  term  having  etymologically  the  sense  of 
"  enemy,"  or  "  adversary,"  and  the  Greek  that  of  "  accuser." 

He  is  represented  as  standing  at  Joshua's  "  right  hand," 
which  is  supposed  by  many  to  have  been  the  usual  position 
of  the  accuser  in  judicial  procedure,  the  ground  of  the 
conjecture  (for  there  is  no  positive  proof  of  such  a  custom 
among  the  ancient  Jews)  being  Ps.  cix.  6,  where  we  read, 
"  Set  a  wicked  man  over  him,  and  let  an  adversary  ('  Satan  ') 
stand  at  his  right  hand."  Another  suggestion  is  that 
Satan  took  the  place  usually  taken  by  the  protector  (Ps. 
xvi.  8,  cix.  31,  cxxi.  5),  "to  show  that  Joshua,  or  those 
he  represented,  had  none  to  save  them,  and  that  he  himself 
was  victorious."  The  passage  itself,  however,  tells  us 
clearly  that  he  stood  there  "  Fsitno  " — to  act  as  adversary, 
or  "  be  Satan,"  to  him — "  that  he,"  as  an  old  writer  observes, 
"  who  is  called  Satan,  might  thus  fill  up  the  measure  of  his 
name." 

Here  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  one  of  those 
mysteries  of  revelation  which  must  be  classed  among  the 
things  which  "  we  know  not  now,"  nor  can  as  yet  fully 
understand  —  namely,  the  position  of  Satan  in  God's 
economy  in  general,  and  his  relation  to  the  moral  govern 
ment  of  this  world,  and  to  man  in  particular. 

How  and  why,  we  may  not  yet  fully  know,  but  the 
fact  is  clearly  brought  before  us  in  Scripture  that  the  great 
adversary  of  God  and  man  is  permitted  to  appear  before 
God,  not  only  in  His  earthly  courts  of  the  Temple,  as  in 
this  vision,  but  in  heaven,  as  "  the  accuser  of  the  brethren." 

And  it  is  especially  in  his  r61e  as  the  accuser  that  the 

"To  stand  before"  is  used  also  in  a  judicial  sense  both  of  the  plaintiff  and 
the  defendant  in  Num.  xxvii.  2,  xxxv.  12  ;  Deut.  xix.  17  ;  Josh.  xx.  6  ;  I  Kings 
iii.  16  ;  so  that  Hengstenberg's  statement,  that  this  expression  is  never  used  of 
the  appearance  of  a  defendant  before  a  judge,  but  always  of  a  servant  before  his 
lord,  is  not  o^uite  accurate. 


90     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

fiendish  nature  of  the  "old  serpent"  is  brought  out.  It 
was  he  who  brought  sin  into  the  world ;  it  is  he  who 
deceives  men  and  nations,  and  spurs  them  on  to  sin  and 
rebellion  against  God ;  and  yet,  when  the  seduction  is 
accomplished,  he  turns  round  and  becomes  their  accuser — 
this  truly  is  like  himself. 

But  it  is  not  merely  his  malice  against  Israel  which 
brings  him  here  as  their  accuser  before  God  in  the  person 
of  their  high  priest.  Oh  no ;  it  is  first  and  foremost  his 
hatred  of  God,  and  his  desire,  if  possible,  to  frustrate  the 
accomplishment  of  God's  purposes  of  mercy  for  this  world, 
which,  as  he  so  well  knows,  are  bound  up  with  Israel.  It 
was  for  this  same  reason  that  he  sought  all  through  the 
centuries  to  rouse  the  fury  of  the  nations  against  them, 
with  a  view,  if  possible,  to  bring  about  their  extermination. 

The  actual  words  of  Satan's  accusations  are  not  given, 
but  their  nature  may  be  inferred  from  the  3rd  verse, 
where  we  read  :  "  Now  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy 
garments,  and  stood  before  the  A  ngel." 

The  word  DWy,  tsoyim,  which  is  found  only  here  as 
an  adjective,  is  the  strongest  expression  in  the  Hebrew 
language  for  filth  of  the  most  loathsome  character,  and  the 
garments  so  defiled  denote  the  sins  of  the  people  as  viewed 
by  the  Holy  One,  in  which  the  high  priest  as  their  repre 
sentative  stood,  so  to  say,  clad  in  His  presence.  Satan, 
therefore,  might  well  have  sought  the  rejection  of  Israel  as 
the  priestly  nation,  or  to  impugn  the  holiness  of  God's 
character  in  receiving  the  worship  and  services  of  those  so 
morally  defiled. 

But,  blessed  be  God,  the  adversary  may  accuse,  but  it 
is  not  in  his  power  to  condemn.  He  that  sitteth  as  Judge,  , 
to  justify  or  condemn,  is  the  Lord.  And  note,  it  is  the 
Divine  Angel  Himself,  who  in  the  2nd  verse  is  expressly 
called  "  Jehovah,"  who  pleads  the  cause  of  His  people. 
Well  might  the  remnant  of  Israel  say,  therefore :  "  He  is 
near  that  justifieth ;  who  will  contend  with  me  ?  Let  us 
stand  together ;  ^vho  is  mine  adversary  f  Let  him  come 
near  to  me.  Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  help  me  ;  who  is  he 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH  91 

that  shall  condemn  me  f  Behold,  they  all  shall  wax  old  as 
a  garment ;  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up"  (Isa.  1.  8,  9) — a 
challenge  which  is  thrown  down  still  more  triumphantly  in 
the  New  Testament  in  the  words,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything 
to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth  ;  who 
is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather, 
that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God ; 
who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us"  (Rom.  viii.  33,  34). 
Satan's  malice  and  hatred  against  the  Church  and  the 
individual  believer  in  Christ  is  as  great  as  it  is  against 
Israel.  And  he  still  appears  as  "  the  accuser  of  the 
brethren,"  before  God  and  before  our  own  conscience ;  but 
with  such  an  "  Advocate  with  the  Father  "  as  "  Jesus  Christ 
the  Righteous,"  who  has  Himself  become  "  the  propitiation 
for  our  sins  "  (i  John  ii.  I,  2),  we  need  fear  neither  his  fury 
nor  his  malicious  accusations.  Is  Satan's  hatred  of  us 
great  ?  The  love  of  Jesus  is  greater.  Is  Satan  ever  on 
the  watch  and  restlessly  walking  about  like  a  roaring  lion 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour?  Behold,  He  that  keepeth 
Israel  doth  neither  slumber  nor  sleep,  and  His  eyes  run  to 
and  fro  throughout  the  earth  to  prove  Himself  strong  on 
behalf  of  those  whose  hearts  are  perfect  towards  Him,  and 
His  myriads  of  blessed  angels  are  sent  forth  specially  to 
guard  and  to  be  ministering  spirits  to  them  who  shall  be 
heirs  of  salvation.  Therefore  we  may  continue  the  Apostle's 
song  of  triumph  :  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
God?  .  .  .  for  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life, 
nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present, 
nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Christ  fesus  our  Lord." 

But  to  return  to  the  context.  The  great  Advocate 
bases  His  plea  on  Israel's  behalf,  first  on  the  ground  of 
Jehovah's  immutable  choice.  "Jehovah  rebuke  thee,  O 
Satan" 

The  verb  yigar,  from  ga'ar  ("  to  rebuke,"  "  to  reprove  "), 
"  when  applied  to  God,  who  accomplishes  all  things  by  His 
own  power,  includes  the  idea  of  actual  suppression  " ;  and 


92     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

in  this  case  it  "  involved  a  withering  rejection  of  the  blasted 
spirit  and  his  accusations,  as  when  Jesus  rebuked  the 
unclean  spirit  and  he  departed  out  of  his  victim."  *  The 
reason  follows,  "  Yea,  Jehovah  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem, 
rebuke  thee"  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Shall  God  cast  away  His 
people  which  Pie  hath  foreknown?"  (Rom.  xi.  i).  And 
this  is  the  best  answer  that  can  ever  be  given  to  the 
accusations  of  man  or  devil,  directed  either  against  Israel, 
or  the  Church,  or  the  individual  Christian.  It  is  the 
answer  which  Paul  gives  in  that  section  of  his  Epistle  to 
the  Romans  which  was  indicted  for  the  express  purpose  of 
instructing  Gentile  believers  in  God's  mystery  with  Israel  : 
"  I  say,  then,  hath  God  cast  away  His  people  ? "  He 
shudders  at  the  very  thought,  as  inconsistent  with  the 
character  of  God,  Who  must  abide  true  though  all  may 
prove  liars,  and  whose  gifts  and  calling  of  His  people  are 
without  repentance  (or  "  change  of  mind  ")  on  His  part — 
"  By  no  means,"  or  "  God  forbid,"  he  exclaims. 

Yes,  if  Israel's  position  as  the  Lord's  peculiar  people 
depended  on  their  own  faithfulness,  then  there  would  have 
been  an  end  of  them  long  ago ;  but  Israel's  hope  and 
safety  rest  on  the  immutable  character  and  faithfulness  of 
the  Everlasting,  Unchangeable  God,  and  that  makes  all 
the  difference.  Why  did  God  choose  Israel  in  the  first 
instance  ?  Was  it  because  of  their  righteousness  or  their 
lovableness  above  all  other  peoples  ?  Oh  no  !  "  Jehovah 
did  not  set  His  love  upon  you,  nor  choose  you,"  He  tells 
them  through  Moses,  "  because  ye  were  more  in  number  than 
any  people ;  for  ye  were  the  fewest  of  all  people."  "  Not 
for  thy  righteousness  or  the  uprightness  of  thine  heart,  but 
because  Jehovah  loved  you,  and  because  He  would  keep 

1  The  following  passages  collected  by  Pusey  show  that  "the  rebuke  of  God 
must  be  with  power"  :  "Thou  hast  rebuked  the  nations,  Thou  hast  destroyed 
the  ungodly"  (Ps.  ix.  5);  "Thou  hast  rebuked  the  proud  accursed"  (Ps.  cxix. 
21 );  "They  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  Thy  countenance "  (Ps.  Ixxx.  16) ;  "God 
shall  rebuke  him,  and  he  fleeth  far  off,  and  shall  be  chased  as  the  chaff  of  the 
mountains  before  the  wind"  (Isa.  xvii.  13);  "The  foundations  of  the  world 
were  discovered  at  Thy  rebuke,  O  Lord "  (Ps.  xviii.  15;  Nah.  i.  4;  see  also 
Ps.  cvi.  9  and  Mai.  ii.  3,  R.V.). 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH  93 

the  oath  which  He  hath  sworn  unto  your  fathers."  A 
truly  wonderful  and  God-like  reason.  "  He  chose  you 
because  He  loved  you ;  and  He  loved  you  because  He 
loved  you  "  =  the  sole  ground  and  motive  being  in  His  own 
heart  of  love>  and  in  the  sovereign  purpose  of  grace  which 
He  hath  formed  in  and  through  them. 

And  having  known  and  foreknown  them — yea,  with 
all  their  many  and  grievous  sins  and  backslidings,  and 
purposed  in  His  heart  to  exhibit  in  and  through  them,  not 
only  His  holy  severity  (as  now  in  their  unbelief),  but  even 
in  a  more  wonderful  way  His  infinite  grace  and  goodness, 
and  all  the  attributes  of  His  character  for  the  blessing  of 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  He  can  never  wholly  cast 
them  off. 

Some  of  my  readers  may  have  visited  the  Wartburg  and 
had  pointed  out  to  them  the  black  spot  on  one  of  the  walls 
of  the  room  which  Luther  occupied  during  his  benevolently 
intended  imprisonment.  The  legend  connected  with  it  is 
this.  One  night  during  this  mournful  solitude,  when  suffer 
ing  from  great  depression,  because,  as  he  himself  expresses 
it  in  a  letter  to  Melanchthon,  dated  May  24,  I  52  I,  "  I  do 
see  myself  insensible  and  hardened,  a  slave  to  sloth,  rarely, 
alas !  praying — unable  even  to  utter  a  groan  for  the 
Church,  while  my  untamed  flesh  burns  with  devouring 
flame  "  * — the  great  Reformer  dreamt  that  Satan  appeared 
to  him  with  a  long  scroll,  in  which  were  carefully  written 
the  many  sins  and  transgressions  of  which  he  was  guilty 
from  his  birth,  and  which  the  evil  one  proceeded  to  read 
out,  mocking  the  while  that  such  a  sinner  as  he  should 
ever  think  of  being  called  to  do  service  for  God,  or  even  of 
escaping  himself  from  hell.  As  the  long  list  was  being 
read,  Luther's  terrors  grew,  and  his  agonies  of  soul 
increased.  At  last,  however,  rousing  himself,  he  jumped 
up  and  exclaimed :  "  It  is  all  true,  Satan,  and  many  more 
sins  which  I  have  committed  in  my  life  which  are  known 

1  See  The  Life  of  Luther,  by  M.  Michelet.  Based  almost  entirely  on  his 
own  letters  and  table  talk,  2nd  edition,  translated  by  W.  Hazlitt,  pp.  IOI, 
102. 


94     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

to  God  only ;  but  write  at  the  bottom  of  your  list,  '  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin' " 
and  grasping  the  inkstand  on  his  table  he  threw  it  at  the 
devil,  who  soon  fled,  the  memorial  of  it  being  left  in  the 
ink-splash  on  the  wall. 

We  are  always  reminded  of  this  story  when  reading 
anti-Semitic  literature,  or  listening  to  accusations  and  dis 
paragements  of  the  Jewish  people.  No  too-black  a  picture 
can  ever  be  drawn  of  Israel's  backslidings  and  apostasies  ; 
no  human  lips  can  ever  sufficiently  describe  the  heinousness 
of  Israel's  sins  and  transgressions.  All  that  can  therefore 
be  said  against  their  past  or  their  present  is  true.  But 
when  you  have  read  through  your  long  indictment  against 
Israel,  write  at  the  bottom  of  your  list  words  such  as  these : 
"  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  If  heaven  above  can  be  measured,  and 
the  foundation  of  the  earth  searched  out  beneath,  I  will  also 
cast  off  all  the  seed  of  Israel,  for  all  that  they  have  done,  saith 
Jehovah"  (Jer.  xxxi.  37);  or  words  taken  from  the  very 
chapter  which  foretells  in  advance  Israel's  many  sins  and 
apostasies,  and  the  terrible  calamities  which  should  come 
upon  them  in  consequence  :  "  And  yet,  for  all  ttiat,  I  will 
not  cast  them  away,  neither  will  I  ablior  them,  to  destroy 
them  utterly,  and  to  break  My  covenant  with  them,  for  I  am 
Jelwvah,  their  God"  (Lev.  xxvi.  44).  No,  "Jehovah  will 
not  forsake  His  people,  for  His  great  Name's  sake,  because 
it  hath  pleased  Jehovah  to  make  you  His  people" — in 
which  faithfulness  of  the  God  of  Israel  to  the  nation  which 
He  has  chosen  for  His  own  inheritance,  in  spite  of  all  its  un- 
worthiness,  you  may  see  a  picture,  dear  reader,  of  His  faith 
fulness  to  you,  and  a  pledge  of  your  eternal  safety  in  Christ. 

Secondly,  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  bases  his  answer  to 
Satan's  accusations  on  the  ground  of  the  sufferings  in 
punishment  of  their  sins  which  Israel  has  already  endured. 
"  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  This  same 
figure,  with  one  slight  variation,  is  found  in  Amos  iv.  n, 
and  is  used  (as  Hengstenberg  well  explains)  to  "  denote  the 
occurrence  of  great  misfortune,  which,  however,  is  prevented 
by  the  mercy  of  God  from  issuing  in  utter  destruction." 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH  95 

It  need  scarcely  be  pointed  out,  after  what  has  already 
been  stated,  that  these  words  also  must  not  be  tarken  as 
applying  to  Joshua  as  an  individual,  but  as  the  high  priest, 
the  type  and  representative  of  his  people.  The  fire  out  of 
which  Joshua  had  been  rescued  as  a  brand  was  neither  the 
evil  which  had  come  upon  him  through  neglecting  the 
building  of  the  Temple  (as  some  German  expositors 
explain),  nor  the  guilt  of  allowing  his  sons  to  marry 
foreign  wives  (which  the  Jewish  Targum,  followed  by 
Rashi  and  Kimchi,  oblivious  of  the  anachronism,  assert) ; 
for,  as  Keil  well  observes,  in  the  former  case  the  accusation 
would  have  come  too  late,  since  the  building  of  the  Temple 
had  been  resumed  five  months  before  (Hag.  i.  14  com 
pared  with  Zech.  i.  7) ;  and  in  the  latter  case  it  would  have 
been  much  too  early,  since  these  mesalliances  did  not  take 
place  till  fifty  years  afterwards.  No ;  the  words  are  used 
by  the  Great  Advocate  of  the  whole  people,  against  whom, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  the  adversary's  accusations  were 
really  directed,  and  their  general  sense  has  been  well  given 
by  one  of  the  earliest  Church  Fathers — namely,  "  As  if  He 
should  say,  Israel  confessedly  has  sinned,  and  is  liable  to 
these  charges  ;  yet  it  has  suffered  no  slight  punishment ;  it 
has  endured  sufferings,  and  has  scarce  been  snatched  out  of 
them,  as  a  half-burned  brand  out  of  the  fire.  For  not  yet 
had  it  shaken  off  the  dust  of  the  harms  from  the  captivity  ; 
only  just  now,  and  scarcely,  had  it  escaped  the  flame  of  that 
most  intolerable  calamity.  Cease,  then,  imputing  sin  to 
them  on  whom  God  has  had  mercy."  x 

But  though  primarily  the  figure  refers  to  "  the  fire  "  of 
the  Babylonian  Captivity  from  which  the  restored  remnant 
at  the  time  had  been  plucked  as  a  "  brand,"  the  words  are 
designed  also  to  remind  us  of  a  deeper  and  more  general 
truth  in  connection  with  Jewish  history.  Israel  may  be 
said  to  be  always  in  the  fire,  yet  God  never  permits  them 
to  be  wholly  consumed.  Like  the  burning  bush,  the 
symbol  of  this  indestructible  people — it  may  burn,  and 
must  suffer  by  very  reason  of  its  being  in  a  special  sense 

1  Cyril. 


96     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  dwelling-place  of  the  Holy  One,  until  all  its  dross  shall 
have  been  consumed  ;  but  it  cannot  be  destroyed. 

When  God  first  made  His  covenant  with  Abraham,  the 
symbols  of  His  presence,  which  were  meant  to  foreshadow 
His  whole  future  dealings  with  them,  were  "  a  smoking 
furnace  and  burning  lamp,"  or  "  flaming  torch "  (Gen. 
xv.  17).  Already  in  Egypt  they  found  themselves  in  an 
"  iron  furnace  "  (Deut.  iv.  20),  and  from  the  human  point 
of  view  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  they  would 
be  wholly  consumed  ;  but  along  with  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  furnace  of  the  four  hundred  years'  "  affliction,"  there  was 
suspended  the  flaming  torch  of  promise  that  God  would 
ultimately  interpose  on  their  behalf,  and  judge  the  nation 
who  was  oppressing  them,  and  bring  them  out  "  with 
great  substance"  (Gen.  xv.  13,  14). 

Babylon  was  another  such  furnace,  and  though  a 
remnant  had,  according  to  God's  promise,  after  the  seventy 
years,  been  plucked  out  "  as  a  brand  from  the  fire,"  we 
have  to  remember  that  the  Babylonian  Captivity,  in  a  very 
important  sense,  still  lasts,  for  it  inaugurated  the  prophetic 
period  called  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  which  will  only 
be  brought  to  a  close  when  the  kingdom  is  restored,  and 
governmental  power  over  the  earth  is  centred  in  Mount 
Zion.  But  in  this  longer  captivity  also,  in  this  more  fiery 
"  furnace  of  affliction "  (Isa.  xlviii.  i  o),  God  has  not  left 
His  people  without  the  burning  lamp  of  promise  that  they 
shall  never  be  wholly  consumed  ;  that  He  will  never  forget 
the  Covenant  which  He  made  with  their  fathers ;  but  that 
He  would  be  with  them  even  when  they  walk  through  the 
fires  (Isa.  xliii.  2) ;  and  in  the  end,  when  their  sufferings 
reach  their  climax  in  the  great  tribulation,  when  the  filth  of 
the  daughter  of  Zion  shall  finally  have  been  purged  away 
"  by  the  spirit  of  judgment  and  by  the  spirit  of  burning," 
He  would  save  them  as  "  a  brand  from  the  fire,"  and  cause 
them  to  multiply  and  to  be  a  blessing  to  all  the  world. 

If  we  may  digress  for  a  moment  from  the  interpretation 
of  this  familiar  figure,  and  its  primary  significance  in 
relation  to  Israel,  and  make  an  application  of  it  to  the 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH  97 

individual  believer  in  Christ,  we  would  remind  the  reader, 
first,  that  we  have  a  picture  here  of  what,  and  where,  we 
were  in  our  natural  condition.  It  is  true,  as  Keil  contends, 
that  "  fire  is  a  symbol  of  punishment,  not  of  sin,"  but  in  a 
very  real  and  terrible  sense  sin  is  its  own  punishment ; 
and  apart  from  "the  everlasting  burnings"  (Isa.  xxxiii.  14) 
which  await  the  impenitent  in  that  place  where  "  the  fire  is 
never  quenched,"  wickedness  (already  in  this  life)  burneth 
as  a  fire  (Isa.  ix.  18).  And  this,  whether  we  have  been 
conscious  of  it  or  not,  has  been  the  case  with  us  all.  We 
were  in  the  fire  which  indwells  our  nature,  and,  but  for  the 
mercy  of  God,  we  should  have  ultimately  been  altogether 
consumed  by  it. 

But,  secondly,  the  figure  also  reminds  us  of  the  love 
and  compassion  of  our  Redeemer,  Who,  when  there  was 
no  eye  to  pity,  at  the  cost  of  infinite  suffering  to  Himself, 
plucked  us  "  as  brands  from  the  fire,"  and  delivered  us,  not 
only  from  the  punishment  of  sin  in  the  future,  but  from  the 
power  and  dominion  of  sin  in  the  present. 

But  to  proceed  with  the  exposition.  As  already  indicated, 
"  the  filthy  garments  "  in  which  Joshua  was  clad  symbol 
ised  the  sin  with  which  the  nation  as  a  whole  was  defiled, 
and  which  he,  as  high  priest,  represented  in  his  official 
capacity.  This  was  already  clearly  perceived  by  the  Church 
Father  whom  I  have  already  quoted,  who  observes :  "  The 
high  priest  having  been  thus  taken  to  represent  the  whole 
people,  the  filthy  garments  would  be  no  unclear  symbol  of 
the  wickedness  of  the  people ;  for  clad,  as  it  were,  with 
their  sins,  with  the  ill-effaceable  spot  of  ungodliness,  they 
abode  in  captivity  subject  to  retribution,  paying  the  penalty 
of  their  unholy  deeds."  l 

The  figure  of  the  filthy  garments  as  emblematic  of 
moral  pollution  is  also  carried  over  into  the  visions  of 
Zechariah  from  the  former  prophets.  Thus  in  the  confes 
sion  of  the  remnant  of  Israel  in  Isa.  Ixiv.  6  we  read  :  "  For 
we  are  all  become  as  one  that  is  unclean,  and  all  our 
righteousnesses  are  as  a  polluted  garment ;  and  we  all  do  fade 

1  Cyril. 
7 


98     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

as  a  leaf ;  and  our  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  take  us  away'1 
This  is  a  true  picture  of  Israel's  moral  condition  before 
God.  But  in  contrast  to  the  past  and  the  present  there 
are  other  pictures  painted  for  us  by  the  prophets  of  Israel's 
future,  based  on  the  fact  of  God's  election  of  this  nation  to 
be  a  peculiar  people  unto  Himself,  and  on  the  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises  given  to  the  fathers.  The 
Lord  shall  wash  away  "  the  filth  of  the  daughter  of  Zion," 
and  cleanse  her  from  all  her  defilements,  "  and  it  shall  come 
to  pass  that  he  that  is  left  in  Zion,  and  he  that  remainet/t  in 
Jerusalem,  sJiall  be  called  holy,  even  every  one  that  is  written 
among  the  living  in  Jerusalem"  (Isa.  iv.  3,  4  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi. 
16—32).  Then,  in  contrast  to  the  "polluted  garment,"1  the 
same  prophet  sings :  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  Jehovah,  my 
soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  ;  for  He  hath  clothed  me 
with  the  garments  of  salvation,  He  hath  covered  me  with 
the  robe  of  righteousness,  as  a  bridegroom  decked  himself 
with  ornaments  (or,  '  with  his  priestly  head-dress '  or 
'  turban '),  and  as  a  bride  adorneth  herself  with  her  jewels  " 
(Isa.  Ixi.  10). 

Now  this  same  glorious  truth,  so  clearly  announced  in  I 
verbal  prophecy,  is  here  realistically  set  forth  to  Zechariah  j 
in  symbol.      The  symbol,   however,  is   immediately    inter 
preted  by  the  Angel  of  Jehovah   Himself,  who,  after  com 
manding    the  attendant  angels  "  who    stood    by,"   saying,  I 
"  Take  away  the   filthy  garments   from   him,"  addresses  the 
comforting  words  to  Joshua  himself:  "  Behold  I  have  caused 
thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee"  (which,  as  already  pointed 
out,  answers  to    the   glorious  promise  in   ver.   9  :    "  /  will 
remove  the  iniquity  of  the  land  in  one  day "),  "  and  I  will 
clothe  thee  with  rich  apparel";  which,  in   brief,  answers  to 
the    garments    of  salvation    and    pure    robe    of    Messiah's 
own    perfect  righteousness,  in   which   Israel  shall  then    be 
attired. 

But  the  word  nwnp,  machalatsoth,  which  is  in  the 
plural,  translated  in  the  Authorised  Version  "  change  of 
raiment,"  and  in  the  Revised  "  rich  apparel " — and  which  is 

1  Not  "filthy  rags,"  as  rendered  in  the  A.V.  of  Isa.  Ixiv.  6. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH   99 

found  elsewhere  only  in  Isa.  iii.  22,  where  it  is  used  of 
the  "  changeable  suits  of  apparel "  which  the  haughty 
daughters  of  Zion  of  that  time  reserved  to  be  worn  on  great 
occasions — probably  stands  here  for  the  specifically  priestly 
or  high  priest's  outfit ;  and  these  being  put  upon  Joshua 
as  the  representative  of  Israel  Would  indicate,  not  only 
pardon  and  justification  before  the  Lord,  on  the  ground  of 
the  righteousness  which  He  Himself  provides  for  His  people, 
but  their  reinstatement  and  reconsecration  to  their  priestly 
calling  as  a  nation.  And  this,  it  seems  to  me,  is  brought 
out  still  more  clearly  in  the  5th  verse. 

The  prophet  has  hitherto  been  a  silent  but  eager 
spectator  of  the  wonderful  scene  which  he  was  made  to 
witness,  but  as  he  beholds  the  transformation  which  had 
taken  place  in  the  high  priest's  outfit,  after  the  filthy 
garments  were  taken  from  him,  and  as  the  symbolical 
character  of  the  transaction  becomes  clear  to  him  in  its  very 
process  (since  he  does  not  in  this  vision  ask  for  any 
explanation  of  its  meaning,  nor  is  there  one  given  to  him 
by  the  interpreting  angel),  he  bursts  out  in  the  prayer  that 
the  gracious  work  may  be  completed  :  "  And  I  said,  Let 
them  set  a  fair  (or  '  clean ')  mitre  upon  his  head  " — which 
prayer,  being  in  accordance  with  the  good  pleasure  of 
Jehovah,  and  that  for  which  it  asked  having  apparently 
been  omitted  only  in  order  to  leave  something,  and  that  the 
completion  of  all,  to  be  done  at  the  intercession  of  the 
prophet,  it  is  also  immediately  answered,  "  So  they  set  a 
fair  mitre  (literally,  '  the  mitre,  the  clean  or  fair  one ')  upon 
liis  head" 

Now  the  word  tsaniph  (rendered  "  mitre ")  is  not  "  a 
turban  such  as  might  be  worn  by  anybody "  (as  Koehler 
and  other  commentators  assert),  but  is,  as  Keil  rightly 
explains,  "  the  head-dress  of  princely  persons  and  kings," 
and  is  here  used  as  a  synonym  for  mitsnepheth,  which  is  the 
technical  word  for  the  tiara  prescribed  for  the  high  priest  in 
the  law. 

And  this  mitre,  or  turban,  was  the  glory  and  comple 
ment  of  the  high  priest's  sacred  and  symbolical  attire — the 


ioo     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

portion  of  his  dress  "  in  which  he  carried  his  office,  so  to 
speak,  upon  his  forehead "  ; l  for  to  it  was  attached  the 
plate  of  pure  gold  with  the  words  fljn*?  EHp — qodesh 
layehovah  \  "  Holy  to  Jehovah,"  engraven  on  it.  "  It  shall 
be  always  upon  his  forehead,"  we  read,  "  that  he  may 
bear  the  iniquity  of  the  holy  things  which  the  children 
of  Israel  shall  hallow,  .  .  .  that  they  may  be  accepted  before 
the  Lord"  (Ex.  xxviii.  36—38).  The  answer,  therefore, 
of  the  prophet's  prayer,  and  the  putting  of  the  fair  mitre 
upon  Joshua's  head,  signified  in  his  own  case  his  full  equip 
ment  and  fitness  for  his  high-priestly  functions ;  and  in 
relation  to  the  people,  the  removal  of  their  guilt,  and  an 
assurance  of  their  acceptance  before  the  Lord. 

But  we  have  also  to  remember  that  the  Aaronic  priest 
hood,  summed  up  as  it  was  in  the  person  of  the  high  priest, 
while  appointed  to  meet  Israel's  felt  need  of  a  Mediator 
between  them  and  God,  was  at  the  same  time  designed  not 
only  to  foreshadow  some  of  the  aspects  of  the  everlasting 
priesthood  of  Him  Who  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us,  but  to  be  also  a  continual  reminder  of  God's  purpose 
with  the  nation  as  a  whole,  and,  symbolically  at  least,  ever 
to  keep  before  them  the  significance  of  priesthood,  which 
is  to  be  "chosen  "  ;  to  be  "  His,"  in  a  peculiar  sense ;  to  be 
"  holy,"  and  to  "  draw  near  "  unto  Him  in  priestly  service 
and  intercession  (Num.  xvi.  5). 

To  the  ultimate  realisation  of  God's  original  purpose  in 
the  election  and  call  of  His  people,  that  they  should  be 
unto  Him  "  a  kingdom  of  priests  and  an  holy  nation  " 
(Ex.  xix.  5,  6),  the  prophetic  Scriptures  bear  unanimous 
testimony ;  and  the  wonderful  transformation  which 
Zechariah  is  permitted  to  witness  in  this  vision,  in  the 
case  of  Joshua,  symbolically  sets  forth  the  same  great  truth, 
and  describes  the  change  which  will  come  over  Israel  as  a 
nation,  and  their  equipment  in  that  day  when  they  shall  be 
named  throughout  the  earth  "  the  priests  of  Jehovah,"  and 
when  men  everywhere  shall  call  them  "  the  ministers  of 
our  God  "  (Isa.  Ixi.  6). 

1  Keil. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH    101 

And  the  process  which  the  prophet  witnesses  in  the 
case  of  Joshua  as  the  representative  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
answers  also  to  the  experience  of  each  individual  believer. 

By  nature,  dear  reader,  "  we  are  all " — whether  we 
be  Jew  or  Gentile — "  as  one  that  is  unclean  "  in  God's 
sight,  and  "  all  our  righteousness  " — the  very  best  moral 
outfit  which  we  can  manufacture  for  ourselves — is,  "  as  a 
polluted  garment"  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6),  not  only  of  no  avail,  but, 
together  with  our  sins,  must  be  "  taken  away." 

Man,  in  his  own  name,  and  on  the  ground  of  his  own 
merits,  has  no  approach  and  no  standing  in  the  presence  of 
God — he  must  find  his  moral  fitness  outside  of  himself  if 
he  desires  to  "  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord,  and  to 
stand  in  His  holy  place." 

There  must  first  be  a  stripping  of  self.  Like  the  great 
and  blessed  Apostle,  we  must  each  one  be  brought  to  say  : 
"  What  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for 
Christ.  Yea  verily,  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss,  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord  :  for 
Whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  do  count 
them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in 
Him,  not  having  my  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the 
law,  but  that  which  is  through  faith  in  Christ,  the  righteous 
ness  which  is  of  God  through  faith  "  (Phil.  iii.  7-9). 

From  the  very  beginning  of  the  history  of  redemption 
we  have  the  same  truth  set  forth  under  the  same  figure. 
Already  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  as  soon  as  sin  entered  into 
the  world,  and  man,  losing  the  consciousness  of  God, 
became  self-conscious,  we  read  of  the  man  and  the  woman 
that  "  they  sewed  fig-leaves  together,  and  made  themselves 
aprons."  These  "  aprons  "  or  "  girdles  "  which  men  continue 
to  sew  or  "  weave "  for  themselves  (Isa.  lix.  6)  are  of  no 
avail  to  hide  their  shame  or  to  cover  their  misery.  But 
already  then,  God  in  His  infinite  compassion  began  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  man  by  direct  promise,  and  to  set  it 
forth  also  by  type.  He  not  only  announced  the  coming  of 
"  the  Seed  of  the  woman,"  who  should  bruise  the  serpent's 
head  and  destroy  the  devil  and  his  works  (Gen.  iii.  15), 


ro2     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

but  Jehovah  God,  we  read,  also  "  made  for  Adam  and  his 
wife  coats  of  skins  (from  animals  which  He  probably  first 
commanded  the  man  to  slay)  and  clothed  them "  (Gen. 
iii.  21). 

And  these  two  "  garments  " — the  one  symbolic  of  the 
meetness  for  fellowship  with  God,  which  man  tries  to  work 
out  for  himself,  and  the  other  of  the  beautiful  robe  of 
Messiah's  own  righteousness  which  is  provided  for  all  who, 
conscious  of  their  own  utter  unworthiness  to  appear  in  His 
presence  on  the  ground  of  anything  in  themselves,  look  for 
the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life 
(Jude  21) — are  contrasted  throughout  Scripture  until  the 
day  when  the  "  wedding  feast "  which  the  Great  King 
made  for  His  Son,  to  which  men  are  now  invited,  merges 
into  the  "  marriage  of  the  Lamb  "  and  "  the  great  supper  of 
God."  Then  there  shall  be  a  final  scrutiny  and  separation 
between  those  arrayed  in  "  fine  linen,  bright  and  pure  "  and 
clothed  in  "  festal  attire,"  and  those  who  refused  to  put 
on  the  wedding  robe  provided  by  the  King,  because  they 
deceived  themselves,  or  made  belief  to  think  that  their  own 
"  polluted  garment "  was  good  enough :  these  shall  then 
be  bound  hand  and  foot  and  cast  into  outer  darkness, 
where  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth 
(Matt.  xxii.  1-14;  Rev.  xix.  6-18). 

And  this  "  robe  of  righteousness,"  which  is  ours  first  of 
all  by  faith,  and  which  is  the  only  ground  of  our  standing 
before  God,  becomes  also  a  blessed  subjective  experimental 
reality  to  the  Christian. 

In  this  world  men  walk  in  a  vain  show,  and  there  is 
often  no  inward  correspondence  between  their  actual 
character  and  the  robe  of  office  which  they  wear.  There 
are  kings  who  are  not  kingly,  princes  who  are  by  no  means 
princely,  and  priests  who  are  far  from  being  priestly  ;  but 
it  can  never  be  so  in  the  kingdom  of  God — in  it  there  are 
no  deceiving  appearances.  As  many  as  are  justified  in 
Messiah's  righteousness  are  also  being  regenerated  and 
sanctified  by  His  blessed  Spirit,  and  there  is  not  one 
arrayed  in  the  beautiful  robe  of  His  perfection  who  does 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH    103 

not  also  make  it  the  aim  of  his  life  to  perfect  holiness  in 
the  fear  of  God  now,  and  who  shall  not  in  the  end  be 
conformed  to  His  image,  and  be  actually  and  fully  like 
Him  in  character. 

And  what  Israel  shall  be  nationally  in  the  day  when, 
stripped  of  their  own  filthy  garments,  they  are  clothed 
in  machalatsoth  (the  new  priestly  outfit),  and,  with  the  fair 
mitre  with  qodesli  layehovaJi  on  their  foreheads,  go  forth 
as  "  the  priests  of  Jehovah  "  and  as  "  the  ministers  of  our 
God  "  among  the  nations — that  also  all  believers  in  Christ 
are  already  now  as  individuals.  We,  too,  are  "  a  chosen 
generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  people  for 
God's  oivn  possession,"  and  are  sent  forth  into  the  world,  not 
only  with  our  lips,  but  also  in  our  lives  and  conduct,  "  to 
show  forth  the  praises  (the  excellences)  of  Him  Who  hath 
called  us  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light." 

But  let  us  now  proceed  to  the  second  half  of  this 
chapter. 

The  symbolical  transaction  of  the  removal  of  the  filthy 
garments  from  Israel's  high  priest,  and  his  being  fitted  out 
in  machalatsoth^  or  "  rich  apparel,"  with  the  "  clean  mitre  " 
on  his  head,  is  followed  by  a  solemn  charge  and  most 
glorious  promises. 

"And  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  protested  unto  Joshua, 
saying,  Thus  saith  Jefwvah  of  hosts :  If  thou  wilt  walk  in 
My  ways,  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  My  charge,  then  thou  also 
s halt  judge  My  house,  and  shalt  also  keep  My  courts,  and  I 
will  give  thee  places  to  walk  among  these  that  stand  by" 

The  word  va-ya-ad  ("  protested ")  means  solemnly  to 
protest,  or  "  testify."  Etymologically  it  signifies  "  to  call 
God  to  witness."  It  occurs,  for  instance,  in  the  words  of 
Solomon  to  Shimei,  "  Did  I  not  make  thee  swear  by 
Jehovah,  and  protested  unto  thee,"  etc.  (i  Kings  ii.  21) — 
and  is  intended  to  express  the  solemnity  and  importance  of 
the  charge  about  to  be  made. 

The  expressions  "  Walk  in  My  ways  "  and  "  Keep  My 
charge "  (mishmarti  thislimor]  are  frequently  used  in  the 
Pentateuch  for  "  holding  on  in  the  way  of  life,  well-pleasing 


i04     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

to  God,  and  for  keeping  the  charge  given  by  God."  1  It 
was  the  injunction  of  the  dying  David  to  Solomon  :  "  Keep 
the  charge  of  the  Lord  thy  God  to  walk  in  His  ways,  to 
keep  His  statutes."  The  first  part  of  the  charge,  "If 
thou  wilt  walk  in  My  ways,"  refers  particularly  to  Joshua's 
personal  attitude  towards  the  Lord — to  fidelity  in  his 
personal  relations  to  God  ;  and  the  second,  "If  thou  wilt 
keep  My  charge,"  to  the  faithful  performance  of  his  official 
duties  as  high  priest. 

And  the  reward  of  his  thus  (in  his  personal  and  official 
capacity)  studying  to  present  himself  approved  unto  God, 
will  be  (a)  "  Then  thou  also  shalt  judge  My  house."  "  My 
house "  may  be  used  metaphorically  of  the  people,  as  in 
Num.  xii.  7  :  "  My  servant  Moses,  .  .  .  who  is  faithful  in 
all  My  house,"  and  the  judging  of  the  house  would  in  that 
case  refer  to  the  high  priest's  function  as  the  representative 
of  God  in  all  matters  of  controversy,  to  give  the  sentence  of 
judgment  (Deut.  xvii.  8-10);  or  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  and 
Pusey  may  be  right  in  limiting  it  to  the  high  priest's 
administration  of  the  literal  House  or  Temple — to  the 
decisions,  namely,  which  devolved  upon  him  in  all  matters 
of  the  sanctuary.  Probability  is  added  to  this  more 
limited  meaning  of  the  expression  by  the  next  parallel 
clause,  which  certainly  is  to  be  understood  in  a  literal  sense 
as  referring  to  the  Temple,  namely,  (fr)  "  And  shalt  also  keep 
My  courts" — as  a  faithful  watchman  or  porter,  not  only  "  to 
keep  away  everything  of  an  idolatrous  nature  from  the 
House  of  God,"  but  to  see  to  it  that  nothing  that  is  unclean 
or  which  defileth  shall  enter  into  it  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  19). 
(c)  But  the  climax  of  promise  in  this  verse  is  reached  in  the 
last  clause,  "  And  I  will  give  thee  places  to  walk  among 
these  that  stand  by."  The  Hebrew  word  D'WMDj  matilekhim, 
translated  "  places  to  walk,"  and  which  the  Revised  Version 
renders  "  a  place  of  access,"  has  been  variously  translated 
and  interpreted  by  different  commentators.  Thus  Gesenius, 
Hengstenberg,  Hoffmann,  etc.,  have  rendered  the  sentence, 
"  I  will  give  thee  leaders  among  those  that  stand  by."  But 

1  Pusey. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH    105 

the  rendering  in  the  Authorised  Version,  which  is  supported 
by  almost  all  modern  scholars,  is  doubtless  the  true  one. 

"  These  that  stand  by  " — as  we  see  by  comparing  the 
expression  with  ver.  4 — are  the  angels,  who  were  in 
attendance  on  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  and  who  "  stood  before 
Him "  ready  to  carry  out  His  behests.  The  promise  is 
usually  limited  by  Christian  commentators  to  signify  that 
God  would  yet  give  to  Joshua,  and  to  the  priesthood 
generally,  fuller  and  nearer  access  to  Him  than  they 
possessed  hitherto,  or  than  was  possible  in  the  old  dispensa 
tion  ;  but  the  Jewish  Targum  is,  I  believe,  nearer  the  truth 
when  it  paraphrases  the  words,  "  In  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  I  will  revive  thee,  and  give  thee  feet  walking  among 
these  seraphim."  Thus  applied  to  the  future,  the  sense  of 
the  whole  verse  would  be  this :  "  If  thou  wilt  walk  in  My 
ways  and  keep  My  charge,  thou  shalt  not  only  have  the 
honour  of  judging  My  house  and  keeping  My  courts,  but 
when  thy  work  on  earth  is  done  thou  shalt  be  transplanted 
to  higher  service  in  heaven,  and  '  have  places  to  walk  ' 
among  these  pure  angelic  beings  who  stand  by  Me, 
hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  My  word"  (Ps.  ciii.  20,  21). 
Note  the  "  ifs  "  in  this  verse,  my  dear  reader,  and  lay  to 
heart  the  fact  that,  while  pardon  and  justification  are  the 
free  gifts  of  God  to  all  that  are  of  faith,  having  their  source 
wholly  in  His  infinite  and  sovereign  grace,  and  quite  apart 
from  work  or  merit  on  the  part  of  man,  the  honour  and 
privilege  of  acceptable  service  and  future  reward  are  con 
ditional  on  our  obedience  and  faithfulness  :  therefore  seek 
by  His  grace  and  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit  to  "  walk  in 
His  ways  and  to  keep  His  charge,"  and  in  all  things,  even 
if  thine  be  the  lot  of  a  "  porter ""  or  "  doorkeeper  "  in  the 
House  of  God,  to  present  thyself  approved  unto  Him,  in 
remembrance  of  the  day  when  "  we  must  all  be  manifested 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  that  each  one  may 
receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  according  to  what  he 
hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad  "  (2  Cor.  v.  10). 

But  there  are  still  greater  and  more  wonderful  promises 
following,  in  vers.  8  to  10;  and  to  rouse  Joshua,  and  us 


106     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

also  through  him,  to  a  sense  of  their  significance  and  im 
portance,  his  attention  is  again  attracted  by  the  words, 
"  Hear  now,  O  Joshua  " — not  only  with  the  outer  ear,  but 
with  the  ears  of  the  heart,  namely,  hearken  and  consider. 

The  words  lia  koJien  Jia-gadol — the  high  priest — which 
are  added,  are  intended  once  more  to  remind  us  that  it  is 
not  in  his  private  personal  capacity,  but  as  the  head  of  his 
order  and  official  representative  of  the  people,  that  he  is  thus 
addressed.  This  is  made  clear  by  the  words  which  immedi 
ately  follow :  "  Thou  and  thy  fellows  which  sit  before  thee, 
for  they  are  men  which  are  a  sign" 

"  Thy  fellows  "  (or  "  companions  ")  which  sit  before,  are 
the  ordinary  priests  who,  in  meetings  of  the  order  for  the 
purpose  of  discussing  or  deciding  matters  connected  with 
their  office,  "  sat  before "  the  high  priest,  who  was  the 
president  of  the  assembly  * — not  that  they  were  there  and 
then  sitting  before  Joshua.  The  words  anshei  mopheth, 
rendered  in  the  Authorised  Version  "  men  wondered  at," 
and  in  the  Revised  Version  "  men  that  are  a  sign,"  are  men 
who  attract  attention  to  themselves  by  something  striking, 
and  are  types  of  what  is  to  come.  Thus  Isaiah's  sons,  with 
their  prophetic  names,  Shear  Jashub  ("  a  remnant  shall 
return  "),  Maher-shalal-hash-baz  ("  Haste  spoil  speed  prey  "), 
were,  with  his  own  name  "  Isaiah,"  which  signifies  "  the 
salvation  of  Jehovah,"  for  signs  and  mopKthim — portents 
and  types  to  the  people  of  what  was  going  to  take  place  in 
the  nation  (Isa.  viii.  I  8  ;  see  also  Isa.  xx.  3  ;  Ezek.  xii.  6- 
11).  And  if  we  ask  wherein  were  Joshua  and  the  whole 
order  of  Aaronic  priesthood  portents  or  types  of  things 
which  were  then  yet  to  come,  the  answer  is  that  in  their 
persons  they  were  imperfect  images  of  the  true  Priest  after 
the  order  of  Melchizedek,  "  who  is  made,  not  after  the  law 
of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless 

1  We  find  the  expression  in  2  Kings  iv.  38  and  in  vi.  I,  used  of  the  sons  of  the 
prophets  as  "  sitting  before  "  their  master  Elisha  ;  and  in  Ezekiel  it  is  used  again 
and  again  of  the  elders  of  Judah  who  came  and  "  sat  before  "  the  prophet,  profess 
ing  the  desire  to  be  taught  by  him  the  Word  of  God  (Ezek.  viii.  I,  xiv.  i,  and 
xx.  i).  Thus  also  in  later  times  the  Rabbinical  students  "sat  before"  and  "at 
the  feet  of  "  their  Rabbis,  in  the  ycshibahs  or  Talmudic  seats  of  learning. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH    107 

life,"  and  whose  priesthood  is  therefore  "  unchangeable  "  ; 
and  in  their  ministry,  the  essential  part  of  which  was  "  to 
make  atonement " — but  which  in  the  old  economy  could 
never  be  perfectly  accomplished,  since  "  it  was  impossible 
that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  should  take  away  sins  " — 
they  typified  the  great  redeeming  work  of  Him  who,  through 
the  Eternal  Spirit  offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God, 
and  thus  once  and  for  ever  "  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice 
of  Himself." 

But  Kliefoth,  Keil,  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  and  Pusey 
may  be  right  in  considering  that  the  words  that  Joshua 
and  the  other  priests  are  anshei  mopheth — men  who  are  a 
portent  or  type — have  a  reference  also  to  the  previous 
incidents  of  the  vision.  "  The  vision  had  pictured  to  the 
eye  of  the  priest-prophet  the  manner  in  which  the  priest 
hood  of  Israel,  represented  by  Joshua,  though  defiled  with 
iniquity,  had  been  cleansed  by  Divine  grace,  and  rendered 
acceptable  to  God.  By  that  grace  priest  and  people  had 
been  snatched  like  half-burnt  brands  from  the  fire  of  a  well- 
deserved  punishment.  That  deliverance  was,  however, 
typical  of  a  greater  salvation,  which  the  angel  was  now 
about  to  reveal.  Hence  Joshua  and  his  fellows  were  typical 
men."  1  "  For  this  miracle  of  grace  which  has  been  wrought 
for  them  points  beyond  itself  to  an  incomparable,  greater, 
and  better  act  of  the  sin-absolving  grace  of  God  which  is 
still  in  the  future."  2 

The  key  and  explanation  of  the  enigmatic  words  ad 
dressed  to  Joshua,  and  to  his  fellow  priests  "  that  sat  before 
him,"  are  contained  in  the  last  sentence  of  the  8th  verse : 

"  For,  behold,  I  will  bring  forth  My  servant  the  Branch" 

This  and  the  words  which  immediately  follow  in  the 
9th  verse  form  one  of  the  richest  and  most  beautiful 
Messianic  passages  in  the  Old  Testament ;  and  again,  on 
careful  examination,  we  find  it  to  be  (as  is  the  manner  of 
Zechariah)  a  terse  summary  of  glorious  announcements 
concerning  the  coming  Redeemer  in  the  "  former  prophets." 
Thus,  "  My  Servant "  is  the  title  of  Messiah  in  the  second 
1  Wright.  *  Keil. 


io8     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

half  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  and  our  minds  are  taken 
back  to  such  passages  as,  "  Behold  My  servant,  whom  I 
uphold ;  Mine  Elect,  in  whom  My  soul  delighteth.  I  have 
put  My  Spirit  upon  Him  ;  He  shall  bring  forth  judgment 
unto  the  Gentiles.  .  .  .  It  is  a  light  thing  that  thou  sJiouldest 
be  My  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  Jacob,  and  to  restore 
the  preserved  of  Israel :  I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  of 
the  Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  My  salvation  unto  the  end  of 
the  earth" l  But  it  is  perhaps  particularly  to  Isa.  liii. — 
"  the  crown  of  all  Old  Testament  prophecy,"  as  it  has  been 
well  called — that  our  thoughts  are  directed  by  the  introduc 
tion  of  this  title  of  Messiah  in  our  prophecy — to  the  innocent 
and  absolutely  holy  One  who  is  wounded  for  our  trans 
gressions,  bruised  for  our  iniquities,  who  pours  out  His  soul 
unto  death  as  an  atonement  for  sin — to  the  "Righteous 
Servant "  through  the  knowledge  of  whom  the  many  are 
justified,  or  "  made  righteous,"  and  in  whose  redeeming 
work  Zechariah,  like  Isaiah  himself  and  all  the  other 
prophets,  saw  the  solution  of  the  great  moral  problem,  how 
those  morally  defiled,  as  Joshua  was  represented  to  be  in 
his  filthy  garments,  ca/i  be  acquitted  and  justified  by  a  holy 
God,  and  how  "  the  iniquity  of  the  land  shall  be  removed  " 
in  one  day. 

But  the  designation,  "  My  Servant "  stands  here  in 
combination  with  another  well-known  Messianic  title,  which 
in  the  visions  of  Zechariah  is  turned  into  a  proper  name  of 
the  promised  Deliverer — "  My  Servant  the  Branch" z 

1  Isa.  xlii.  1-6,  xlix.  6. 

2  Kimchi's  comment  on  the  words  "  My  Servant  the  Branch  "  is  :  "  This  is 
Zerubbabel  "  ;  but  the  interpretation  thus  proposed  is  (as  shown  in  a  note  by 
Dr.  Alexander  McCaul  in  his  translation  of  Kimchi's  Commentary)  untenable. 
"  Kimchi  here  follows  Rashi  in  interpreting  '  My  servant  the  Branch  '  of  Zerub 
babel.     Their  reason  for  this  probably  was  that  if  they  acknowledged  the  person 
thus  designated  in   this  chapter  to  be  the  Messiah,  they  must  have  made  the 
same   admission   in   the  parallel  passage,  chap.  vi.    12  ;  and  by  so  doing  they 
would  have  admitted  that  Messiah  was  to  be  a  priest  as  well  as  a  king. 

"  Perhaps  they  also  saw  some  polemical  danger  in  this  chapter,  in  connecting 
the  promise  of  the  Messiah  with  the  promise  occurring  in  the  next  verse,  '  To 
remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in  one  day,'  which  would  seem  to  favour  the 
Christian  doctrine  that  the  Messiah  '  by  one  offering  perfected  for  ever  them  that 
are  sanctified'  (Heb.  x.  14).  But,  however  that  be,  the  interpretation  which 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH    109 

In  the  former  prophets  we  find  Tsemach  first  used 
as  a  title  of  Messiah  by  Isaiah  in  chap,  iv.,  where,  too,  it 
stands  in  connection  with  the  prophecy  of  the  washing 
away  of  "  the  filth  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  "  and  the  purg 
ing  of  the  blood  of  Jerusalem  from  the  midst  of  her,"  so 
that  all  that  shall  be  left  in  Zion,  and  he  that  remaineth  in 
Jerusalem,  shall  be  called  holy,  "  even  every  one  that  is 
written  among  the  living  in  Jerusalem."  Then  Jeremiah, 
in  chaps,  xxiii.  and  xxxiii.  15,  uses  the  term  Tsemakh 
Tsaddik,  "  the  Branch  of  Righteousness,"  or  "  Righteous 
Branch,"  as  a  designation  of  the  Divine  King  who  should 
spring  out  of  David's  line,  in  whose  days  Judah  shall  be 
saved,  and  Israel  dwell  safely,  and  whose  name  shall  be 
called  Jehovah  Tsidkenu. 

Including,  therefore,  the  prophecies  of  Zechariah,  we  find 
the  Messiah  brought  before  us  in  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  by  this  title  of  TsemacJi  in  four  different  aspects 
of  His  character : 

(1)  As  the  ideal  King  who  shall  reign  in  righteousness 
— the  Branch  of  David   in   whom  shall  be  fulfilled  all  the 
promises  made  to  the  Davidic  house  (Jer.  xxiii.  5,  6,  xxxiii. 
15,  1 6). 

(2)  As  "  My  Servant  the  Branch  "  (Zech.  iii.  8). 

(3)  As  "  The  Man  whose  name  is  the  Branch  "  (Zech. 
vi.  12). 

they  propose  is  not  tenable  :  1st,  Because  it  departs  from  the  old  received  inter 
pretation  of  the  Jewish  Church.  Both  Kimchi  and  Rashi  admit  that  there  was 
an  interpretation  referring  this  passage  to  the  Messiah  ;  and  Jonathan,  in  his 
Targum  interprets  both  these  passages  of  the  Messiah  ;  2nd,  Because  it  contra 
dicts  the  analogy  of  the  prophetic  language.  Messiah  is  elsewhere  called  '  The 
Branch,'  as  in  Isa.  iv.  2  and  Jer.  xxiii.  5,  in  both  of  which  passages  Kimchi 
himself  freely  admits  that  '  Branch  '  means  the  Messiah,  yd,  Because  the  words 
do  not  agree  with  the  circumstances  of  Zerubbabel.  God  says,  '  I  will  bring  My 
Servant  the  Branch.'  But,  as  Aharbanel  remarks,  Zerubbabel  had  come  long 
before,  and  was  already  a  prince  among  them.  Kimchi  felt  this  difficulty,  and 
therefore  tries  to  twist  the  words  to  mean  '  that  his  dignity  should  increase  still 
more,  and  his  greatness  should  grow  as  a  branch,'  etc.  But  Abarbanel  remarks 
again  that  God  does  not  say  that  He  will  make  him  great,  but  that  He  will  bring 
him  ;  and  adds,  that  '  after  this  prophecy  Zerubbabel  attained  to  neither  royalty, 
dominion,  or  other  dignity  more  than  be  already  possessed ' "  (see  Abarbanel, 
Comment,  in  loc. ). 


no     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

(4)  As  "  The  Branch  of  Jehovah"  who  in  that  day  shall 
be  "  for  beauty  and  for  glory,  ...  for  excellency  and 
comeliness  to  them  that  should  be  of  the  escaped  in  Israel  " 
(Isa.  iv.  2).  The  promised  King — the  Servant — the  Man 
— the  Branch,  or  Son  of  God. 

And  this  fourfold  prophetic  picture  of  Messiah  on  the 
pages  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  I  have  elsewhere  shown 
many  years  ago,1  answers  to  the  fourfold  portraiture  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  has  given  us  in  the  four  different  Gospels 
of  the  Christ  of  history.  One  probable  reason  why  the 
Divine  artist  has  seen  fit  to  sketch  the  person  and  character 
of  Messiah  for  us  in  four  Gospels  instead  of  one,  has  been 
well  expressed  by  the  late  Professor  Godet,  who  says  :  "  Just 
as  a  gifted  painter,  who  wished  to  immortalize  for  a  family 
the  complete  likeness  of  the  father  who  had  been  its  glory, 
would  avoid  any  attempt  at  combining  in  a  single  portrait 
the  insignia  of  all  the  various  offices  he  had  filled ;  at  re 
presenting  him  in  the  same  picture  as  general  and  as 
magistrate ;  as  man  of  science  and  as  father  of  a  family  ; 
but  would  prefer  to  paint  four  distinct  portraits,  each  of 
which  should  represent  him  in  one  of  these  characters.  So 
has  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  order  to  preserve  for  mankind  the 
perfect  likeness  of  Him  who  was  its  chosen  Representative, 
God  in  man,  used  means  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  the 
writers,  whom  He  has  made  His  organs,  four  different 
images." 

And  these  "  four  different  images "  in  the  historic 
narrative  correspond  in  a  striking  manner,  as  already  stated, 
with  the  fourfold  outline  of  Messiah's  character  as  delineated 
on  the  page  of  prophecy.  Although  the  same  blessed 
features  of  our  Redeemer  are  easily  recognisable  in  all  the 
Gospels,  there  is  a  special  aspect  of  His  character  brought 
out  in  each,  (i)  In  Matthew,  which  is  primarily  "  the  Jewish 
Gospel,"  and  was  very  probably  in  the  first  instance  written 
in  Hebrew  or  Aramaic  (though  afterwards  rewritten  by 
the  same  evangelist  in  Greek),  we  have  the  promised 

1  In  Rays  of  Messiah's  Glory,  2nd  edition,   published  in  1886,   now  out  of 
print. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH  in 

Malkha  Meshicha  —  the  theocratic  "  King  Messiah  "  — 
presented  to  us,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy,  "  Behold, 
I  will  raise  unto  David  a  Righteous  Branch,  and  a  King 
shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  shall  execute  judgment  and 
justice  in  the  earth,"  gradually  unfolded  before  us.  In 
keeping  with  its  primary  design  is  its  very  style.  The 
keynote  throughout  is  "  that  it  might  be  fulfilled."  For 
this  reason  also  is  Christ  presented  to  us  in  this  Gospel, 
more  than  in  any  of  the  others,  as  the  Prophet  like  unto 
Moses,  the  great  lawgiver  of  the  Old  Covenant,  and  yet 
above  Moses  and  the  whole  prophetic  order,  not  only  in  the 
new  unfolding  and  application  of  the  law  in  the  so-called 
"  Sermon  on  the  Mount,"  but  in  His  four  other  great  dis 
courses,  to  which  the  narrative  portion  supplied  by  Matthew 
forms  the  framework.  For  the  same  reason  also  the 
genealogy  in  this  Gospel  traces  back  Christ's  earthly  descent 
only  as  far  as  Abraham,  for  the  aim  of  the  Evangelist  is  to 
unfold  the  thesis  laid  down  in  the  ist  verse,  which  is  in 
itself  a  summary  and  fulfilment  of  all  the  Messianic  hope 
of  the  Old  Testament :  "  The  book  of  the  generation  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David,  the  son  of  Abraham. 

(2)  But  if  "  Behold  thy  King"  (Zech.  ix.  9)  is  the  key 
note  of  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  the  inscription  written  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  on  the  Gospel  of  Mark  is,  "  Behold  My 
Servant."  This,  the  shortest  of  the  four  Gospels,  which, 
though  written  by  the  pen  of  John  Mark,  has  most  probably 
"  come  to  us  from  the  lips  of  Peter  " — and  was  apparently 
designed  in  the  providence  of  God  primarily  for  the  practical, 
busy  Roman  world — is  a  graphic  and  living  sketch  of  that 
Blessed  One  Who  spoke  of  Himself  in  the  Spirit  long  before 
His  advent — "  Lo  I  am  come :  in  the  scroll  of  the  book  it 
is  written  of  Me,  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O  My  God,  yea, 
Thy  law  is  within  My  heart."  It  is  a  record,  not  so  much 
of  the  words  of  Jesus  as  of  His  acts.  It  is  composed  of 
two  sections  only — the  ministry  in  Galilee  and  the  death 
on  Calvary. 

"  His  ministry  moves  in  widening  circles — first  in  the 
synagogue,  then  in  the  open  field,  to  the  interested  groups 


H2     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

who  gathered  round  Him,  afterwards  to  the  teeming 
multitudes."  x 

Characteristic  of  this  Gospel  is  the  rapidity  of  its  move 
ments,  and  the  promptness  of  the  obedience  to  the  Father's 
will  and  to  the  impulses  of  the  Spirit,  expressed  in  the  word 
rendered  "straightway,"  "immediately"  (i.  10-12). 

Mark  gives  no  genealogy,  because  a  servant  needs  not 
such  recommendation,  he  being  judged  by  his  work  alone. 

(3)  But,  if  Matthew  is  the  Gospel  of  the  King  and  the 
Kingdom,  and  Mark  that  of  the  perfect  Servant,  the 
prominent  feature  of  our  Lord  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  which 
probably  was  primarily  intended  for  the  cultured  Greek 
world,  is  that  of  "  the  Son  of  Man''  In  it  Christ  is  por 
trayed  as  the  Man  par  excellence — the  true  Man,  who  is  both 
the  ideal  and  the  representative  of  the  race ;  the  second 
Adam,  who,  in  contrast  to  the  first,  who  brought  sin  and 
ruin  to  the  race,  is  the  Saviour  of  men.  The  chief 
characteristic  of  this  Gospel  is  its  universality.  The  Christ 
depicted  on  its  orderly  pages  is  indeed  the  Messiah  of 
Israel,  "  who  is  sent  in  fulfilment  of  the  promises  made  to 
our  fathers,"  and  of  the  oath  which  God  sware  "  to  our 
father  Abraham "  (i.  67-80) ;  and  Who,  even  after  His 
rejection  by  Israel,  commands  that,  in  the  proclamation  of 
His  gospel  among  all  nations,  His  disciples  should  "  begin 
at  Jerusalem  "  (xxiv.  47) — but  He  is  shown  as  caring  also 
for  all  who  are  sitting  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of 
death.  "  Already  in  the  narrative  of  the  infancy  there  are 
hints  of  the  Light  which  is  to  enlighten  all  nations ;  in  the 
parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan  and  the  recital  of  the 
mission  of  the  seventy,  there  is  the  promise  of  the  advancing 
outreach  of  the  Divine  mercy  to  men  of  every  nation  and 
tongue ;  and  in  the  call  of  Zacchaeus,  the  parable  of  the 
Pharisee  and  the  publican,  and  the  salvation  of  the  penitent 
robber,  we  have  tokens  of  a  grace  which  reaches  out  to  the 
uttermost.  The  author  does  not  aim  at  being  a  theologian  ; 

1  See  the  chapter,  "The  Fourfold  Portrait,"  in  The  Spirit  in  the  Word,  by 
D.  M.  Mclntyre.  The  subject  is  also  fully  and  beautifully  unfolded  in  Bernard's 
Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the  New  Testament,  Lecture  ii. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH    113 

he  is  an  evangelist,  and  his  message  is,  "  The  Son  of  Man 
came  to  seek  and  save  that  which  was  lost." l 

It  is  for  this  reason  also  that  this  evangelist  took  upon 
himself  the  laborious  task  of  tracing  the  genealogy  of  Jesus 
right  back  to  Adam,  in  order  to  show  His  relation  as  the 
promised  "  Seed  of  the  woman,"  not  only  with  Israel,  as  does 
Matthew,  but  with  men  of  all  nations  and  kindreds,  and 
peoples  and  tongues,  who  are  thus  traced  back  to  one 
common  stock. 

(4)  And  the  picture  of  our  Lord  in  the  Gospel  of  John 
is  undoubtedly  that  of  "  the  Branch  of  Jehovah  "  ;  for  though 
it  is  true  that  "  no  other  evangelist  so  sounds  the  depths  of 
our  Lord's  humiliation,  nor  rises  with  such  adequacy  to  the 
exaltation  of  His  glorified  manhood,  as  John,  the  son  of 
Zebedee,  the  eagle  of  the  Church,"  and  it  would  not  be  true 
to  say  that  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  the  emphasis  rests  entirely 
on  the  deity  of  Christ  and  ignores  His  perfect  humanity  ; 
yet  the  light  that  shines  most  transcendently  through  this 
most  sublime  narrative  is  His  Divine  Sons/tip — that  glory 
which  He  had  with  the  Father  from  all  eternity.  Hence 
we  have  no  genealogy  in  this  Gospel  tracing  back  His 
relations  to  Abraham,  for  He  of  Whom  it  speaks  was 
"  before  Abraham  "  (viii.  5  8) ;  nor  yet,  as  in  Luke,  to  Adam, 
for  by  Him  were  all  things  made  (i.  3),  and  Adam  himself 
was  created  in  His  image.  No,  John  traces  not  His  human, 
but  His  divine  pedigree,  and  shows  us  that,  although  the 
Word  "  became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,"  He  that 
tabernacled  with  the  children  of  men  was  none  other  than  the 
Only-begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth,  Who 
in  the  very  "  beginning  "  was  with  God,  and  Himself  was  God. 

But  just  as  in  each  of  the  Gospels,  though  one  feature 
of  our  Lord's  character  is  brought  more  prominently  to  the 
fore,  His  twofold  nature  is  always  steadily  kept  in  view  ;  so 
it  is  also  in  each  of  the  four  different  prophecies  to  which 
we  have  referred.  Jeremiah  speaks  of  Him  as  the  "  Branch 
of  David,"  thus  dwelling  more  particularly  on  His  human 
nature,  but  he  proceeds  to  add  :  "  And  this  is  the  name 

1  The  Spirit  in  the  Word,  by  D.  M.  Mclntyre. 
8 


H4     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

whereby  He  shall  be  called,  Jehovah  our  Righteousness"  by 
which  he  proclaims  Him  to  be  Divine.  Isaiah  introduces 
Him  as  the  Tsemach  Yehovah  (Branch  of  Jehovah},  but  he 
also  designates  Him  PKri  Jia-arets  ("  Fruit  of  the  earth"), 
which,  as  the  construction  demands,  must  be  regarded  as 
another  title  of  the  Tsemach,  and  which  brings  before  us 
more  particularly  His  human  nature,  and  His  relation  to 
our  earth. 

He  is  "  the  Servant "  in  Zechariah,  and  is  pointed  to  as 
the  One  who  will  bring  in  a  perfect  righteousness,  on  the 
ground  of  which  Israel  shall  be  justified  and  the  iniquity  of 
the  land  be  removed  "  in  one  day  " ;  but  it  is  the  Servant, 
"  the  Branch"  and  by  Zechariah's  time  the  title  Tsemach 
had  already  become  a  proper  name  for  the  Messiah,  and 
carries  with  it  all  that  the  former  prophets  had  spoken  of 
His  divinity,  as  well  as  of  His  humanity. 

Lastly,  in  Zech.  vi.,  we  are  told  to  "  behold  the  Man  " ; 
but  this  chapter  proceeds  to  tell  us  that  this  Man  shall 
not  only  rule  and  be  Counsellor  of  Peace,  but  that  He 
shall  be  a  "  Priest  upon  His  throne  " — the  true  Melchizedek, 
the  King  of  Peace,  and  King  of  Righteousness,  Who  unites 
in  His  one  person  different  functions  which  were  formerly 
vested,  not  only  in  different  persons,  but  in  different  tribes. 

The  climax  of  the  Messianic  references  in  this  great 
prophecy  is  reached  in  the  Qth  verse :  "  For  behold,  the 
stone  that  I  have  laid  before  Joshua  ;  upon  one  stone  are 
seven  eyes  :  behold,  I  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof,  and  I 
will  remove  the  iniquity  of  the  land  in  one  day" 

Many  fanciful  explanations  have  been  given  of  this 
beautiful  scripture,  overlooking  the  fact  that  here  again 
(as  I  have  so  frequently  pointed  out  to  be  the  case  in  these 
visions  of  Zechariah)  we  have  a  terse  summary  of  well- 
known  predictions  in  the  former  prophets,  in  the  light  of 
which  we  must  interpret  the  passage.1  "  Behold  the  stone 

1  Baumgarten  thinks  the  stone  laid  before  Joshua  represented  the  jewels 
belonging  to  the  high  priest's  breastplate  (the  Urim  and  Thummim,  which,  by 
the  way,  never  existed  in  the  Second  Temple),  or  even  some  single  precious 
stone  which  supplied  the  place  of  the  jewels  that  were  lost. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH     1 1  5 

which  I  have  laid "  carries  our  minds  back  to  Isa.  xxviii. 
1 6 :  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a 
tried  stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  a  sure  foundation  ;  he 
that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste";  and  to  Ps.  cxviii.  22  : 
"  The  stone  which  the  builders  refused  (or  '  despised ')  is 
become  the  head-stone  of  the  corner." 

There  may  have  been  some  allusion  to  the  foundation- 
stone  of  the  Second  Temple — the  eben  shetiyah,  as  it  was 
afterwards  called — "  the  very  foundation  as  well  as  the 
centre  of  the  world,"  about  which  there  are  many  traditions, 
true  and  false,  absurd  and  beautiful,  in  the  Talmud  and  in 
later  Jewish  Midrashim  ;  but  if  so,  it  is  because  the  literal 
foundation  was  a  type  of  Him  who  is  the  "  precious  corner 
stone  "  and  unshakable  foundation  of  the  spiritual  temple, 
into  which  believers  also  are  built  as  living  stones,  and 
which  through  eternity  shall  be  for  the  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit. 

Upon  this  one  stone  "  are  seven  eyes." 

If,  according  to  Jewish  commentators,  we  are  to  under 
stand  the  words  that  the  eyes  are  directed  toward  this 
stone,  then  they  are  "  the  seven  eyes  of  Jehovah "  (chap, 
vi.  10),  which  have  rested  from  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  upon  this  precious  corner-stone ;  and  the  figure 
would  in  that  case  express,  not  only  the  assurance  of  His 
watchful  care  and  protection  over  it,  but  the  Father's  com 
placency  and  delight  in  His  only-begotten  Son.  Or  the 
sacred  and  covenant  number  "  seven  "  may  be  taken  in  a 

Keil  says  :  "The  stone  is  the  symbol  of  the  Kingdom  of  God."  Hengsten- 
berg  explains  it  as  "the  Kingdom  or  people  of  God,  outwardly  insignificant 
when  compared  with  the  great  mountain  (chap.  iv.  7)  which  symbolises  the 
power  of  the  world  "  ;  and  Kohler  regards  the  stone  as  signifying  Israel,  "which 
nation  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  the  high  priest  Joshua,  that,  by  the  due 
discharge  of  his  high  priestly  office,  the  purity  and  freedom  from  iniquity  required 
by  God  should  be  attained  by  the  people." 

Many  interpret  it  simply  of  the  foundation  of  the  Temple,  while  Von 
Hoffmann  and  others  say  that  "  the  stone  here  represents  the  entire  collection  of 
materials  required  for  the  erection  of  the  (second)  Temple."  All  of  which 
interpretations  are  more  or  less  fanciful  and  beside  the  mark,  since  (as  shown 
above)  "the  Stone"  which  Joshua  was  to  behold,  like  "the  Servant,  the 
Branch,"  ii)  the  previous  verse,  are  well-known  titles  of  Messiah  carried  over  in 
these  visions  of  Zechariah  from  "  the  former  prophets." 


n6     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

more  general  sense  as  meaning  "  all  eyes,"  that  is,  the  eyes 
of  God,  and  of  the  holy  angels,  and  of  men,  all  directed 
toward  Him  thus  symbolised  by  the  Foundation  Stone,  as 
the  object  of  love  and  of  admiration,  of  yearning  desire  and 
hope. 

But  it  seems  to  me  that  the  view  adopted  by  most  of 
the  modern  scholars,  namely,  that  there  were  actually  seven 
eyes  carved,  or  engraven,  on  this  stone  of  vision,  is  most 
probably  the  correct  one,  in  which  case  the  thing  signified 
by  the  symbol  would  be  the  manifold  intelligence  or 
omniscience  of  this  "  Living  Stone " — the  seven  reminding 
us  of  the  sevenfold  plenitude  of  the  One  Spirit  of  Jehovah, 
"  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of 
counsel  and  might,  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear 
of  the  Jehovah,"  which  should  rest  upon  Him,  and  which 
was  so  wonderfully  fulfilled  in  Him  whom  the  New  Testa 
ment  seer  beheld  as  the  Lamb  which  had  been  slain 
"  having  seven  horns  (all  power)  and  seven  eyes  (omnis 
cience),  which  are  the  seven  spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into 
all  the  earth  "  (Rev.  v.  6). 

"  For  this  stone  to  have  seven  eyes,"  says  one  of  the 
Fathers,  "  is  to  retain  in  operation  the  whole  virtue  of  the 
Spirit  of  sevenfold  grace.  For,  according  to  the  distribution 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  one  receives  prophecy,  another  know 
ledge,  another  miracles,  another  kinds  of  tongues,  another 
interpretation  of  words ;  but  no  one  attaineth  to  have  all 
the  gifts  of  that  same  Spirit.  But  our  Creator  taketh  on 
Him  our  infirmities,  because  through  the  power  of  His 
Divinity  He  showed  that  He  had  at  once  in  Him  all  the 
virtues  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  uniting  beyond  doubt  the  bright 
gleams  of  the  sevenfold  constellation."  a 

The  next  sentence  in  this  verse,  hineni  mepJiateach 
pituchah — "Behold  I  will  grave  the  graving  thereof" — is 
probably  not  unconnected  with  the  words  which  we  have 
just  considered,  and  denotes,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  what 
the  prophet  had  seen  on  the 'stone  of  vision,  God  Himself 
would  accomplish  in  the  day  of  fulfilment. 

1  St.  Gregory,  quoted  by  Pusey. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH     117 

What  the  graving  will  be  is  not  stated,  but  those  are 
far  from  the  mark  who  conjecture  some  kind  of  an  inscrip 
tion.  Rather  is  it  that  which  makes  this  Living  Stone  the 
precious  corner-stone  (or,  "  the  corner-stone  of  preciousness" 
as  it  is  literally),  namely,  the  perfect  equipment  of  the 
Messiah  by  the  Father  for  His  Messianic  office  and 
mediatorial  work  of  redemption — the  spiritual  glory  and 
beauty  which  God  would  bestow  upon  Him  when  He  shall 
have  anointed  Him  with  all  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  ; 
which  indeed  had  already  in  symbol  been  set  forth  by  the 
"  seven  eyes  "  which  the  prophet  saw  traced  on  the  stone. 

According  to  the  Talmud,  the  Eben  Shetiyah — the 
foundation-stone  of  the  Second  Temple,  which  was  some 
inches  higher  than  the  level  of  the  Holy  of  Holies — had 
the  sacred  Tetragrammaton  (the  four  Hebrew  letters 
making  up  the  ineffable  name  "  Jehovah  ")  graven  upon  it ; 
and  although  in  later  times  all  sorts  of  absurd  legends 
gathered  around  this  tradition,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
the  fact  itself,  and  the  words  used  in  reference  to  the 
Everlasting  Foundation  of  the  spiritual  temple,  "  Behold,  / 
will  engrave  the  graving  thereof"  may  be  an  allusion  to  it. 

On  Messiah,  too,  the  ineffable  name  was  graven.  Of 
the  Divine  Angel  of  Jehovah  we  read  already  in  the  Old 
Testament, "  My  Name  "  (which  stands  for  all  the  attributes 
of  God's  character,  for  all  the  perfections  of  His  glorious 
Being)  "  is  in  Him."  And,  when  in  the  fulness  of  time,  He 
who  of  old  so  often  appeared  as  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant 
in  the  form  of  man,  became  real  man,  and  "  tabernacled 
among  us,"  then  this  sacred  mystical  "  graving "  became 
more  and  more  clear  and  legible.  Then  "  the  Name " 
became  fully  manifested,  and  men  saw  "  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ." 

But  the  most  glorious  display  of  all  the  attributes 
belonging  to  that  "  holy  Name "  was  when  on  the  cross 
of  shame  He  laid  down  His  life  a  ransom  for  us ;  hence 
those  early  Fathers,  and  some  also  of  the  modern  inter 
preters,  are  not  far  wrong  when  they  say  that  the  "  graving  " 
of  the  stone  took  place  when,  "  through  the  providence  and 


n8     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

will  of  God  He  caused  Him  to  be  wounded  by  the  nails  of 
the  cross  and  the  soldier's  lance."  "  For  what  even  in  the 
body  of  the  Lord  can  be  lovelier  or  more  lightful,"  says  a 
Catholic  writer,  "  than  those  five  wounds,  which  He  willed  to 
retain  in  His  immortal  Being,  lest  the  blessed  work  should 
be  deprived  of  that  splendour  surpassing  far  the  light  of 
sun  and  stars " ;  to  which  I  would  add  the  words  of  yet 
another,  namely :  "  Beautiful  were  the  gifts  and  graces  which 
Christ  received  as  man  ;  but  beautiful  beyond  all  beauty 
must  be  those  glorious  scars  with  which  He  allowed  His 
whole  body  to  be  riven,  that  throughout  the  whole  frame 
His  love  might  be  engraven." 

The  last  sentence  of  this  Qth  verse,  "And  I  will 
remove  the  iniquity  of  this  land  in  one  day"  may  in  a  sense 
be  regarded  as  the  key  to  the  whole  vision,  for  it  demon 
strates  (i)  the  fact  we  have  so  frequently  emphasised  in  the 
course  of  the  exposition,  namely,  that  it  is  to  Israel  as  a 
nation  that  the  vision  primarily  refers,  and  that  what  the 
prophet  beheld  as  happening  to  Joshua  was  meant  typically 
to  set  forth  the  experience  of  the  whole  people,  which,  in 
his  official  capacity  as  high  priest,  he  represented  ;  and  (2) 
that  the  removal  of  Israel's  iniquity,  and  their  acceptance 
and  reinstatement  as  Jehovah's  priestly  nation,  are  yet  to 
take  place  in  the  future. 

For  which  is  this  yom  echad — "  one  day  " — of  which 
the  prophet  speaks  ?  The  Jewish  answer  is  expressed  in 
the  words  of  their  most  popular  commentator,1  who  says, 
"  One  day ;  I  know  not  what  that  day  is."  Christian  com 
mentators  all  substantially  agree  in  saying,  "It  is  the  day 
of  Golgotha,"  which  is  true,  but  yet  does  not  express  the 
whole  truth. 

What  is  here  predicted  will  assuredly  be  fulfilled  only 
on  the  ground  and  as  a  blessed  consequence  of  "  the  day 
of  Golgotha,"  when  Christ  through  the  Eternal  Spirit 
offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God,  and  thus  once  and 
for  all  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself;  but  the 
"  one  day  "  on  which  the  iniquity  of  this  land  and  people 

1  Rashi. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH     119 

shall  be  removed  is  none  other  than  the  "  that  day  "  of  the 
last  chapters  of  this  same  Book  of  Zechariah — the  "  day," 
namely,  of  Israel's  national  repentance  and  great  Day  of 
Atonement,  when  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  shall 
be  poured  out  upon  them,  and  they  shall  look  upon  Him 
whom  they  have  pierced. 

"  In  that  day,"  we  read,  "  there  shall  be  a  great  mourning 
in  Jerusalem  :  .  .  .  every  family  apart  and  their  wives  apart. 
In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  House  of 
David  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  for  sin  and  for 
undeanness"  (Zech.  xii.  10—14  and  xiii.  i). 

"  But,  again  we  may  be  asked,  how  can  this  be  recon 
ciled  with  the  statement  that  the  true  Day  of  Atonement  is 
the  Day  of  Calvary ;  and  was  not  the  '  fountain  for  sin  and 
uncleanness '  opened  when  our  Saviour  was  nailed  to  the 
cross,  and  when  the  soldier  with  the  spear  pierced  His  side, 
and  forthwith  there  came  out  blood  and  water  ? "  Yes, 
but  to  the  sinner  actually  and  experimentally  the  Day  of 
Calvary  is  the  day  when  his  eyes  are  opened  to  the  true 
meaning  to  himself  of  the  great  redeeming  work  there 
accomplished,  and  when  the  Spirit  of  God  applies  Jesus' 
blood  and  righteousness  and  high-priestly  intercessions  to 
his  own  need.  Thus,  "  in  that  day  "  it  will  be  with  Israel 
nationally.1 

A  simple  illustration  from  the  experience  of  Hagar  in 
the  wilderness  of  Beer-sheba  may  help  us  to  understand 
this.  When  the  water  in  her  bottle  was  spent,  and  she 
put  down  the  lad,  as  she  thought  to  die,  she  herself  went  to 
a  distance,  and  in  the  anguish  of  her  spirit  lifted  up  her 
voice  and  wept.  But  God  heard  not  only  her  voice,  but 
the  voice  of  the  lad,  and  had  pity  on  them.  "And  God 
opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well  of  water"  The  well  was 
most  probably  there  all  the  time,  but  her  eyes,  dimmed  by 
her  very  sorrow  and  tears,  could  not  see  it ;  and  it  was  to 
her,  as  she  was  filling  her  skin  bottle,  as  if  the  well  had  just 

1  This  section  about  the  future  prophetic  significance  of  the  Day  of  Atonement 
is  quoted  from  the  chapter,  "  The  Sacred  Calendar  of  the  History  of  Redemption," 
in  Types,  Psalms,  and  Prophecies,  to  which  I  would  refer  the  reader. 


120     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

sprung  up.  So  it  will  be  with  Israel.  The  fountain  for 
sin  and  for  uncleanness  has  been  opened  in  the  wounds  of 
their  Messiah  nineteen  centuries  ago,  but  "  in  that  day," 
when  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  is  poured  out 
upon  them  as  a  nation,  "  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened" 
(Isa.  xxxv.),  and  the  Spirit  of  God  will  apply  to  their 
hearts  and  consciences  as  a  people  the  great  redeeming 
work  accomplished  on  Calvary,  and  the  words  used  in  con 
nection  with  the  Day  of  Atonement  shall  receive  a  fulfil 
ment  as  never  before  :  "  For  on  this  day  He  shall  atone  for 
you  to  cleanse  you  from  all  your  sins  ;  before  Jehovah  ye 
shall  be  clean"  (Lev.  xvi.  30,  Heb.). 

On  that  day  the  high  priest,  as  I  have  fully  described 
in  another  place,1  entered  twice  within  the  veil — first,  with 
the  blood  of  the  sin-offering  for  himself  and  his  house,  and 
then  a  second  time  with  the  blood  of  the  goat  of  the  people's 
sin-offering  on  which  the  lot  fell  "  la-yehovali "  ;  and  it  was 
not  till  he  came  forth  a  second  time,  and  the  remaining 
part  of  the  ceremonial  was  gone  through,  that  the  people 
could  rejoice  in  the  knowledge  that  atonement  was  fully 
accomplished,  the  whole  of  which,  in  this  sense  also,  may 
be  regarded  as  a  figure  of  the  work  of  Christ  in  relation  to 
the  Church  and  to  Israel.  For  Himself,  the  Holy  One 
needed  not  as  the  Aaronic  priests  to  offer  sacrifice,  but  for 
those  who  in  this  interval,  and  in  a  special  sense,  constitute 
His  redeemed  family,  atonement  is  fully  accomplished,  not 
only  as  an  objective  fact,  but  as  a  blessed  subjective  reality  ; 
and  in  proof  that  it  is  not  only  "  finished,"  but  accepted, 
the  Great  High  Priest,  after  His  Resurrection,  showed  Him 
self  again,  "but  not  to  all  the  people"  (Acts  x.  41),  but 
only  to  His  own  family  of  faith. 

But  in  relation  to  Israel  the  High  Priest  may  still  be 
regarded  as  inside  the  veil,  or  in  the  Holy  Place,  and  the 
people  as  "  waiting  without,"  marvelling  that  he  tarries  so 
long  (Luke  i.  10,  21).  But  soon  He  will  come  forth  again, 
in  the  hour  of  their  deepest  sorrow  and  humiliation,  to 
cleanse  them  before  Jehovah,  so  that  they  shall  be  known 

1  See  the  exposition  of  Ps.  xxxii.,  in  Types,  Psalms,  and  Prophecies. 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH     121 

(and  called  in  all  the  earth)  as  "  the  holy  people,  the 
Redeemed  of  the  Lord,"  that  He  may  be  glorified  (Isa. 
Ixii.  12). 

Finally,  "  when  the  high  priest  came  forth  from  the 
sanctuary  and  appeared  again  unto  the  people,  he  first 
dispatched  the  scapegoat  bearing  all  their  iniquities  into 
the  wilderness,  and  then  united  with  them  in  offering  the 
burnt-offering  unto  the  Lord.  And  such  shall  be  the  result 
of  the  Second  Advent  of  our  Saviour.  Then  shall  sin  be 
completely  put  away,  and  every  trace  of  it  removed  for 
ever.  In  one  sense  sin  is  already  put  away — it  is  no  more 
imputed  unto  them  who  believe  in  Jesus ;  but  sin  itself 
remaineth,  yea,  and  will  remain,  until  He  comes  again. 
But  then  it  shall  be  for  ever  banished,  and  all  its  consequences 
shall  be  removed  for  ever.  Then  there  shall  be  no  more 
sin,  nothing  of  it  shall  remain  but  the  blessed  conscious 
ness  that  we  are  redeemed  from  its  power  and  its  curse. 
And  then,  too,  shall  Jesus  and  His  people  unite  to  offer  the 
burnt-offering  unto  God.  Then,  in  the  midst  of  His 
redeemed,  He  shall  head  up  all  their  pure  and  holy  service ; 
and  blessed  and  consecrated  by  the  presence  of  incarnate 
Godhead,  the  untiring  energies  of  the  redeemed  people 
shall  be  for  ever  consuming,  yet  unconsumed,  upon  the 
altar  of  eternal  love." 

It  was  on  the  evening  also  of  the  Day  of  Atonement, 
after  the  complete  cycle  of  seven  sevens  of  years  were 
fulfilled,  that  the  "  Jubilee "  was  proclaimed  (Lev.  xxv. 
9,  10),  which  was  the  signal  of  liberty,  not  only  to  the 
people  but  for  the  land  itself,  which  that  year  was  neither 
to  be  ploughed,  sown,  nor  reaped,  the  typical  significance 
of  which  was  already  discerned  by  the  prophets  in  the  Old 
Testament,  who  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and  by  faith  greeted 
from  afar  the  time  when,  after  Israel's  iniquity  shall  have 
been  purged,  Messiah  will  not  only  "  proclaim  liberty  to 
the  captives,"  *  but  when  the  earth  itself  shall  at  last  enjoy 
her  rest,  and  the  whole  creation,  which  has  been  groaning 

1  The  very  words  used  in  Isa.  Ixi.  i  are  taken  from  the  command  in  reference 
to  the  Jubilee  in  Lev.  xxv.  9,  10. 


122     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  travailing  in  pain  together  until  now,  shall  at  last  be 
delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 

And  when  once  Israel's  sin  and  guilt  shall  be  removed, 
their  sorrows  and  suffering,  too,  shall  end.  The  vision 
closes,  therefore,  with  the  beautiful  picture  of  tranquillity 
and  happy  contentment  depicted  in  the  last  verse,  "  In 
that  day>  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  ye  shall  call  every  man  his 
neighbour  under  the  vine  and  under  the  fig-tree" 

1  close  with  the  following  quotation  :  "  We  are  told  in 
the  Talmud  (Yoma,  vii.  4)  that,  when,  on  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement,  the  high  priest  had  performed  the  various 
duties  of  that  solemn  day,  he  was  escorted  home  in  a 
festive  manner,  and  was  accustomed  to  give  a  festal 
entertainment  to  his  friends.  The  maidens  and  youths  of 
the  people  went  forth  to  their  gardens  and  vineyards  with 
songs  and  dances  ;  social  entertainments  took  place  on  all 
sides,  and  universal  gladness  closed  the  festival  of  that 
solemn  day." 

And  thus,  in  the  last  verse  of  this  chapter,  a  picture 
is  given  of  a  day  of  similar  gladness  and  joy  of  heart, 
when,  on  account  of  sin  pardoned,  free  access  to  God's 
throne  granted,  and  the  Deliverer  having  come  anointed 
with  the  plentitude  of  the  Spirit  and  sealed  by  God  the 
Father,  each  true  Israelite  would  invite  his  friends  as  joyful 
guests  to  partake  of  festal  cheer  under  his  own  vine  and 
fig-tree.  The  days  of  peace  once  more  are  seen.  The 
glorious  era  of  the  earthly  Solomon  has  indeed  returned  in 
greater  splendour  under  the  reign  of  the  Prince  of  Peace. 
"  Paradise  lost  "  has  become  "  Paradise  regained." 

"THE  BODY  OF  MOSES" 
NOTE  TO  CHAPTER  in 

It  has  been  a  point  much  disputed  whether  the  reference  in  the 
Epistle  of  Jude  to  Michael's  contention  with  the  devil  about  "the 
body  of  Moses,"  where  the  same  formula  ("the  Lord  rebuke  thee") 
is  used  by  the  Archangel  in  silencing  Satan  as  by  the  Angel  of 


JOSHUA  BEFORE  THE  ANGEL  OF  JEHOVAH     123 

Jehovah  in  this  chapter,  does,  or  does  not,  refer  back  to  this  vision. 
Origen,  and  some  of  the  other  Church  Fathers,  state  that  the 
quotation  in  Jude  is  from  an  apocryphal  book,  the  title  of  which 
is  "The  Ascension,"  or  "Assumption  of  Moses";  but,  in  the 
fragments  of  that  legendary  apocalyptic  writing  which  have  come 
down  to  us — either  in  Latin,  Hebrew,  or  Arabic  (in  which  elements 
belonging  to  various  dates  as  far  apart  as  the  first  or  second  and  the 
thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries  after  Christ  are  discernible) — 
no  such  tradition  as  a  strife  between  Michael  and  the  Evil  One 
over  the  body  of  Moses  is  to  be  found,  nor  is  there  anything  to 
prove  that  it  ever  existed  in  those  parts  of  this  apocryphal  book 
which  are  missing — the  confused  allusions  in  the  Fathers  being  prob 
ably  to  legends  in  the  Talmud  and  Midrashim  to  a  contest  between 
Samael,  the  Angel  of  Death,  and  Michael,  which  had  reference, 
not  to  the  body  of  Moses  after  his  death,  but  to  his  soul  while  he 
was  still  living.  There  are  also  different  legendary  accounts  of 
contests  between  Moses  himself  and  the  Angel  of  Death,  whom  he 
put  to  flight  when  he  came  to  take  his  soul  by  striking  him  with 
his  rod,  on  which  the  ineffable  name  Jehovah  was  inscribed.  In 
the  end  (so  one  legend  proceeds)  God  Himself,  accompanied  by 
Gabriel,  Michael,  and  Zagziel  (the  former  teacher  of  Moses), 
descended  to  take  Moses'  soul.  "  Gabriel  arranged  the  couch, 
Michael  spread  a  silken  cover  over  it,  and  Zagziel  put  a  silken 
pillow  under  Moses'  head.  At  God's  command  Moses  crossed  his 
hands  over  his  breast  and  closed  his  eyes,  and  God  took  his  soul 
away  with  a  kiss." 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  just  a  possibility  that  the  expression 
"the  body  of  Moses,"  in  Jude,  is  used  in  an  allegorical  sense  of  the 
Jewish  people ;  in  which  case  the  reference  would  certainly  be  to 
this  vision. 

"  It  is  true  that  no  instance  can  be  cited  in  which  '  the  body  of 
Moses,'  or  any  similar  expression,  is  used  of  the  people  of  Israel ; 
but  it  is  possible  that  the  phrase  niight\\a.ve  been  employed  by  Jude 
in  that  signification  in  imitation  of  the  expression  'the  body  of 
Christ,'  which  is  used  in  reference  to  the  Church  of  Christ  in  the 
Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  Jewish  Church 
in  the  writer's  day  had  become  bitterly  opposed  to  the  Church  of 
Christ,  while  it  looked  back  to  Moses  as  its  teacher — a  claim  which 
might  well  be  admitted  as  true  in  the  most  real  sense  of  the  Jewish 
Church  in  the  days  of  Zechariah  "  (C.  H.  H.  Wright). 

I  must  refer  those  who  are  desirous  to  enter  more  fully  into 


124     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

this  question  to  Baumgarten's  Die  Nachtgeschichte  Sacharias ; 
Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright's  Zechariah  and  his  Prophecies ;  and  to  Dean 
Alford's  note  on  the  passage  in  Jude,  where  they  will  find  the 
subject  fully  discussed.  For  my  own  part,  while  not  committing 
myself  to  the  allegorical  interpretation  of  the  passage  in  Jude, 
which  may  have  reference  to  a  very  early  tradition  about  a 
dispute  about  the  literal  body  of  Moses  not  recorded  in  any 
writing  now  extant,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  incidents  and 
the  words  of  the  vision  we  are  considering  were  in  the  Apostle's 
mind  when  he  wrote  his  short  epistle.  This  is  proved  not  only  by 
his  use  of  the  formula,  "The  Lord  rebuke  thee,"  but  by  two  other 
undoubted  allusions  to  this  vision  in  ver.  23 — namely,  the  "pulling 
out  of  the  fire,"  which  is  an  echo  of  "  the  brand  plucked  from  the 
fire"  (Zech.  iii.  2),  and  "the  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh,"  which 
is  an  allusion  to  the  "  filthy  garments  "  in  which  Joshua  was  at  first 
seen  standing  before  the  Lord. 


CHAPTER   VI 
THE    FIFTH   VISION 

THE  CANDLESTICK 
(CHAPTER  iv) 


And  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  came  again,  and  waked  me,  as  a  man  that 
is  wakened  out  of  his  sleep.  And  he  said  unto  me,  What  seest  thou  ?  And  I 
said,  I  have  seen,  and  behold,  a  candlestick  all  of  gold,  with  its  bowl  upon  the 
top  of  it,  and  its  seven  lamps  thereon  ;  there  are  seven  pipes  to  each  of  the 
lamps,  which  are  upon  the  top  thereon  ;  and  two  olive  trees  by  it,  one  on  the  right 
side  of  the  bowl,  and  the  other  upon  the  left  side  thereof;  and  I  answered  and 
spake  to  the  angel  that  talked  with  me,  saying,  What  are  these,  my  lord  ?  Then 
the  angel  that  talked  with  me  answered  and  said  unto  me,  Knowest  thou  not 
what  these  are  ?  And  I  said,  No,  my  lord.  Then  he  answered  and  spake  unto 
me,  saying,  This  is  the  word  of  Jehovah  unto  Zerubbabel,  saying,  Not  by  might, 
nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts.  Who  art  thou,  O  great 
mountain  ?  before  Zerubbabel  thou  shall  become  a  plain  :  and  he  shall  bring  forth 
the  top-stone  with  shoutings  of  Grace,  grace  unto  it.  Moreover  the  word  of 
Jehovah  came  unto  me,  saying,  The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation 
of  this  house  ;  his  hands  shall  also  finish  it ;  and  thou  shalt  know  that  Jehovah  of 
hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  you.  For  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things  ? 
for  these  seven  shall  rejoice,  and  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the  hands  of 
Zerubbabel ;  these  are  the  eyes  of  Jehovah,  which  run  to  and  fro  through  the 
whole  earth.  Then  answered  I,  and  said  unto  him,  What  are  these  two  olive 
trees  upon  the  right  side  of  the  candlestick  and  upon  the  left  side  thereof?  And 
I  answered  the  second  time,  and  said  unto  him,  What  are  these  two  olive 
branches,  which  are  beside  the  two  golden  spouts,  that  empty  the  golden  oil  out 
of  themselves  ?  And  he  answered  me  and  said,  Knowest  thou  not  what  these 
are?  And  I  said,  No,  my  lord.  Then  said  he,  These  are  the  two  anointed  ones, 
that  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth. 


126 


CHAPTER  VI 

INTRODUCTORY1 

AS  stated  in  the  introduction  to  the  3rd  chapter,  the 
fourth  and  fifth  visions  form  a  new  chapter  in 
this  series  of  symbolic  prophecies,  which,  "  though 
in  a  sense  standing  by  themselves,  are  in  true  psychological 
order,  and  in  the  closest  possible  relation  with  the  wonderful 
things  which  had  already  been  unfolded  before  the  pro 
phet's  spiritual  sight."  We  there  saw  that  the  fourth  vision 
depicts  in  a  symbolic  but  very  graphic  manner  the  inner 
salvation  of  Israel  from  sin  and  defilement,  answering  to 
tJieir  outward  deliverance  from  captivity  and  oppression  set 
forth  in  the  preceding  three  visions. 

We  feel  it,  however,  necessary,  even  at  the  risk  of  being 
guilty  of  repetition,  to  cast  once  more  a  brief  retrospective 
glance  at  the  progressive  unfolding  of  God's  counsel  in 
relation  to  Israel,  and  the  establishment  of  Messiah's 
Kingdom,  in  the  series  of  visions  which  we  have  already 
considered. 

The  first  three  visions  were  meant  to  convey  to  the 
prophet,  and  through  the  prophet  to  the  people,  the  "  good 
and  comfortable  "  assurance  that  God  had  neither  cast  off 
nor  forsaken  the  people  which  He  hath  foreknown  ;  that, 
though  they  found  themselves  under  the  oppressive  yoke  of 
Gentile  world-power  (which  was  true  of  the  remnant  which 
had  returned  as  well  as  of  the  bulk  of  the  nation  which  was 


1  The  exposition  of  this  chapter  was  originally  written  out  and  read  as  "a 
paper"  at  a  meeting  of  the  "  Prophecy  Investigation  Society,"  l>y  whom  it  was 
also  privately  circulated  among  the  members.  This  will  account  for  its  being 
slightly  different  in  form  and  style  from  the  rest  of  the  exposition. 


128     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

still  in  the  far  land  of  the  Captivity),  the  Angel  of  the 
Covenant  was  in  their  midst,  identified  with  them,  and 
pleading  their  cause  (i.  8-12).  Jehovah  Himself,  far  from 
being  indifferent  to  their  sorrows  and  sufferings,  is  very 
angry  with  the  nations  who  are  helping  forward  the 
affliction  (i.  14,  15),  and  wishes  it  to  be  proclaimed  that  he 
that  toucheth  them  "  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye  "  (ii.  8). 
These  Gentile  world-powers  "  who  lift  up  their  horn  "  to 
scatter  and  oppress  "  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem,"  would 
be  broken  and  cast  out  (i.  18-21);  the  beloved  city  should 
be  rebuilt  on  a  much  grander  scale,  and  according  to  plans 
and  measurements  devised  by  God  Himself,  Who  would 
henceforth  be  her  Light  and  her  Defence — "  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about,  and  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her  "  (ii.  1-5). 

And  not  only  Jerusalem,  but  the  whole  land,  shall 
experience  the  blessed  effects  of  Jehovah's  "  return  to  His 
people  with  mercies,"  and  its  cities  shall  spread  abroad  and 
overflow  with  material  prosperity  and  with  the  multitude 
of  men  and  cattle  which  shall  be  found  therein  (ii.  4). 
"  The  name  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall  be  Jehovah 
Shammah  ;  and  thus  the  first  cycle  in  this  series  of  visions 
ends  with  the  joyous  proclamation  :  "  Sing  and  rejoice,  O 
daughter  of  Zion  :  for,  lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  thee,  saith  the  Lord  "  (ii.  i  o). 

And  the  blessed  consequence  of  Israel's  return  to  the 
land,  and  of  the  return  to  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  for  ever 
more  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  will  be  that  the 
original  purpose  of  God  in  the  call  and  election  of  Abraham 
and  his  seed — namely,  that  in  and  through  them  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed — shall  be  fulfilled. 
"  And  many  nations  shall  join  themselves  to  the  Lord  in  that 
day,  and  shall  be  My  people,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst 
of  thee,  and  thou  shalt  know  that  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath 
sent  Me  unto  thee  "  (ii.  1 1 ). 

But  (as  shown  in  the  exposition  on  chap,  iii.)  the  ques 
tion  might  have  suggested  itself  to  the  prophet :  How 
can  these  things  be?  Has  riot  Israel,  by  his  grievous  sins 
and  moral  defilement,  for  ever  forfeited  his  place,  and  made 


THE  CANDLESTICK  129 

himself  unfit  to  be  again  Jehovah's  sanctuary  and  appointed 
minister  of  blessing  to  the  nations  ? 

As  if  in  answer  to  this  question,  the  vision  in  the  3rd 
chapter  is  shown  to  the  prophet,  from  which  he  is  to  learn 
(i)  that  the  fulfilment  of  "the  good  words  and  comfortable 
words  "  of  promise,  rests,  not  on  Israel's  merits  or  worthi 
ness,  but  on  the  immutable  purpose  of  Jehovah,  Who,  in  His 
free  sovereign  grace,  hath  "  chosen  Jerusalem,"  and  Whose 
gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance. 

(2)  The  solution  of  the  moral  problem,  how  the  Holy 
One  can  dwell  in  the  midst,  and  accept  and  use  the  ministry 
of  those  who  are  defiled  by  sin,  is  realistically  presented  to 
the  prophet  in  the  transformation  which  he  witnesses  as 
taking  place  in  the  case  of  Joshua,  who  stands  before  the 
Angel  of  Jehovah,  not  in  his  private  capacity,  but  as  the 
high  priest  and  representative  of  the  people. 

Like  the  filthy  garments  in  which  their  representative 
had  been  clothed,  so  shall  the  Lord  remove  the  moral  filth 
of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  and  cause  her  iniquity  to  pass 
away  in  that  "  one  day  "  when  her  eyes  shall  be  opened  to 
behold  the  glorious  Person  and  atoning  work  of  her  Messiah, 
who,  in  allusion  to  the  prophecies  in  the  second  half  of 
Isaiah  (especially  chap,  liii.),  is  called  "  My  Servant,"  and 
also  by  the  well-known  Messianic  title,  "  The  Branch " 
(Hi.  8). 

Thus,  clothed  in  the  righteousness  of  Him,  Who  "  by 
His  knowledge  makes  the  many  righteous,"  and  arrayed  in 
the  "  rich  apparel,"  or  festal  attire  of  priestly  garments, 
with  the  high-priestly  mitre,  to  which  was  fastened  the  plate 
of  gold  with  Qodesh  la-  Yehovah  on  his  head,  Israel  shall  be 
fitted,  not  only  for  fellowship  with  Jehovah,  but  to  go  forth 
on  the  mission  for  which  he  was  originally  chosen  and 
destined,  namely,  to  disseminate  the  truth  and  the  blessings 
of  Jehovah  among  the  nations.  Now,  in  beautiful  order  of 
sequence  we  have  the  vision  in  chap,  iv.,  which  presents  to 
us  Israel  as  the  Light  of  the  world. 


130     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  Fifth  Vision 

We  shall  now  give  an  explanation,  first,  of  the  symbolism 
of  this  vision  ;  and,  secondly,  of  the  message. 

I.   The  Symbolism  (vers.  1-5) 

A  brief  pause  had  intervened,  during  which  the  prophet 
was  lying  probably  in  a  state  of  ecstatic  slumber  still  con 
templating  the  wonderful  things  he  saw  and  heard  in  the 
last  vision ;  or  Hengstenberg  may  be  right  in  regarding  the 
prophet's  "  sleep  "  as  a  return  to  his  ordinary  conditions  of 
life  in  comparison  to  the  spiritually  wakeful  state  in  which 
he  was  when  receiving  the  visions.  If  so,  then  we  have 
here,  as  he  suggests,  "  the  deepest  insight  into  the  state  in 
which  the  prophets  were,  during  their  prophecies,  as  com 
pared  with  their  ordinary  condition.  The  two  bear  the 
same  relation  to  each  other  as  sleeping  and  waking.  A 
man's  ordinary  state,  in  which  he  is  under  the  control  of 
the  senses,  and  unable  to  raise  his  spiritual  eye  to  the  con 
templation  of  Divine  objects,  is  one  of  spiritual  sleep ;  but 
an  ecstatic  condition,  in  which  the  senses  with  the  whole 
lower  life  are  quiescent,  and  only  pictures  of  Divine  objects 
are  reflected  in  the  soul,  as  in  a  pure  and  untarnished 
mirror,  is  one  of  spiritual  waking." 

Being  thus  wakened  by  the  interpreting  angel,  and  his 
powers  of  spiritual  vision  stimulated  by  the  question,  "  What 
seest  thou  ?  "  he  looks,  and  beholds  a  candlestick,  all  (of  it) 
of  gold,  with  a  bowl,  or  oil  vessel,  "  at  the  top  of  it "  (indi 
cating  that  it  is  designated  as  a  fountain  of  supply  for  the 
candlestick),  with  seven  nipifin  (mutsaqotti)  "  pipes,"  or  little 
canals  (literally  "  pourers  "),  connecting  this  vessel  with  each 
of  the  seven  lamps  on  the  candlestick.1 

On  either  side  (i.e.,  one  on  the  right  and  one  on  the 
left  of  the  bowl)  were  two  olive  trees,  each  with  a  specially 
ffoiitful  bough,  or  branch,  which,  as  Kimchi  puts  it,  "  were 

1  Ft->r  it  is  in  the  distributive  sen'se  that  the  expression  Shibh'ah  v'  Shibh'ah 
must  doubtless  be  understood. 


THE  CANDLESTICK  131 

full  of  olives,  as  ears  are  full  of  grain,"  and  are  therefore 
called  Shibalei  hazethim — "  ears  of  olives  " — which  poured 
golden  oil  from  themselves,  by  means  of  two  "  spouts  "  or 
channels,  into  the  vessel,  for  the  supply  of  the  candlestick. 

On  the  prophet's  asking,  "  What  are  these,  my  lord  ?  " 
the  Interpreter  answers,"  Knowest  thou  not  what  these  be  ?  " 
as  much  as  to  imply  that  the  symbolism  of  this  vision  was 
such  that  the  prophet  might  himself  have  been  able  to 
interpret  had  he  understood  the  symbolism  of  the  Taber 
nacle  and  Temple. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  neither  the  Interpreter  nor  the 
Angel  of  Jehovah  explain  the  symbolism  of  this  vision,  but 
only  indicate  the  message  which  it  conveyed  to  Zerubbabel  at 
that  time,  and  to  the  people  of  God  generally  in  all  time. 

The  candlestick  itself — the  central  object  in  this  vision — 
is  doubtless  a  figurative  representation  of  the  seven-branched 
candlestick  in  the  Temple.  There  it  stood  in  the  Holy 
Place  (the  figure  of  heavenly  places  not  made  with  hands), 
not  only  as  the  emblem  and  representation  of  what  the 
whole  redeemed  family  shall  finally  be  "  when  in  union 
with  their  risen,  glorified  Lord  they  shall  for  ever  shine  in 
the  sanctuary  of  God,"  but  also  as  typifying  Israels  high 
calling  in  relation  to  the  other  nations. 

In  his  midst  a  great  light  had  shone — the  light  of 
the  self-revelation  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah — not  only  for  his 
own  illumination,  but  that  he  might  be  the  candlestick,  the 
light-bearer,  and  light-diffuser  all  around. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  "  when  the  Most  High  gave 
to  the  nations  their  inheritance,  when  He  separated  the 
children  of  men,  He  set  the  bounds  of  the  peoples  according 
to  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel "  (Deut.  xxxii.  8). 

We  know  how  terribly  and  sadly  Israel  failed  to  respond 
to  God's  purpose  concerning  Him.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God" — through  His  prophet  Ezekiel,  in  chap.  v.  of  his 
prophecy — "  This  is  Jerusalem  :  I  have  set  her  in  the  midst 
of  the  nations,  and  countries  are  round  about  her" — that  she 
may  shine  as  a  light  in  their  midst,  so  that  these  nations 
and  countries  may  see  of  her  good  works  and  glorify  God, 


132     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

— BUT  she  hath  changed  My  judgments  into  wickedness 
more  than  the  nations,  and  My  statutes  more  than  the 
countries  tJiat  are  round  about  lier :  for  tJiey  have  rejected 
My  judgments,  and  as  for  My  statutes,  they  have  not  walked 
in  them" 

Often  did  God  in  effect  threaten  Israel  through  the 
prophets  to  remove  his  candlestick ;  but  in  His  long-suffer 
ing  for  a  long  time,  even  after  the  sceptre,  the  emblem  of 
governmental  power,  had  been  removed,  the  candlestick — 
which  is  the  emblem  of  Israels  religious  or  ecclesiastical 
position  as  witness  for  God  in  His  corporate  capacity — was 
not  taken  away  till  the  cup  of  his  national  iniquity  was 
filled  up  in  the  rejection  of  Him  who  is  the  "  Light  of  light," 
for  the  diffusion  of  which  this  very  candlestick  was  formed, 
and  in  their  final  resistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Then  the 
Kingdom  of  God  was  taken  from  them  and  "  given  to  a 
nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof." 

On  the  disappearance  of  the  candlestick  from  Israel,  the 
seven  golden  candlesticks  come  into  view  as  representing 
the  new  people  of  God,  the  Church  of  this  dispensation 
planted  on  the  earth,  that  during  the  period  of  Israel's 
blindness  and  darkness  it  might  fulfil  Israel's  mission  of 
shining  before  the  Lord  in  His  sanctuary,  and  letting  its 
light  stream  out  into  the  night  of  the  world's  darkness :  the 
seven  as  representing  the  Church,  instead  of  the  one  as 
representing  Israel,  is  not  without  significance. 

The  seven  Christian  ecclesiai  selected  by  the  Lord  out 
of  the  many  Christian  assemblies  which  already  then  existed 
even  in  that  one  pro-consular  province  of  Asia,  to  be  symbol 
ised  by  the  seven  golden  "  luchniai  "  (lampstands),  are  meant 
to  represent  the  one  Church  of  Christ  through  all  time,  and  in 
all  places,  during  the  present  dispensation.  It  has  not,  like 
Israel,  one  earthly  centre,  and  cannot  be  presented  as  an 
absolute  unity.  The  seven  are  all  mutually  independent  as 
to  external  order  and  government,  yet  were  they  meant  to 
be  one  in  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  under  the  one  headship  of 
Christ.  But  not  only  in  relation  to  the  Lord  and  to  one 
another,  but  also  in  relation  to  the  world  outside,  did  the 


THE  CANDLESTICK  133 

Church  of  Christ,  as  originally  constituted,  possess  both  a 
local  and  a  catJiolic  unity.  "  The  first,"  to  quote  a  great 
master  now  with  the  Lord,  "  was  symbolised  by  each  of  the 
candlesticks  regarded  individually ;  the  second  by  all  the 
seven  collectively.  At  Ephesus,  for  example,  all  the  saints 
who  dwelt  in  that  city  were  gathered  into  visible  communion 
with  each  other.  All  light  was  with  them  ;  everything  else 
in  Ephesus  was  darkness ;  and  therefore  one  candlestick 
fitly  represented  their  condition.  There  was  one  point  of 
concentrated  light.  But  what  each  Church  was  in  its  own 
locality,  that  all  the  Churches  unitedly  were  to  the  world 
around  them.  They  were  together  separated ;  had  a 
common  calling  and  service ;  were  alike  one  to  the  other ; 
were  ordered  and  nourished  by  the  same  hand.  This  was 
catJiolic  unity,  symbolised  by  the  seven  candlesticks  standing 
together  with  the  Lord  in  their  midst.  The  proper  unity  of 
the  Church  is  gone  if  either  of  these  be  wanting."  x  How 
glorious  was  the  Apostolic  Church  in  its  original  purity  and 
lustre !  How  brightly  did  it  shine  !  And  how  rapidly  did 
it  disseminate  its  light !  Thus  the  Apostle  Paul,  for  instance, 
writing  to  the  Thessalonians  only  such  a  very  brief  while 
after  the  Church  in  that  city  was  founded  by  him,  could 
say  :  "  From  you  hath  sounded  forth  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
not  only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  but  in  every  place  your 
faith  to  Godivard  is  gone  forth,  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak 
anything"  (i  Thess.  i.  8). 

But  how  long  did  this  beautiful  condition  of  things 
continue  ?  Already  in  the  lifetime  of  the  Apostles,  germs 
of  corruption  began  to  manifest  themselves,  and  they  have 
continued  ever  since  to  develop ;  and  though  the  long- 
suffering  of  God  manifested  in  His  dealings  with  Christendom 
has  been  as  great,  and  even  greater,  than  in  His  dealings 
with  Israel,  He  has  had,  nevertheless,  to  remove  from  His 
sanctuary,  one  by  one,  the  candlesticks  of  Gentile  Christi 
anity,  and  to  disown  them  in  their  corporate  capacity  from 
being  witnesses  for  the  truth  and  representatives  of  Christ 
on  the  earth. 

1  Thoughts  on  the  Apocalypse,  B.  W.  Newton. 


134     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  history  of  corporate  Gentile  Christianity  is  not  as 
the  shining  light  that  "  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect  day,"  as  some  who  boast  in  the  supposed  progress 
and  speak  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  before  the  glorious 
appearing  of  Christ  ignorantly  suppose,  but  rather  that  of 
a  bright  dawn,  developing  into  an  increasingly  dark  and 
cloudy  day,  and  ending  in  blackness  of  darkness.  And 
there  is  no  hope  for  Christendom  which  continued  not  in 
the  goodness  of  God  when  once  it  is  "  cut  off" ;  nor  is 
there  any  promise  of  the  restoration  and  relighting  of  its 
candlestick  when  once  its  light  has  been  quenched  in 
anti-Christian  apostasy.  But  it  is  different  with  Israel. 
There  is  always  hope  in  his  end. 

Not  only  shall  the  sceptre  of  governmental  rule  and 
the  kingdom  come  back  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem, 
after  the  long  centuries  of  subjugation  and  oppression,  but 
her  candlestick,  too,  shall  be  restored  after  the  long  period 
of  Israel's  spiritual  darkness  and  blindness,  to  shine  in 
more  resplendent  glory  than  even  in  the  past.  This  is  the 
meaning  of  Zechariah's  fifth  vision,  and  it  sets  forth  in 
symbol  the  great  truth  proclaimed  by  the  former  prophets 
in  relation  to  Israel's  future  glory  as  the  centre  of  light  and 
blessing  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  as,  for  instance,  in 
Isa.  Ix.  i— 3  :  "  Arise,  shine  ;  for  ttiy  light  is  come,  and  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  is  risen  upon  thee.  For  behold,  darkness 
shall  cover  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  peoples :  but 
Jehovah  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  His  glory  shall  be  seen 
upon  thee.  And  nations  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to 
the  brightness  of  thy  rising";  and  Isa.  Ixii.  I,  2:  "For 
Zions  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's 
sake  I  will  not  rest,  until  her  righteousness  go  forth  as 
brightness,  and  her  salvation  as  a  lamp  that  burneth.  And 
the  nations  shall  see  thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  thy 
glory  ;  and  thou  shalt  be  called  by  a  new  name,  ivhich  the 
mouth  of  Jehovah  shall  name." 

That  the  light  of  Israel's  restored  candlestick  will  shine 
on  throughout  the  millennial  period  in  undiminished  purity, 
and  in  greater — yea,  in  sevenfold  brilliancy  as  compared 


THE  CANDLESTICK  135 

with  the  past — is,  I  think,  indicated  by  the  additions  to 
the  candlestick  in  this  vision  as  compared  with  the  original 
in  Exodus. 

In  the  Tabernacle,  in  keeping  with  the  Mosaic  dis 
pensation,  the  continuity  of  its  light  depended  on  the 
offerings  of  the  people,  who  were  commanded  to  bring 
"  pure  olive  oil,  beaten  for  the  light ;  to  cause  a  lamp  to 
burn  (lit.,  to  ascend)  continually  " ;  and  on  the  ministry  of 
Aaron  and  his  sons,  who  had  to  fill,  and  trim,  and  order, 
and  light  them  every  morning  and  evening  (Ex.  xxvii.  20, 
21,  xxx.  7,  8);  but  in  our  vision  no  attendant  priests  are 
necessary,  nor  offerings  of  oil  from  the  people.  The  lamps 
are  fed  spontaneously  from  the  gullah>  or  oil  vessel,  above 
the  candlestick,  the  plentifulness  of  the  flow  of  oil  (emblem 
atic  of  the  abundant  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit)  being 
set  forth  by  the  seven  pipes  (or  "  pourers  "),  which  carried 
the  supply  to  each. 

There  is  yet  one  item  in  the  symbolism  of  the  candle 
stick  which  requires  our  attention — namely,  the  two  olive 
trees  (ver.  3),  or  "  sons  of  oil "  (ver.  14),  which,  by  means  of 
the  two  tsanteroth)  or  spouts,  empty  golden  oil  out  of 
themselves  into  the  gullah,  or  bowl. 

Many  fanciful  interpretations  have  been  given  of  this 
part  of  the  vision,  which,  for  lack  of  time  and  space,  we 
will  not  stop  to  examine,  but  it  is  most  in  harmony  with 
the  scope  of  these  visions  (one  of  the  great  objects  of 
which  was  to  encourage  the  two  heads,  or  leaders,  of  the 
restored  remnant  of  the  nation  in  their  task  of  rebuilding 
the  Temple)  to  regard  the  olive  trees  as  representing 
Joshua  the  high  priest,  and  Zerubbabel  the  prince.  These 
were  the  two  persons  by  whom  the  whole  covenant  people 
was  then  represented,  and  through  whom  it,  in  a  very 
important  sense,  received  the  grace  and  the  promises  of 
God. 

The  words,  "  These  are  the  two  that  stand  before  the 
Lord  of  the  whole  earth"  must  also  lead  us  to  the  same 
conclusion.  In  the  previous  vision  (iii.  i),  which  is  so 
closely  connected  with  that  we  are  considering,  Joshua  is 


136     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

thus  represented  as  "  standing  "  before  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  ; 
and  in  chap.  iv.  it  is  Zerubbabel  who  is  specially  mentioned 
by  name.  It  is  fitting,  therefore,  that  in  the  end  the  two 
who  are  so  often  mentioned  together  by  Haggai  and 
Zechariah  should  again  be  represented  together  in  their 
united  ministry.  Though  differently  occupied,  the  one  in 
more  particularly  "  religious,"  and  the  other  in  civil  duties, 
they  both  stand  (intent  on  their  ministry)  before  the  Lord 
of  the  whole  earth. 

But,  while  in  relation  to  the  remnant  of  Israel  at  that 
time,  and  to  the  Temple  then  in  building,  we  are  to  under 
stand  by  these  two  "  sons  of  oil "  the  actual  persons  of 
Joshua  and  Zerubbabel,  it  is  certain  that  these  two,  con 
sidered  merely  as  individuals,  do  not  exhaust  the  symbol, 
for  the  simple  reason  that  the  supply  of  oil  for  the  candle 
stick  in  a  vision  designed  to  describe  the  abiding,  and 
especially  the  future  position  and  mission  of  the  congrega 
tion  of  Israel,  could  not  be  represented  as  dependent  on  the 
lives  of  two  mortal  men.  They  must  therefore  be  viewed 
standing  here  as  the  types  or  representatives  of  the  kingly 
and  priestly  offices  to  which  they  respectively  belonged 
— the  only  two  orders  (with  the  one  other  exception  of  the 
prophetic)  which  could  properly  be  designated  by  the  term 
"  sons  of  oil,"  because  of  their  being  originally  consecrated 
for  their  office  by  the  ceremony  of  anointing  (with  oil),  by 
which  act  they  were,  so  to  say,  appointed  as  the  media 
through  whom  "  the  spiritual  and  gracious  gifts  of  God  " 
were  to  be  conveyed  to  His  Church. 

And  both  these  divinely-appointed  offices  and  functions 
in  Israel,  we  must  remember,  were  from  the  beginning 
designed  to  shadow  forth  what  should  ultimately  be  united 
in  Him  who,  as  set  forth  by  Zechariah  himself  (vi.  1 3), 
would  be  "  a  Priest  upon  His  throne  " — the  true  and  ever 
lasting  great  High  Priest,  of  whom  Joshua  and  the  whole 
order  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood  were  "  men  that  were  a 
sign  "  (iii.  8)  ;  and  the  just  and  ideal  King  (ix.  9),  of  whom 
the  kingly  function  in  Israel  was  also  a  type  and  prophecy. 
It  is  in  His  light,  and  by  means  of  the  golden  oil  of  His 


THE  CANDLESTICK  137 

Spirit,  which  shall  then  be  shed  upon  them  abundantly, 
that  Israel's  candlestick  shall  yet  shine  with  a  sevenfold 
brilliancy  for  the  illumination  of  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth. 

II.   The  Message  (vers.  6-10) 

The  contemplation  of  God's  determinate  counsel  and  the 
glimpse  of  Israel's  future  glory  are  to  serve  as  a  stimulus  and 
encouragement  to  the  leaders  and  people  in  the  then  present. 

The  prophet  having  with  humility  confessed  his  ignorance 
of  the  true  import  of  the  symbolism,  the  interpreting  angel 
answered  and  said  :  "  This  (vision  in  as  far  as  it  embodies 
a  prophecy]  is  the  word  of.  Jehovah  unto  Zerubbabel,  saying, 
Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  Jehovah 
of  hosts"  The  word  >JH,  hayil  ("  might  "),  which  also  means 
an  "  army,"  or  "  host,"  probably  stands  for  the  strength  of 
many ;  while  03,  ko'ach,  stands  for  that  of  one  man. 
The  two  might  be  taken  to  express  human  strength  and 
power  of  every  description — physical,  mental,  and  moral — 
individual,  or  the  combined  strength  of  the  multitude.  All 
of  themselves  can  neither  advance  nor  retard  the  accomplish 
ment  of  His  purpose.  The  real  motive  power  by  which 
Israel's  mission,  as  set  forth  by  the  candlestick,  shall 
eventually  be  fulfilled,  namely,  "  My  Spirit,  saith  Jehovah," 
must  be  the  only  resource  also  of  Zerubbabel  in  the 
prosecution  of  the  task  of  rebuilding  the  Temple  which 
shall  be  the  visible  proof  and  symbol  of  the  restored 
fellowship  between  Jehovah  and  His  people,  and  hence  an 
indispensable  preparation  for  the  accomplishment  of  Israel's 
mission  as  the  light  of  the  nations. 

Now  this  Almighty  Spirit  of  Jehovah  "  of  Ts'bhaoth  " 
was  now  present,  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the  returned 
remnant  of  the  people ;  for,  in  effect  this  message  through 
Zechariah  is  but  an  amplified  reiteration  of  the  word  of 
Jehovah  to  Zerubbabel  and  his  companion  by  the  mouth  of 
Haggai  about  four  months  before:  "Be  strong-;  for  I  am 
with  you,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  according  to  the  word  that 
I  covenanted  with  you  when  ye  came  out  of  Egypt,  so  My 


138     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Spirit  remaineth  among  you:  fear  ye  not"  (Hag.  ii.  4,  5), 
which  again  (as  is  characteristic  of  all  the  notable  utterances 
of  the  post-exilic  prophets)  is  based  on  a  great  word  of 
Jehovah  through  one  of  the  former  prophets,  namely,  Isa.  lix. 
21:"  As  for  Me,  this  is  My  covenant  with  them,  saithJeJiovak  : 
My  Spirit  that  is  upon  thee,  and  My  words  which  I  have  put 
in  thy  mouth,  shall  not  depart  out  of  thy  mouth,  nor  out  of 
the  mouth  of  thy  seed,  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seeds  seed, 
saith  Jehovah,  from  henceforth  and  for  ever'' 

Relying  only  on  God's  Spirit,  "  the  great  mountain  "- 
whether  we  understand  it  as  a  figurative  expression  for  "  the 
colossal  difficulties,  which  rose  up  mountain  high,"  and  of 
the  hindrances  which  were  then  in  the  way  before  the 
building  could  be  completed  ;  or,  with  the  Jewish  Targum 
and  Kimchi,  and  some  eminent  Christian  interpreters, 
as  the  symbol  of  Gentile  world-power,  which  is  the  real 
obstacle  to  the  restoration  of  the  theocratic  kingdom, 
before  Zerubbabel,  as  the  instrument  of  God's  Almighty 
Spirit — shall  be  turned  into  "  a  plain  "  ;  and  he,  who  some 
fifteen  years  before  was  permitted  amid  great  demonstra 
tions  of  joy,  not  unmixed  with  sobs  and  tears,  to  lay  the 
foundation  (Ezra  iii.  8,  I  3),  shall  yet  bring  forth  the  "  head 
stone,"  accompanied  by  shoutings  of  joy  and  admiration, 
"  Grace,  grace  (is)  unto  it !  " 

In  vers.  8— 10  we  have,  so  to  say,  a  corroborative 
message  from  the  mouth  of  the  Malakh  Yehovah,  of  the 
explanation  given  to  the  prophet  by  the  angelic  interpreter : 

"  Moreover  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  unto  me,  saying, 
The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this 
house  ;  his  hands  shall  also  finish  it "  ;  which,  so  far  as  the 
Temple  which  they  were  then  building  was  concerned,  was, 
as  we  know,  fulfilled  about  four  years  after  the  prophesying 
of  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  namely,  "  on  the  third  day  of  the 
month  Adar,  which  was  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of 
Darius  the  king"  (Ezra  vi.  14,  15);  but  the  words,  "And 
thou  shalt  know  that  Jehovah  of  Ts'bhaoth  hath  sent  me 
unto  you  "  (which,  as  appears  clear  from  a  comparison  with 
chap.  ii.  9,  must  be  ascribed,  not  to  the  angelus  interpres, 


THE  CANDLESTICK  139 

but  to  the  Malakh  YehovaK),  show  that  the  promise  was  not 
exhausted  then,  but  that  the  work  on  which  Zerubbabel 
was  engaged  is  regarded  as  a  type  and  pledge  of  the 
sure  fulfilment  of  that  which  was  set  forth  by  the  symbolism. 
The  last  words  of  the  message  sound  a  special  note  of  en 
couragement  to  the  dispirited  remnant. 

Toward  so  great  a  consummation  the  work  they  were 
then  engaged  upon  might  seem  insignificant.  Indeed  this 
feeling  had  been  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  slow  progress 
made  in  the  work  of  building  the  House,  and  disposed  them 
only  too  readily  to  yield  to  the  opposition  of  their  enemies, 
and  for  a  time  to  desist  from  their  task  altogether,  till 
Haggai  and  Zechariah  were  raised  up  "  to  prophesy  to  them 
in  the  Name  of  the  God  of  Israel"  (Ezra  v.  i,  2). 

When  its  foundation  was  laid,  in  the  midst  of  the  great 
joy  which  accompanied  it,."  many  of  the  priests,  and  Levites, 
and  chief  of  the  fathers,  which  were  ancient  men,"  when 
they  saw  the  modest  dimensions,  and  remembered  the  very 
limited  resources  at  their  command,  "  wept  with  a  loud 
voice,  ...  so  that  the  people  could  not  discern  the  noise 
of  the  shout  of  joy  from  the  noise  of  the  weeping  of  the 
people"  (Ezra  iii.  10-13). 

Even  in  comparison  with  the  glory  of  the  first  House 
which  had  been  destroyed,  the  one  that  was  then  building 
"  was  as  nothing  in  their  eyes"  (Hag.  ii.  3)  ;  but  particularly 
in  relation  to  the  greater  glory  of  their  restoration  and  of 
the  future  House  predicted  by  the  former  prophets,  which 
should  become  the  centre  from  which  the  light  of  Jehovah 
should  stream  forth  to  all  the  nations,  the  actual  circum 
stances  in  which  they  then  found  themselves  must  have 
seemed  indeed  "  a  day  of  small  things."  Yet  from  God's 
point  of  view  the  task  of  the  rebuilding  on  which  they  were 
then  engaged  was — because  of  its  being  a  necessary  step 
toward  the  fulfilment  of  His  purpose  as  set  forth  in  the 
symbolism  of  the  candlestick — the  greatest  and  most  im 
portant  thing  in  tlie  world,  and  formed  the  centre  and  motive 
of  His  providential  dealings  on  the  earth  at  that  time.  Not 
on  the  great  world-movements,  but  on  the  little  "  stone  of 


140     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

lead"  or  "plummet"  in  the  hand  of  Zerubbabel,  who  is 
thus  indicated  as  superintending  the  work  of  building,  do 
the  seven  eyes  of  God's  special  providence  rest  with  com 
placency  and  joy  ;  and  as  those  eyes  run  to  and  fro  through 
the  whole  earth,  and  nothing  is  hid  from  His  omniscience, 
He  will  see  to  it  that  nothing  from  without  shall  now 
prevent  the  work  being  brought  to  a  happy  completion. 

This  is  "  the  word  of  Jehovah  unto  Zerubbabel " ;  but 
as  we  look  more  closely  at  the  message  we  seem  to  see  the 
lineaments  of  Zerubbabel  melt  away  into  the  features  of  the 
true  Prince  of  the  House  of  David,  and  the  task  on  which 
he  was  then  engaged  merge  into  the  building  of  the  true 
"  Temple  of  Jehovah "  by  "  the  Man  whose  name  is  The 
Branch,"  as  set  forth  by  the  prophet  in  chap.  vi. 
Messiah,  the  true  Son  of  David,  shall  not  only  be  the  real 
builder  of  the  future  literal  Temple,  which  through  the 
millennial  period  shall  be  the  centre  of  the  true  worship  of 
Jehovah  on  this  earth,  and  the  House  of  Prayer  for  all 
nations ;  but  also  of  the  much  more  glorious  mystical 
Building,  which  through  eternity  shall  be  for  the  habitation 
of  God  through  the  Spirit.  Of  this  spiritual  Temple  He  is 
Himself  the  "  sure  Foundation,"  the  precious  Corner-stone 
and  Head-stone  of  the  Corner,  as  well  as  the  Master  Builder. 

Nineteen  centuries  ago,  in  His  life  of  suffering,  death  of 
atonement,  and  glorious  resurrection,  the  foundation  of  that 
Temple  was  laid.  Since  then  living  stones,  both  Jewish 
and  Gentile,  from  all  parts  of  the  earth  are  being  gathered 
by  His  Spirit,  and  "the  building  fitly  framed  together"  is 
growing  toward  completion  ;  but  the  exceeding  magnificence 
and  the  spiritual  glory  of  this  mystical  Temple  will  not  be 
manifested  until,  at  the  glorious  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus, 
the  Head-stone  is,  so  to  say,  brought  forth,  and  Christ  is  for 
ever  joined  with  His  Church. 

Then,  when  covered  with  the  beauty  of  her  Lord,  and 
made  perfect  in  the  comeliness  which  He  shall  put  upon 
her,  there  shall  be  shouting  of  joy  and  admiration,  not  only 
by  men,  but  by  the  hosts  of  heaven,  ^  in  |n(  «  Grace,  beauty, 
loveliness  (is)  unto  it !  "  Hen,  Hen,  lah  ! 


CHAPTER    VII 
THE   SIXTH  VISION 

THE   FLYING   ROLL 
(CHAPTER  v.  1-4) 


Then  again  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and  behold,  a  flying  roll.  And 
he  said  unto  me,  What  seest  thou  ?  And  I  answered,  I  see  a  flying  roll ;  the 
length  thereof  is  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  ten  cubits.  Then  said  he  unto 
me,  This  is  the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the  face  of  the  whole  land  :  for  every 
one  that  stealeth  shall  be  cut  off  on  the  one  side  according  to  it ;  and  every  one 
that  sweareth  shall  be  cut  off  on  the  other  side  according  to  it.  I  will  cause  it  to 
go  forth,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief,  and 
into  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth  falsely  by  My  name  :  and  it  shall  abide  in 
the  midst  of  his  house,  and  shall  consume  it  with  the  timber  thereof  and  the 
stones  thereof. 


CHAPTER    VII 

INTRODUCTORY 

THE  first  five  visions  are  indeed  prophecies  "  of  Hope 
and  of  Glory."     They  abound,  as  we  have  seen,  in 
most  glorious  promises  of  restoration  and  enlarge 
ment,  of  temporal  and  spiritual  prosperity  and  blessing — 
promises  which,  in  their  full  and  exhaustive  sense,  are  yet 
to  be  fulfilled,  when  "  Jehovah  shall  arise  and  have  mercy 
upon  Zion,"  and  yet  again  "  choose  Israel." 

But  before  that  longed-for  day  of  blessing  can  at  last 
come  ;  before  the  beautiful  symbolism  of  the  fifth  vision 
shall  at  last  be  realised,  and  Israel's  restored  candlestick 
shall  once  again,  and  in  greater  splendour  and  purity  than 
ever  before,  shed  abroad  the  light  of  Jehovah  throughout 
the  millennial  earth — both  the  land  and  people  must  be 
cleansed  from  everything  that  defileth,  or  worketh  abomina 
tion,  or  maketh  a  lie.  This  is  the  import  of  the  dark 
episode  unfolded  in  the  two  visions  in  the  5th  chapter, 
which  we  are  now  to  consider. 

The  God  of  Israel  has  two  methods  in  dealing  with  sin 
and  removing  iniquity,  both  of  which  are  in  perfect  accord 
with  the  absolute  holiness  of  His  character.  One  of  these 
methods — the  one  He  delights  in — is  the  method  of  grace. 
This  is  beautifully  unfolded  in  the  3rd  chapter,  where  we 
are  shown  how  that,  on  the  ground  of  His  sovereign 
immutable  "  choice  "  (ver.  2),  and  because  of  the  full  atone 
ment  and  perfect  righteousness  accomplished  by  His 
Righteous  Servant,  "  The  Branch,"  the  iniquity  of  that  land 
shall  be  removed  "  in  one  day,"  and  repentant  Israel  (upon 
whom  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  shall  in  that  day 

M3 


144     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

be  poured)  shall  be  cleansed  from  all  defilement  (as 
signified  by  the  removal  of  the  "  filthy  garments ")  and 
clothed  in  "  rich  apparel,"  and  with  the  "  fair,"  or  "  clean," 
mitre  on  his  head,  on  which  the  words  Qodesh  la-  Yehovah 
— "  Holy  to  Jehovah  " — are  graven,  shall  be  fitted  to  go 
forth  among  the  nations  as  the  priests  of  Jehovah  and  the 
ministers  of  our  God. 

But  what  about  those  who  persist  in  their  wickedness, 
and,  in  spite  of  the  marvellous  display  of  God's  grace,  "  will 
not  learn  righteousness,"  but  continue  even  "  in  the  land  of 
uprightness  "  (as  Immanuel's  land  shall  then  be  called)  "  to 
deal  unjustly,  and  will  not  behold  the  majesty  of  Jehovah  " 
(Isa.  xxxvi.  10)?  With  them  God's  method  is  that  of 
judgment.  Sin  must  be  purged  away,  iniquity  must  be 
stamped  out  in  the  city  of  God  ;  and  when  the  sinner  is  so 
wedded  to  his  sin  that  he  is  no  longer  separable  from  it,  he 
becomes  the  object  of  God's  curse,  and  must  be  "  cleansed 
away  "  from  the  earth.  In  short,  then,  the  two  visions  in 
chap.  v.  give  us  the  reverse  side  of  the  truth  unfolded  in  the 
first  four  chapters. 

They  show  us  that  if  there  is  grace  and  forgiveness  with 
God,  it  is  not  in  order  to  encourage  men  to  think  lightly  of 
sin,  but  that  "  He  might  be  feared  "  (Ps.  cxxx.  4).  They 
also  take  us,  so  to  say,  a  step  backward,  and  show  us  that, 
before  the  glorious  things  symbolically  set  forth  in  the  first 
five  visions  will  finally  be  fulfilled,  a  period  of  moral  dark 
ness  and  corruption,  and  of  almost  universal  apostasy,  was 
yet  to  intervene. 

The  Flying  Roll 

But  now  for  a  brief  exposition  of  the  sixth  vision. 

The  prophet  having  for  a  season  been  absorbed  in 
meditation  on  the  wonderful  things  which  had  been  pre 
sented  to  him  in  the  last  vision,  "  turns "  himself,  his 
attention  being  very  probably  called  anew  by  the  inter 
preting  angel — and,  lifting  up  his  eyes,  sees  a  roll  twenty 
cubits  in  length  and  ten  cubits  in  breadth  flying  in  the  air. 


THE  FLYING  ROLL  145 

On  addressing  a  silent  look  of  inquiry  to  his  angelic 
instructor  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  strange  sight  he  is  told, 
"  This  is  the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the  whole  land," 
etc. 

The  r&o,  megillah,  "  roll  "  or  "  scroll,"  as  the  emblem  of 
a  message  or  pronouncement  of  solemn  import  from  God 
to  man,  is  used  in  other  scriptures.  Thus,  in  Ezek.  ii.  9,  10 
we  find  a  strikingly  parallel  passage :  "  And  I  looked,  and 
behold  an  hand  was  put  forth  unto  me  ;  and,  lo,  a  roll  of  a 
book  (megillath  sepher]  was  therein  ;  and  he  spread  it  before 
me,  and  it  was  written  within  and  without :  and  there  was 
written  therein  lamentations,  and  mourning,  and  woe" 

The  megillah  which  Zechariah  beheld  was  also  "  spread  " 
out,  or  open,  else  its  dimensions  could  not  have  been  seen  ; 
and  it  also  was  written  "  within  and  without,"  as  may  be 
gathered  from  the  words  "  on  this  side  and  on  the  other  side, 
according  to  it"  which  I  take  to  be  the  most  satisfactory 
rendering  of  the  Hebrew  mizzeh  kamoah,  which  is  twice 
repeated  in  ver.  3. 

The  same  was  true  of  the  tables  of  the  law,  of  which 
the  same  words  are  used  to  describe  the  fact  that  "  they 
were  written  on  both  sides :  on  the  one  side  and  on  the 
other  ('"W21  nnp,  mizzeh-u-mizzeK)  were  they  written  "  (Ex. 
xxxii.  I  5). 

What  was  written  on  this  roll  may  be  gathered  from 
the  words,  "  This  is  the  curse"  ha-alah  (answering  to  the 
"  lamentations  and  mourning  and  woe "  of  Ezekiel's 
megillali} — which  might  refer  to  the  awful  catalogue  of 
curses  which  Moses  foretold  would  come  upon  Israel  in 
case  of  their  disobedience,  recorded  in  Deut.  xxviii.  15-68, 
and  which  in  chap.  xxx.  I  of  the  same  book  are  spoken  of 
in  the  singular  as  "  the  curse" 

But  it  seems  to  me  more  satisfactory  to  regard  the  word 
as  describing  in  a  more  general  way  the  curse  which  the  law 
as  a  whole  contains  within  itself — the  sequel,  so  to  say,  to 
the  breaking  its  commands  expressed  in  a  solemn  sentence : 
"  Cursed  be  Jie  tJiat  confirmeth  not  the  words  of  this  law  to  do 
them." 

10 


146     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

It  is  true  that  only  two  transgressions  are  here  specified 
for  which  their  perpetrators  are  to  be  pursued  and  over 
taken  by  the  curse — namely,  perjury  and  theft ;  but  these 
two  are  most  probably  mentioned  as  samples  and  sum 
maries  of  the  whole.  For  the  expression  "  everyone  that 
sweareth  "  must  be  understood  as  explained  in  the  4th  verse, 
as  "  swearing  falsely  by  the  Name  of  Jehovah"  and  is  thus  a 
violation  of  the  Third  Command,  which  is  found  in  the  first 
table  of  the  law  which  summarises  man's  duty  to  God  ;  and 
"  everyone  that  stealeth  "  breaks  the  Eighth  Commandment, 
which  is  found  on  the  second  table,  which  summarises 
man's  duty  to  his  neighbour.1  So  that  Baumgarten  and 
Hengstenberg  are  not  far  wrong  when  they  write  that  one 
side  of  the  roll  contained  the  judgments  of  God  against  the 
transgressors  of  the  Command,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and 
with  all  thy  might";  and  on  the  other  the  judgments 
against  the  transgressors  of  the  Command,  "  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself." 

Against  all  such  the  megillah,  with  its  awful  contents, 
" gpeth  forth"  being  set  in  motion  (as  we  see  from  the  4th 
verse)  by  "  Jehovah  of  hosts  "  ;  and  is  therefore  seen  "  fly 
ing  " — that  is,  travelling  rapidly  over  the  whole  land,2  and 

1  Baumgarten  points  out  that  the  prophet  selects  the  middle  Command  from 
each  of  the  tables. 

2  pN,  eretz,  means  earth  as  well  as  land,  and  several  commentators  have 
defended  the  rendering  in  the  A.V. ,  "  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."     But 
the  translation  adopted  in  the  R.V.  is  doubtless  the  correct  one — first,  because, 
as  Pusey  points  out,  those  upon  whom  the  curse  was  to  fall  were  those  who 
swore  falsely  by  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  which  was  true  of  Judah  only  ;  secondly, 
as  Keil  observes,  in  the  vision  of  the  Ephah,  which  is  closely  connected  with  that 
of  the  Flying  Roll,  "  the  land  "  is  contrasted  with   "the  land  of  Shinar."     The 
reference  to  the  two  tables  of  the  law  also  confines  the  vision  primarily  to  those 
who  were  under  the  law.     Yet  it  is  true  also  that  "  since  the  moral  law  abides 
under  the  gospel  there  is  an  ultimate  application  in  these  two  visions  in  the 
5th  chapter  also  to  Christendom,  which  was  to  spread  over  the  whole  earth." 
Remember,  dear  reader,  whatever  the  primary  application  of  this  vision,  that 
God's    curse  will  finally  overtake   all  workers  of  iniquity,  and  that    He  will 
"  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works  :  to  them  that  by  patience  in  well 
doing  seek  for  glory  and  honour  and  incorruption,  eternal  life  ;  but  to  them  that 
are   factious,   and  obey  not   the   truth,   but   obey   unrighteousness,   wrath  and 
indignation,  tribulation  and  anguish,  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  worketh  evil — 


THE  FLYING  ROLL  147 

signifying  the  swiftness  with  which  the  judgments  of  God 
shall  finally  overtake  the  wicked. 

The  special  dimensions  of  the  roll,  which  the  prophet  so 
carefully  notes,  are  also  not  without  significance.  It  was 
twenty  cubits  long  and  ten  cubits  broad,  which  corresponds 
both  with  the  porch  of  Solomon's  Temple  (i  Kings  vi.  3) 
and  with  the  Holy  Place  of  the  Tabernacle.  This  is 
certainly  not  accidental.  Hengstenberg,  who,  together 
with  Kimchi  and  other  Jewish  commentators,  considers  the 
reference  to  be  to  the  Temple,  says :  "  The  porch,  the 
uttermost  portion  of  the  actual  Temple,  was  the  spot  from 
which  God  was  supposed  to  hold  intercourse  with  His 
people  "  (i  Kings  vii.  7).  Hence  the  altar  of  burnt-offering 
stood  before  the  porch  in  the  forecourt  of  the  priests,  and 
when  any  great  calamity  fell  upon  the  land  the  priests 
approached  still  nearer  to  the  porch  to  offer  their  prayers, 
that  they  might,  as  it  were,  embrace  the  feet  of  their  angry 
Father  (Joel  ii.  1 7). 

By  giving  to  the  flying  roll  (the  symbol  of  the  Divine 
judgments  upon  the  covenant  nation)  the  same  dimensions 
as  those  of  the  porch,  the  prophet  appears  to  intimate  that 
these  judgments  were  a  direct  result  of  the  theocracy,  and 
originate  in  the  very  fact  of  Israel's  relationship  to  God,  in 
accordance  with  His  Word  through  the  prophet  Amos : 
"  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth, 
therefore  will  I  visit  on  you  all  your  iniquities  "  (iii.  2),  for 
which  reason  also  judgment  begins  first  at  the  house  of  God. 
But  there  is  a  greater  probability  in  the  suggestion  of 
Keil,  Kliefoth,  and  others,  that  the  dimensions  are  taken, 
not  from  the  porch  of  the  Temple,  but  from  the  Holy  Place 
of  the  Tabernacle,  just  as  the  symbolic  candlestick  in  the 
preceding  vision  is  also  the  Mosaic  candlestick  of  the 
Tabernacle,  and  not  of  the  Temple.  And  the  true  reason 
why  the  dimensions  of  the  roll  containing  God's  curse 
against  the  breakers  of  His  law  are  taken  from  the 

of  the  Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  Greek  ;  but  glory  and  honour  and  peace  to  every 
man  that  worketh  good,  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek  :  for  there  is  no 
respect  of  persons  with  God  "  (Rom.  ii.  6-1 1 ). 


148     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

sanctuary  is  probably  that  suggested  by  Kliefoth,  who  says  : 
"  The  fact  that  the  writing  which  brings  the  curse  upon 
sinners  has  the  same  dimensions  as  the  Tabernacle  signifies 
that  the  measure  will  be  meted  out  according  to  the  Holy 
Place  " ;  or,  in  the  words  of  an  English  theologian  :  "  Men 
are  not  to  be  judged  as  to  sin  by  their  own  measures,  or 
weighed  in  their  own  false  balances — the  measure  of  the 
sanctuary  is  that  by  which  man's  actions  are  to  be  weighed  " 
(i  Sam.  ii.  3).1  And  the  judgment  which  is  to  fall  on  the 
unrepentant,  unpardoned  transgressor  will  not  only  be 
"  according  to  the  measure  of  the  sanctuary,"  but  in  strict 
correspondence  with  the  majesty  and  holiness  of  the  law 
which  has  been  broken  :  "  For  every  one  that  stealeth  shall 
be  purged  out "  (literally,  cleansed  away,  "  as  something 
defiled  and  defiling  which  has  to  be  cleared  away  as 
offensive ")  "  on  (or  '  from ')  this  side  according  to  it " 
(namely,  as  already  explained,  according-  to  the  writing  on 
the  one  side  of  it) ;  "  and  every  one  that  sweareth  shall  be 
cleansed  away  according  to  "  (the  writing)  "  on  the  other 
side  of  it." 2 

1  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 

2  The  verb  n^  (niqqah)  is  here  the  Niphal.     The  Piel  is  alike  in  form.     The 
probable  meaning  of  the  root  is  to  carve  out,  to  hollow,  then  to  be  empty,  to  be 
pure,  free  from  fault.     Hence  the  Niphal  is  used  in  the  sense  of  to  be  pure,  free 
from  fault,  followed  by  jD  (mitt,  "from,"  "out  of").     Luther  has  taken  it  here 

in  this  meaning,  translating  "  for  all  thieves  shall  according  to  this  letter  be 
pronounced  pious "  (denn  alle  Diebe  werden  nach  diesem  Briefe  fromm 
gesprochen).  That  is,  it  is  a  curse  upon  the  land  that  theft  and  perjury  are 
regarded  no  more  as  crying  evils,  nor  as  deserving  of  punishment.  Similarly  the 
Syriac.  But  this  is  evidently  not  the  meaning.  Modern  scholars  rightly  render 
it  shall  be  cleared,  or  cleansed  away.  "  The  verb  is  used  of  a  city  being  emptied 
of  inhabitants,  i.e.,  laid  waste  and  ruined  (Isa.  iii.  26).  Here  the  verb  may  be 
employed  in  the  sense  of  being  rendered  solitary,  emptied  of  society,  driven  out 
of  communion  (Fiirst),  or  as  signifying  extirpated  (Gesenius).  It  has  probably 
the  signification  of  cleaning  away,  as  the  Greek  /caflaptfw  in  Mark  vii.  19,  as 
Pusey  suggests,  or  as  tKKa.Oa.ipu  in  I  Cor.  v.  7,  as  Pressel  has  given." 

The  late  Rev.  D.  Edwards,  for  many  years  an  honoured  missionary  to  the 
Jews  in  connection  with  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland,  wrote  some  thirty-five 
years  ago  a  striking  pamphlet,  which  is  not  now  in  my  possession,  on  the  two 
visions  of  this  6th  chapter  of  Zechariah,  in  which  he  gave  expression  to  the  view 
that  the  Flying  Roll  symbolised  the  false,  counterfeit  law,  namely,  the  Talmud, 
and  doctrines  of  modern  Judaism,  which  (in  contrast  to  the  holy  law  of  God) 
justified,  or  "declared  innocent,"  all  manner  of  transgressors. 


THE  FLYING  ROLL  149 

The  4th  verse  is  one  of  the  most  solemn  in  the  whole 
Bible,  as  showing  what  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  come  under 
God's  curse  against  sin.  "And  I  will  cause  it  to  go  forth  " 
— that  is,  the  curse,  with  its  doom  of  judgment,  which  God 
keeps,  so  to  say,  in  His  storehouse,  against  the  day  of 
vengeance — "  and  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief, 
and  into  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth  falsely  by  My  Name" 

(a)  "  I  will  bring  it  forth,  and  it  shall  enter  T 

Here  we  see  the  certainty  with  which  God's  judgments 
shall  finally  overtake  the  wicked.  Man  may  avoid  detec 
tion  of  his  sins  and  punishment  at  the  hands  of  his  fellow- 
man,  but  he  cannot  escape  God.  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will 
find  you  out "  ;  and  so  will  its  inevitable  punishment. 

"It  shall  enter  into  the  house" — the  place  where  the 
transgressor  may  think  that  he  can  hide  himself,  where  he 
may  think  himself  most  secure  ;  but  he  shall  find  that  God's 
avenging  justice  cannot  be  kept  out,  even  by  strong  walls 
or  iron  gates. 

(£)  "  And  it  shall  abide  in  the  midst  of  his  house."  x 
Here  we  see  the  continuance,  or  permanency  of  God's  judg 
ment  against  the  wicked.  The  word  for  "  abide,"  or 
"  remain,"  as  in  the  A.V.,  is  na^  laneh,  from  f^,  lun,  "  to 
lodge,"  "  to  spend  the  night  in  " ;  the  idea  being  that  the 
curse  will  not  only  pay  him  a  passing  visit,  but  shall 
"  lodge  "  there — that  is,  abide  by  night  as  well  as  by  day, 
until  it  accomplish  that  for  which  it  was  sent,  its  utter 
destruction.2 

Among  Jewish  commentators  Rashi  interprets  npj  (niqqah)  in  the  sense  of 
being  freed,  or  justified — the  same  as  adopted  by  Luther  and  Mr.  Edwards  ;  but 
Kimchi  says  the  meaning  of  npJ  is  "shall  be  cut  off"  And  this,  or  rather  "  shall 
be  cleansed  away  "  i.e.,  extirpated,  is  here  doubtless  the  true  meaning  of  the  verb, 
as  shown  above. 

1  The  same  verb  is  found  in  Ps.  xci.  I ,  but  there  it  is  used  to  describe  the 
blessed  privilege  of  the  righteous,  who,  "  dwelling  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most 
High"  (by  day),  shall  also  "abide,"  literally  "lodge"  (i.e.,  at  night),  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Almighty. 

2  Pusey. — Dr.  Wright,  in  a  note,  quotes  by  way  of  illustration  the  classical 
instance  recorded  by  Herodotus  (Book  vi.  86),  which  shows  that  the  moral  law 
of  God  was  not  only  revealed  to  Israel  and  graven  on  the  tables  of  stone,  but 
was  originally  also  written  by  His  finger  on  the  conscience  of  man,  who  still 
retains  a  shadowy  tracing  of  it,  so  to  say,  in  his  consciousness.     It  is  the  story 


ISO     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

And  the  punishment  which  these  transgressions  often 
bring  down  upon  man,  even  in  this  life,  must  be  regarded 
as  "  mere  premonitory  droppings  of  the  tempest  of  wrath 
which  will  one  day  overwhelm  the  ungodly." 

(c)  But  there  is  yet  a  climax  in  the  train  of  calamities 
which  the  curse  will  bring  to  the  house  of  the  wicked.  It 
shall  not  only  "  dwell "  there,  but  it  "  shall  consume  it  with 
the  timber  thereof,  and  the  stones  thereof"  Here  we  see  the 
terribleness  of  the  punishment  which  sin  brings  down  upon 
itself.  It  shall  be  utterly  "  cleansed  away,"  or  "  consumed  " 
from  the  midst  of  God's  congregation,  together  with  those 
sinners  who  are  no  longer  separable  from  it. 

The  terms  in  the  last  sentence  are  almost  identical 
with  those  used  of  the  house  stricken  with  leprosy  in 
Lev.  xiv.  45,  which,  too,  had  to  be  destroyed,  "both  the 
stones  thereof  and  the  timber  thereof" ;  and  this  undoubted 
allusion  supplies  another  hint  of  the  fact  that  already  in 
the  Old  Testament  leprosy  was  regarded  as  a  type  of  sin, 
and  that  what  that  terrible  and  loathsome  disease  did  for 
men's  bodies  and  their  earthly  habitations,  sin  does  for 
men's  souls,  not  only  in  relation  to  the  life  that  now  is,  but 
also  in  relation  to  that  which  is  to  come.  There  is  only  one 
way  by  which  we  can  escape  the  curse  of  a  broken  law, 
and  that  is,  instead  of  being  "  cleansed  away  "  with  our  sins 
by  God's  wrath  into  perdition,  to  be  cleansed  from  our  sins 
in  that  fountain  which  God  has  opened  in  the  pierced  side 
of  Messiah  for  sin  and  uncleanness,  and  which  makes  the 

about  Glaucus.  The  name  of  this  man  was  held  in  high  repute  for  integrity,  and 
hence  a  Milesian  came  to  him  to  deposit  a  sum  of  money  on  trust.  The  deposit 
was  accepted  by  Glaucus.  But  when  the  money  was  required  by  the  sons  of  the 
depositor,  who  presented  the  tallies  in  support  of  their  claim,  Glaucus  hesitated 
to  restore  it.  lie  consulted  the  oracle  of  Delphi  whether  he  might  perjure  him 
self  and  appropriate  the  money.  The  priestess  told  him  that  it  was  best  for  the 
present  to  do  as  he  desired,  because  death  was  the  common  lot  of  the  honest  and 
the  dishonest.  "Yet  oath  has  a  son,  nameless,  handless,  footless,  but  swift ;  he 
pursues  until  he  seize  and  destroy  the  whole  race  and  house."  On  hearing  this, 
Glaucus  begged  to  be  pardoned  for  his  question  ;  but  the  priestess  replied  that  it 
was  as  bad  to  have  tempted  the  god  as  to  have  done  the  deed.  Glaucus  ulti 
mately  restored  the  money  to  its  owners.  Yet  it  was  noted  that  his  whole  family 
became  extinct,  which  was  considered  as  a  punishment  for  consulting  the  oracle 
whether  he  might  perjure  himself. 


THE  FLYING  ROLL  151 

vilest  "  whiter  than  snow."  Yes,  blessed  be  God !  for  as 
many  as  can  say  with  the  Apostle,  "  Christ  hath  redeemed 
us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  become  a  curse  for  us  ; 
for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  he  that  hangeth  on  a  tree " 
(Gal.  Hi.  13). 

Yet  one  word  more  in  conclusion  in  reference  to  the 
yet  unfulfilled  prophetic  element  in  this  vision. 

The  more  immediate  application  may  have  been  to  the 
remnant  which  returned  from  Babylon,  to  whom  Zechariah 
spoke ;  and  there  may  be  some  truth  in  the  suggestion  of 
Dr.  Fausset  that  the  "  theft  "  and  "  false  swearing  "  specially 
referred  to  in  this  vision  has  a  reference  to  the  sacrilege  of 
which  the  Jews  then  were  guilty  in  withholding  the  portions 
due  from  them  for  the  Levites  (Neh.  xiii.  10),  and  in 
holding  back  the  due  tithes  and  offerings  from  the  Lord 
(Mai.  iii.  8). 

Thus  "  they  robbed  God  by  neglecting  to  give  Him  His 
due  in  building  His  house,  whilst  they  built  their  own 
houses  foreswearing  their  obligations  to  Him." 

There  is  also,  as  we  have  seen,  a  general  application  of 
the  solemn  truth  contained  in  this  vision  to  all  who  make 
any  profession  of  the  name  of  God  at  all  times  ;  yet  the 
full  and  manifest  fulfilment  of  this  symbolic  prophecy  will 
not  take  place  till  the  time  of  the  end,  when,  in  the  final 
stage  of  both  Jewish  and  anti-Christian  apostasy,  iniquity 
shall  reach  its  climax,  and  the  majority  of  those  who 
profess  to  be  the  Lord's  people  shall  join  in  "  transgressing 
and  lying  against  Jehovah,  and  in  departing  away  from  their 
God,  speaking  oppression  and  revolt,  conceiving  and  uttering 
from  the  heart  words  of  falsehood"  (Isa.  lix.  13).  Then 
the  final  separation  shall  take  place,  and  the  wicked  be 
"  cut  off"  from  the  congregation  of  the  Lord,  and  all  sin 
and  iniquity  be  finally  cleansed  away  from  the  "  holy  land  " 
(Zech.  ii.  12),  and  from  "off  the  face  of  the  whole  earth." 


CHAPTER    VIII 
THE   SEVENTH  VISION 

THE   EPHAH 

(CHAPTER  v.  5-11) 


Then  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went  forth,  and  said  unto  me,  Lift  up 
now  thine  eyes,  and  see  what  is  this  that  goeth  forth.  And  I  said,  What  is  it  ? 
And  he  said,  This  is  the  ephah  that  goeth  forth.  He  said  moreover,  This  is 
their  appearance  in  all  the  land  (and  behold,  there  was  lifted  up  a  talent  of 
lead);  and  this  is  the  woman  sitting, in  the  midst  of  the  ephah.  And  he  said 
unto  me,  This  is  wickedness  ;  and  he  cast  her  down  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah  : 
and  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth  thereof.  Then  lifted  I  up  mine 
eyes  and  saw,  and,  behold,  there  came  forth  two  women,  and  the  wind  was  in 
their  wings  ;  now  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  stork  ;  and  they  lifted  up 
the  ephah  between  earth  and  heaven.  Then  said  I  to  the  angel  that  talked  with 
me,  Whither  do  these  bear  the  ephah  ?  And  he  said  unto  me,  To  build  her  a 
house  in  the  land  of  Shinar  :  and  when  it  is  prepared,  she  shall  be  set  there  in 
her  own  place. 


154 


CHAPTER    VIII 

WE  now  come   to   the   second   of  the   two   visions 
contained  in  the   5th  chapter,  which,  together, 
set  forth  the  full  and  final  removal,  not  only  of 
the  guilt  of  sin,  but  of  sin  itself  (especially  in  its  final  and 
yet  future  form  of  "  wickedness  "  or  lawlessness] — and  that 
by  means  of  judgment — from  ofif  the  "  holy  land,"  and  from 
the  very  presence  of  His  redeemed  and  purified  people. 
: 

What  the  Prophet  saw 

After  instructing  the  prophet  as  to  the  meaning  of  the 
preceding  vision,  the  Interpreting  Angel  had  again  with 
drawn  for  awhile,  and  the  prophet  was  left  to  himself  to 
meditate  on  the  solemn  significance  of  the  Flying  Roll. 
Then  the  angel  "  went  forth  "  (probably  from  the  choirs  of 
angels  among  whom  he  had  retired  in  the  interval,  as 
Pusey  suggests),  and  telling  the  prophet  once  more  to  lift 
up  his  eyes,  he  beholds  another  object,  which  the  Angel 
tells  him  is  "  the  ephah  which  goeth  forth"  and  adds  the 
enigmatical  words :  "  This  is  their  resemblance  (lit.,  '  their 
eye ')  in  all  the  land" 

As  the  prophet  looks,  the  cover,  consisting  of  a  circular 
mass,  or  "talent,"  of  lead,  was  lifted  up,  and  he  beheld  a 
woman  (lit.,  "  one  woman ")  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the 
ephah,  of  whom  the  angel  said,  pointing  to  her :  "  This  is 
the  Wickedness."  As  there  is  evidently  an  attempt  on  the 
part  of  the  woman  to  get  out,  or  escape,  the  angel  casts 
her  down  into  the  midst  of  the  ephah:  "And  he  cast  the 
weight  (lit.,  '  stone ')  of  lead  upon  the  mouth  thereof" 

Then  the  prophet  saw  two  women  with  wings  like  the 


156     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

wings  of  a  stork  "  coming  forth "  from  the  invisible,  and 
the  wind  was  in  their  wings,  and  they  lifted  up  the  ephah 
between  the  earth  and  the  heaven.  On  his  inquiring  of  the 
angel :  "  Whither  do  these  bear  the  ephah  ?  "  the  answer  was  : 
"  To  build  her  an  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar :  and  when 
(or  '  if'}  it  be  prepared  (or  '  established''}  it  shall  be  set 
there  upon  her  own  base." 

The  Significance  of  the  Symbolism 

Let  me  now  try  very  simply  to  explain  the  various 
items  in  this  vision  in  the  order  in  which  they  occur  in  the 
text. 

(a)  The  ephah,  the  same  as  bath,  was  the  largest 
measure  for  dry  goods  in  use  among  the  Jews,1  though 
there  is  still  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  its  exact  size 
and  capacity.  The  most  general  interpretation  of  this 
symbol — the  one  which  I  myself  have  previously  held — is 
that  it  signified  the  (full)  measure  of  Israel's  sins,  beyond 
which  there  is  to  be  no  more  forgiveness,  but  a  carrying 
away,  or  banishing  from  the  land,  or  (as  some  interpreters 
will  have  it)  from  "  the  earth."  Thus,  already  one  of  the  , 
Church  Fathers,  quoting  the  solemn  words  of  our  Lord, 
"  Fill  ye  up  tfie  measure  of  your  fathers"  says :  "  The 
measure,  then,  which  the  prophet  saw  pointed  to  the 
filling-up  of  the  measure  of  the  transgression  against 
Himself";2  and  another  says:  "The  angel  bids  him 
behold  the  sins  of  the  people  Israel  heaped  together  in  a 
perfect  measure,  and  the  transgression  of  all  fulfilled,  that 
the  sins  which  escaped  notice  one  by  one,  might,  when 
collected  together,  be  laid  open  to  the  eyes  of  all,  and 
Israel  might  go  forth  from  its  place,  and  it  might  be  shown 
to  all  what  she  was  in  her  own  land." 3 

A  so.mewhat  similar  interpretation  is  given  by  Kliefoth 
(who  is  folJowed  by  Keil   and  others),  who  says :  "  Just  as 

1  The  'omer,  wiMch  contained  ten  ephahs,  appears,  as  Keil    points  out,  to 
have  had  only  an  idea.  \  existence,  namely,  for  the  purpose  of  calculation. 
a  Cyril.  3  Jerome, 


THE  EPHAH  157 

in  a  bushel  the  separate  grains  are  all  collected  together,  so 
will  the  individual  sinners  over  the  whole  earth  be  brought 
into  a  heap  when  the  curse  of  the  end  (contained  in  the 
Flying  Roll)  goes  forth  over  the  whole  earth."  l 

But,  though  it  is  a  solemn  truth  that  God  allows  evil 
fully  to  develop  itself,  and  iniquity  to  fill  up  its  full  measure 
of  guilt  before  He  finally  interposes  in  judgment,  the  usual 
interpretations  quoted  above  overlook  the  fact  that  the  ephah 
instead  of  being  represented  as  the  measure  into  which  the 
people  pile  up  their  iniquities,  is  spoken  of  as  itself  "going 
forth  "  (riNVi'n,  the  same  expression  as  is  used  of  the  Flying 
Roll  in  ver.  3)  to  pervade  the  people  with  its  influence,  and 
to  stamp  upon  it,  so  to  say,  its  own  characteristic  features, 
so  that  "  this  shall  be  their  appearance  ('  their  aspect,'  or 
'  resemblance  ')  in  all  the  land." 2 

If  we  ask  ourselves  what  was  this  new  power,  or 
principle,  which  exercised  such  a  mighty  formative  influence 
over  the  Jewish  people  ever  since  the  Babylonian  Captivity, 
and  which  is  gradually  also  bringing  all  the  other  nations 
of  the  earth  under  its  sway,  the  answer  is  trade  or  commerce, 
of  which  the  ephah  is  the  natural  emblem. 

With  their  banishment  to  Babylon  and  subsequent 
dispersion  and  peculiar  position  among  the  nations,  there 
not  only  began  an  altogether  new  period  of  Jewish  history, 
but  there  commenced  also  the  processes  by  which  the  bulk 
of  the  nation  became  gradually  transformed  from  an 
agricultural  and  pastoral  people  into  a  nation  of  merchant 
men,3  and  the  new  occupations  into  which  they  were  forced 

1  So  also  Bredenkamp,  in  his  Prophet  Sacharja,  in  almost  exactly  the  same 
words:    "  Wie  in  einem  Scheffel  die  einzelnen  Korner  gesammelt  werden,  so 
werden  alle  Gottlose  in  diesem  epha  gesammelt,  so  dass  sie  ein  Weib  ausmachen." 

2  The  LXX  have  either  had  another    MS  reading,  namely,  Djiy   (avonam), 
"their  iniquity,"  instead  of  the  present  Hebrew  text  of  Dj'y  (^enam),  "eye,"  or 
appearance,  or  have  simply  blundered  in  their  translation,  for  they  render  the 
sentence,   "this  is  their  iniquity  in  all  the  earth,"  a  reading   which   has  been 
adopted   by  several  of  the  German  commentators.     But  there   is  no  reason  to 
doubt  the  correctness  of  the  Masoretic  text. 

3  This  is  the  explanation  given  in  the  Targum  and  by  Rashi.     Kimchi,  who 
quite  unjustifiably  applies  this  vision  to  the  Ten  Tribes,  gives  the  following  far 
fetched   interpretation:    "He  showed   him  an  ephah,  which  is  a   measure,  to 


158     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

by  the  altered  circumstances  tended  in  a  peculiar  sense  to 
develop  the  two  transgressions  (namely,  theft  and  perjury) 
which  are  specified  in  the  preceding  vision  of  the  Flying 
Roll,  with  which  this  vision  of  the  Ephah  stands  very  closely 
related.  Idolatry,  into  which  they  were  so  liable  to  fall, 
was  for  ever  left  behind  in  Babylon  ;  but  a  godless  com 
mercialism,  with  its  temptations  "  to  make  the  ephah  small 
and  the  shekel  great,  and  to  deal  falsely  with  balances  of 
deceit"  (Amos  viii.  5),  eventually  becomes  not  less  hateful 
to  God — not  only  because  it  has  too  often  been  supported 
by  theft  and  perjury,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  trans 
gressions  of  the  central  commands  of  both  tables  of  the 
Law,  but  because  it  was  destined  to  develop  a  new  system 
in  which  all  iniquity  would  finally  be  summed  up. 

(U]  In  conjunction  with  the  ephah  we  have  the  133, 
kikar,  which  the  English  Version  renders  "  talent."  The 
Hebrew  word  literally  means  "  a  circle,"  and  thus  kikar 

signify  that  God  had  measured  out  to  them  measure  for  measure  ;  for,  according 
as  they  had  done  by  continuing  many  days  in  their  wickedness,  from  the  day  that 
the  kingdom  was  divided  until  the  day  that  they  were  led  away  captive ;  and 
as  they  had  not  had  one  out  of  all  their  kings  who  turned  them  to  good,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  they  all  walked  in  an  evil  way  :  according,  I  say,  as  they  had 
continued  long  in  evil,  so  they  shall  be  many  days  in  captivity — this  is  measure 
for  measure  ;  therefore  the  prophet  saw  an  ephah  which  is  a  measure." 

Among  German  commentators,  Pressel,  in  his  Comtnentar  zu  Haggai, 
Sacharja,  ttnd  Maleachi,  is  the  only  one  who,  as  far  as  I  know,  has  caught 
what,  on  mature  consideration,  seems  to  me  the  true  significance  of  the  ephah, 
and  he  is  followed  by  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 

Lange,  in  his  Bibelwerk,  refers  somewhat  contemptuously  to  Pressel's 
view,  his  great  objection  being  expressed  in  the  words:  "  Wie  wenn  etwa  von 
einem  heutigen  judenviertel  die  Rede  ware,  und  nicht  von  der  Geheiligten 
Colonie  zu  Jerusalem"  ("as  if  the  subject  dealt  with  was  a  modern  Jewish 
quarter  instead  of  the  sanctified  colony  in  Jerusalem  ").  But  the  answer  to  this 
objection  is  that  the  present  state  of  the  Jewish  people  as  seen  "  i m  heutigen 
judenviertel"  cannot  be  dissociated  from  Israel's  past  or  future.  That  the 
beginning  of  the  new  power  of  commercialism  as  associated  with  the  Jewish 
people  can  be  traced  back  to  the  dispersion,  and  began  already  to  assert  itself  in 
Zechariah's  time,  is  a  matter  of  history.  Beside  this,  these  two  visions  in 
chap.  v.  do  not  set  forth  the  "sanctified  colony  in  Jerusalem,"  but  rather  show 
how  transgressors  shall  be  "cut  off"  (or  "cleansed  away"),  and  how  the  evil 
which  is  the  very  embodiment  of  "wickedness,"  or  "lawlessness,"  shall  finally 
be  banished  from  the  "holy  land,"  so  that  those  who  remain  after  the  purifying 
judgment  shall  "  be  called  holy,  even  every  one  that  is  written  among  the  living 
in  Jerusalem  "  (Isa.  iv.  3). 


THE  EPHAH  159 

lehem,  "  a  circle  of  bread,"  is  used  to  denote  a  round 
loaf.1 

The  word,  as  Dr.  Wright  points  out,  is  not  elsewhere 
found  in  the  signification  of  a  cover,  though  that  is  a 
possible  sense.  "It  is  constantly  used  of  a  fixed  weight, 
by  which  gold,  silver,  and  other  things  are  weighed  and 
measured,  and  is  naturally  spoken  of  in  such  a  meaning 
here  in  connection  with  the  Ephah,  as  the  latter  was  the 
usual  measure  of  capacity.  The  talent  was  the  largest 
measure  of  quantity,  and  the  weight  was  made  of  lead 
as  the  most  common  heavy  metal,  and  was  used  in  all 
commercial  transactions  for  weighing  out  money." 

That  a  "  talent,"  the  other  chief  emblem  and  instrument 
of  trade,  should  have  been  seen  by  the  prophet  as  forming 
the  cover  of  the  ephah,  is  of  solemn  significance,  as  will  be 
shown  further  on. 

(c]  The  "  talent,"  or  circular  mass  of  lead,  being  lifted,2  the 
prophet  beheld  a  woman  3  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  ephah. 

"  And  he  said  "  (i.e.,  the  Angel,  as  if  to  call  anew  the 
prophet's  special  attention),  "this  is  the  Wickedness" — the 
very  embodiment  of  iniquity,  rendered  in  the  Septuagint 
avopia,  lawlessness. 

1  Ex.  xxix.  23  ;  I  Sam.  ii.  36. 

2  According  to  Pressel  and  Dr.  Wright  the  woman  was  sitting  (as  it  were, 
enthroned)  in  the  ephah  carrying  the  kikar,  or  talent  of  lead  (the  emblem   of 
the  means  by  which  her  traffic  is  carried  on),   in  her   lap.     They  render   the 
7th  verse  thus  :   "  And  behold  a  talent  of  lead  was  being  lifted  up  (i.e.  carried), 
and  I  saw,  and  this  was  one  woman  sitting  (or  '  as  she  sat ')  in  the  middle  of  the 
ephah."     But,  though  this  is  a  possible  though  somewhat  forced  rendering  of 
the  verb  nxiyj  (which  is  the  Niphal  participle  fern,  of  N£J),  it  seems  to  me  clear 
from  the  8th  verse  that  the  "talent"  formed  the  cover.     The  impression  left  on 
the  mind  by  reading  the  narrative  of  the  vision  in  the  original  is  certainly  that 
there  is  an  attempted  escape  on  the  part  of  the  woman  from  the  ephah,  and  that 
the  Angel  casts  the  talent  on  the  mouth  of  the  ephah  with  a  view  to  secure  her, 
that  she  may  be  safely  carried  to  the  land  of  Shinar.     It  is  for  this  reason,  I  suppose, 
that  it  may  serve  as  a  cover,  or  circular  lid — apart  from  its  emblematic  significance 
as  the  instrument  of  trade — that  a  talent  of  lead,  consisting  of  a  large,  circular, 
undefined  mass,  is  seen  in  the  vision,  instead  of  one  of  gold,  or  of  silver,  which 
in  size  would  be  very  much  smaller. 

3  hshah   achath— literally,  "one   woman."     The   words,   "and   this  is  one 
woman,"  are  those  of  the  Interpreting  Angel,  who  proceeds  in  the  next  verse  to 
describe  her  character. 


160     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  woman  is  usually  taken  by  commentators  to 
symbolise  the  Jewish  people,  which,  when  the  measure  of 
sin  shall  have  become  full,  would  be  carried  away  into 
captivity.  But  the  seventy  years'  captivity  in  Babylon  was 
now  at  an  end,  and  the  idea  of  a  retrospective  significance 
of  the  symbolism  of  this  vision,  which  Jerome  and  Rosen- 
muller  adopt,  seems  to  me  untenable.  All  the  other 
visions  of  Zechariah  relate  to  the  future — as  Hengstenberg 
well  observes,  why  should  this  be  the  sole  exception  ?  In 
the  judgment  of  the  Flying  Roll  a  coming  judgment  is 
foretold.  Why  should  this  one  of  the  Ephah  be  referred  to 
the  past  ? 

Neither  can  it  be  properly  referred  to  the  subsequent 
captivity,  as  Hengstenberg  and  others  attempt  to  do. 
There  was,  indeed,  another  dispersion  of  the  Jewish  people 
after  the  restoration  from  Babylon,  but  that  could  not  well 
be  represented  in  any  special  sense  as  a  carrying  away 
"  into  the  land  of  Shinar."  Besides,  as  I  have  tried  to 
show  in  the  introductory  remarks  to  the  exposition  of  the 
preceding  vision  of  the  Flying  Roll,  the  scope  and  purport 
of  the  two  visions  in  chap.  v.  are  not  the  punishment  of 
the  nation,  but  the  cleansing  of  the  restored  people  and 
land,  and  the  stamping  out  and  banishment  from  their 
midst  not  only  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  but  of  iniquity  or  "  wicked 
ness"  itself. 

We  regard,  therefore,  the  woman  in  this  vision,  not  as 
a  personification  of  the  Jewish  people,  nor  as  a  collective 
representation  of  individual  sinners  who  are  finally  gathered 
into  one  heap  in  the  ephah,  but  as  delineating  the  (then  as  yet 
hidden]  moral  system  of  which  the  ephah  is  the  emblem. 

And  it  is  not  inappropriate  that  the  system  engendered 
by  the  ephah,  which  in  its  essence  is  the  worship  of 
Mammon,  should  be  represented  by  a  woman,  "  because  of 
the  power  it  displays  as  a  temptress,  whereby  it  exercises 
such  an  enticing  and  dangerous  influence  over  the  souls  of 
men."  Or,  as  Grotius  observed :  This  form  of  wickedness 
is  here  described  as  a  woman  "  because  she  is  the  mother 
of  thefts  and  perjuries,  and  of  all  crimes."  But  though 


THE  EPHAH  161 

this  vision,  like  all  the  rest,  has  primary  reference  to  the 
land  and  the  people — and  the  purport  of  its  message  is  that 
the  system  which  is  characterised  as  the  Wickedness  (and  is 
altogether  alien  and  opposed  to  the  principles  of  the 
redeemed  and  sanctified  community  in  the  land  in  which 
the  King  of  Righteousness  shall  have  His  seat)  shall  be 
banished  to  the  place,  or  sphere,  to  which  it  originally 
belongs — it  is  a  solemn  truth  that  this  same  evil  power  of 
the  ephah,  with  its  all-pervading  controlling  influence,  is 
"  going  forth  "  also  in  the  whole  world  ;  so  that  of  all  the 
civilised  nations  in  particular  it  must  be  said  :  "  This  is 
their  aspect,  or  resemblance,  in  all  the  earth."1 

It  is  a  striking  and  noteworthy  fact,  which  no  intelli 
gent  man  can  fail  to  observe,  that  commerce  is  more  and 
more  bringing  the  nations  under  its  sway. 

It  now  sets  up  the  governments  and  dictates  the  policies 
of  the  nations.  It  is  for  it  that  the  mighty  armaments  are 
being  built  and  that  wars  are  being  made. 

In  all  the  earth  and  among  all  nations  that  which  is 
symbolised  by  the  ephah  is  becoming  the  great  controlling 
centre  of  society.  "  The  producing  power  of  manufacture, 
the  distributing  skill  of  the  merchant,  the  controlling  power 
of  those  who  trade  in  money  and  command  the  circulating 
medium  of  commerce — these  and  similar  interests,  when 
combined,  are  able  to  speak  with  a  voice  which  no  govern 
ment  can  refuse  to  hear.  Their  will  is  potent.  Legislation 
and  government  accommodate  themselves  to  their  demands." 

That,  for  instance,  "  which  is  most  distinctive  in  the 
present  condition  of  England  is  her  commercial  system. 
Commerce,  or  the  wealth  and  influence  thence  arising,  has 
become  the  mainspring  of  England's  energies — the  chief 
bulwark  of  her  social  institutions,  the  pillar  of  her  govern 
ment.  When  ecclesiastical  power  fell,  and  the  feudal 
aristocracy  became  gradually  enfeebled,  and  when  the 
steady  advance  of  the  people  seemed  to  make  democracy 
(perhaps  revolutionary  democracy)  the  sure  end  of  the 

1  !'!?>  tretz — as  already  explained — means  both  "  land  "  and  "  earth,"  though 
its  primary  use  in  this  vision  is  of  the  "  land." 
II 


1 62     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

social  movement,  there  was  gradually  being  formed  in  this 
country  a  new  aristocracy,  more  potent  than  any,  whether 
ecclesiastical  or  hereditary,  that  had  preceded — the  aristo 
cracy  of  wealth.  The  expressions  '  commercial  interest,' 
'  manufacturing  interest/  '  moneyed  interest,'  '  Indian 
interest,'  and  the  like,  suggest  sufficiently  intelligible  ideas 
to  English  minds.  The  ramifications  of  these  interests  are 
so  various  and  so  extended  that  the  mass  of  society  is 
effectually  reached  and  controlled  by  their  influence ;  and 
thus  a  power  has  been  consolidated  the  like  to  which  has 
never  before  existed.  In  England  this  power  is  learning 
to  work  in  harmony  with  the  State.  Indeed,  the  State  has 
virtually  become  its  organ.  Plutocracy  is  a  comprehensive, 
not  an  exclusive  system.  Its  elasticity  is  great.  It  can 
adapt  itself  to  the  changing  circumstances  of  the  hour,  and 
receiving  within  its  circle  both  the  aristocrat  and  the  demo 
crat,  it  provides  a  place  of  honour  and  influence  for  both. 

"In  its  relations  to  ancient  systems,  it  seeks,  not  to 
annihilate,  but  rather  to  modify,  adapt,  harmonise,  and 
employ.  It  possesses,  therefore,  not  only  its  own  intrinsic 
weight,  but  is  acquiring  also  all  the  weight  which  govern 
mental  authority  can  give.  No  other  interest,  whether 
royal  or  ecclesiastic,  aristocratic  or  popular,  is  allowed  to 
throw  any  effectual  impediment  in  its  course.  Virtually, 
its  will  is  paramount.  The  appropriate  device  of  England 
would  not  be  either  the  crown  or  the  mitre,  the  coronet  or 
the  sword,  but  some  emblem  of  commerce.  An  '  ephah ' 
should  be  emblazoned  on  her  banners.  Our  Government  is 
a  commercial  Government,  not  because  England  happens 
to  be  a  mercantile  country,  but  because  manufacturing  and 
trading  interests  supremely  sway  her  councils,  and  all  other 
interests  are  being  made  subordinate.  Such  are  the 
features  which  characteristically  mark  the  period  during 
which  the  powers  of  civilisation  have  been  renovated  in  this 
Western  corner  of  the  Roman  world. 

"  The  abasement  of  ecclesiastical  supremacy,  the  estab 
lishment  of  constitutional  monarchy,  and  the  rise  of  com 
merce  into  sovereign  influence,  may  be  regarded  as  accom- 


THE  EPHAH  163 

plished  facts.  They  distinctively  characterise  England ; 
and  finally  they  will  equally  characterise  every  other 
kingdom  that  falls  within  the  Roman  world.  The  success 
of  England  naturally  causes  her  to  be  imitated.  Her 
influence,  which  is  great,  is  exerted,  as  might  be  expected, 
for  the  propagation  of  her  principles,  and  the  circumstances 
of  the  hour  favour  these  principles.  We  cannot  marvel  at 
this,  for  the  Scriptures  plainly  declare  that  such  shall  be  the 
principles  of  the  closing  period  of  our  dispensation.  What 
ever  opinion  may  be  formed  as  to  the  particular  city 
indicated  in  the  1 8th  of  the  Revelation,  this  at  least  is 
evident,  that  that  chapter  describes  a  closing  scene  in  the 
world's  present  history,  and  speaks  of  '  merchants  being  the 
great  men  of  the  earth,'  and  of  a  commercial  city  being 
'  queen  of  the  nations.' 

"  But  it  may  be  asked,  Why  should  this  be  regretted  ? 
Is  an  ephah  the  symbol  of  evil  ?  In  other  words,  Is  com 
merce  necessarily  sinful  ?  We  reply,  No  ;  commerce  is  not 
necessarily  sinful.  Commerce  may  be  the  mere  exchange 
on  just  and  righteous  principles  of  the  productions  of 
various  regions,  or  of  various  labourers.  The  effecting 
such  exchange  may  involve  no  course  of  conduct  that 
militates  against  the  principles  of  God,  or  sacrifices  His 
truth.  But  it  may  be  otherwise.  If  commerce  comes  into 
such  supremacy  as  to  make  her  merchants  the  great  men 
of  the  earth,  the  influences  that  governmentally  order  the 
nations  would  in  that  case  fall  into  her  hand.  The  world 
— educationally,  politically,  religiously,  socially — would  be 
virtually  under  her  control.  How  blessed  if  her  principles 
were  the  principles  of  God !  But  if  the  arrangements 
which  are  to  characterise  the  nations  as  the  latter  day 
draws  nigh  are  as  evil  as  the  Scriptures  declare  them  to 
be,  then  they  who  by  means  of  their  commercial  greatness 
control  or  sustain  these  arrangements  must  be  the  very 
pillars  of  the  last  great  system  of  evil,  and  the  commercial 
period  of  the  world's  history  becomes  the  period  of  its 
systematised  transgression."  * 

1  Babylon  and  Egypt,  by  B.  W.  Newton. 


1 64     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

It  is  most  probably,  then,  because  of  the  part  this 
system  is  to  play  in  connection  with  the  final  apostasy, 
that  it  is  characterised  by  the  Angel  with  such  emphasis 
as  fW")n — "  the  wickedness,"  or  "  the  lawlessness." 

But  to  return  to  the  Scriptures  immediately  before  us. 

The  Angel's  action  in  throwing  the  woman  back  into 
the  ephah,  and  casting  the  circular  mass  of  lead  "  upon  the 
mouth  thereof,"  is  meant,  I  believe,  to  set  forth,  not  only 
the  fact  that  the  instruments  of  sin  become  the  instruments 
of  her  punishment,  but  the  still  more  solemn  truth  that 
men  and  nations  who  sell  themselves  to  sin  are,  after  a 
time,  kept  down  and  tied  to  that  particular  sin  ;  or,  to  use 
the  language  of  Prov.  v.  22  :  "  His  own  iniquities  shall  take 
the  wicked,  and  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sin" 

Not  only  in  relation  to  the  future  eternal  destiny  of  the 
individual  (of  which  the  words  are  primarily  used),  but 
already  also  in  the  earthly  history  of  men  and  nations,  there 
comes  a  time  when  the  solemn  judicial  sentence  goes  forth 
from  the  mouth  of  God :  "  He  that  is  unrighteous,  let  him 
do  unrighteousness  still :  and  he  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be 
made  filthy  still"  (Rev.  xxii.  1 1,  R.V.). 

Thus,  when  the  woman  attempts  to  escape,  she  is  thrown 
back  into  the  ephah,  which  becomes,  so  to  say,  the  chariot 
in  which  she  is  carried  away  as  something  which  is  defiled 
and  defiling,  from  the  land  in  which  God  shall  dwell ;  and 
the  talent  with  which  she  carries  on  her  unrighteous  trade 
becomes  the  heavy  weight  by  which  she  is  held  down  till 
she  is  landed  safely  "  in  her  own  place,"  where,  after  a  season 
of  lawless  liberty  in  which  she  will  allure  men  to  their  own 
destruction  by  her  seductive  attractiveness  and  luxury,  she 
will  be  judged  and  destroyed,  together  with  him  who  is 
pre-eminently  styled  "  The  Wicked  One,"  by  the  brightness 
of  the  Lord's  parousia  (2  Thess.  ii.  8). 

(d}  We  come  now  to  the  last  act  in  the  drama  of  this 
vision,  which,  as  already  said,  is  primarily  intended  to  set 
forth  the  removal  of"  wickedness  "  from  the  holy  land  without 
occupying  itself  with  its  final  destiny  in  the  land  to  which,  by 
the  aid  of  evil  powers,  it  was  for  a  time  to  be  transplanted. 


THE  EPHAH  165 

That  every  item  in  the  description  of  the  actors  in  the 
9th  verse  is  of  symbolical  significance  (as  is  the  case  with 
all  the  details  in  the  other  visions),  and  not  merely  pictur 
esque  figures  of  speech  with  a  view  "  to  give  distinctness  to 
the  picture  "  (as  Keil,  Hengstenberg,  Bredenkamp,  and  others 
assert),  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  speak 
with  absolute  positiveness  as  to  what  each  particular  is 
intended  to  signify.1 

In  a  general  way  I  agree  on  this  point  with  those 
writers  who  regard  these  women  as  typifying  instruments 
or  systems  of  evil,  who  for  a  time  deliver  the  woman  in  the 
ephah  from  the  vengeance  which  was  about  to  destroy  her. 
"  By  reason  of  the  curse  described  (in  the  previous  vision) 
as  overtaking  all  who  followed  in  her  wicked  ways,"  observes 
Dr.  Wright,  "  no  place  is  left  for  her  any  longer  in  the  land 
of  righteousness,  among  a  people  whose  trangressions  are  for 
given  and  who  are  sanctified  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  holiness. 
The  winged  women,  therefore,  bear  off  the  evil  one  to  the 
land  of  Shinar,  there  to  build  for  her  a  home  and  a  house."2 

1  Keil,   whose  remarks  are   repeated   almost   verbally  by  Bredenkamp  and 
others,  easily  passes   over  this  verse   with   the  following   remarks:    "Women 
carry  it  because  there  is  a  woman  inside ;  and  two  women  because  two  persons 
are  required  to  carry  so  large  and  heavy  a  burden,  that  they  may  lay  hold  of  it 
on  both  sides.     These  women  have  wings  because  it  passes  through  the  air ;  and 
a  stork's  wings  because  these  birds  have  broad  pinions,"  etc. 

2  It  may  be  remarked  that   the    final  cleansing  of  the  land  and  people  of 
Israel  does  not,  in  point  of  time,  take  place  until  after  the  full  development  of 
"Wickedness,"  and  the  manifestation  of  the  "Wicked  One,"  who  shall  be 
destroyed  by  the  "brightness"  (or  "shining  forth")  of  Christ  at  His  coming 
(2  Thess.  ii.  8).     Not  until  the  King  of  Righteousness  reigns  over  Mount  Zion, 
will  Palestine  be  "  the  land  of  righteousness,"  and  the  nation  of  Israel  "a  people 
whose  transgressions  are  forgiven,  and  who  are  sanctified  to  bring  forth  fruits 
unto  holiness." 

But  we  are  not  to  expect  in  these  visions,  or  indeed  in  Old  Testament 
prophecy  generally,  a  clear  setting  forth  of  eschatological  events  in  their  true 
chronological  order. 

The/act  is  clearly,  though  symbolically,  set  forth,  that  among  a  people,  and 
in  a  land  whence  "iniquity  has  been  removed"  (chap.  iii.  9),  and  which  should 
thenceforth  be  known  as  the  "holy  land"  (chap.  ii.  12),  and  the  holy  people, 
the  system  of  "  wickedness  "  outwardly  symbolised  by  the  ephah,  can  have  no 
place. 

Incidentally,  it  also  sets  forth  the  fact  that  for  a  time  this  system  will  find  a 
place  in  the  land  and  sphere  to  which  it,  so  to  say,  belongs. 


1 66     VISIONS   AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

And  if  we  are  asked  what  two  evil  systems,  helped  and 
impelled  by  evil  spirits  (as  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact 
that  they  had  the  wings  of  a  stork,  which  is  an  unclean 
bird,  and  that  "  the  wind,"  or  "  spirit,"  certainly  not  of  God, 
"  was  in  their  wings  "),  would  thus  eventually  unite  in  finding 
a  home  for  the  ephah  and  the  woman,  which  for  a  season 
would  be  permitted  to  dominate  the  nations  through  its 
power,  we  can  only  suggest  that  it  may  be  apostate 
Christianity  united  in  the  last  days  to  apostate  Judaism,  and 
both  given  over  to  the  worship  of  Mammon,  on  which  the 
power  of  the  ephah  is  based  ;  or,  as  in  these  series  of  visions, 
the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  powers,  as  represented  by  Zerub- 
babel  and  Joshua,  are  frequently  brought  before  us ;  and  in 
the  fifth  vision  (chap.  iv.  1 4)  are  probably  "  the  two  "  who 
are  represented  "  as  standing  before  the  Lord."  The  two 
women  here  may,  perhaps,  be  meant  to  signify  civil  govern 
ment  broken  loose,  even  outwardly,  from  every  acknowledg 
ment  of  God  (and,  therefore,  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of 
lawlessness),  and  a  corrupt  anti-Christian  and  anti-theistic 
priesthood — both  Jewish  and  Gentile — ready  to  unite  as 
sponsors  and  protectors  to  a  system  which,  though  as  yet 
not  so  regarded,  even  by  the  elect,  is  characterised  by  God 
as  "the  Wickedness." 

(<?)  There  is  yet  one  more  point  that  we  must  briefly 
touch  on  before  taking  our  leave  of  this  vision — namely, 
what  are  we  to  understand  by  "  the  land  of  Shinar,"  which, 
according  to  the  words  of  the  Interpreting  Angel,  is  to  be 
the  destination  to  which  the  two  women  bear  the  ephah, 
there  for  a  time  to  establish  it  on  its  own  base  f  According 
to  the  commentators,  the  name  "  Shinar  "  is  not  to  be  taken 
geographically  here,  as  an  epithet  applied  to  Mesopotamia, 
but  "  is  a  national,  or  real,  definition,  which  affirms  that  the 
ungodliness  carried  away  out  of  the  sphere  of  the  people  of 
God  will  have  its  permanent  settlement  in  the  sphere  of  the 
imperial  power  that  is  hostile  to  God."  *  Or,  as  another 
explains  it :  "  The  name  Shinar,  though  strictly  Babylonia, 
carries  us  back  to  an  older  power  than  the  world-empire  of 

1  Keil. 


THE  EPHAH  167 

Babylon,  which  now  was  destroyed.  In  the  land  of  Shinar 
was  the  first  attempt  made,  ere  mankind  was  yet  dispersed, 
to  array  a  world-empire  against  God.  And  so  it  is  the 
apter  symbol  of  the  anti-theistic  or  anti-Christian  world, 
which,  by  violence,  and  falsehood,  and  sophistry,  wars 
against  the  truth." l 

But  while  there  is  truth  in  the  words  of  yet  another 
writer  that  Shinar  was  the  land  of  unholiness,  and  stands 
here  contrasted  with  Palestine,  which  shall  be  "  the  holy 
land  "  (chap.  ii.  1 2),  and  that  the  chief  point  in  the  vision 
is  the  renewal  of  the  special  form  of  "  wickedness  "  which  is 
symbolised  by  the  ephah  from  the  land  of  Israel  to  find  its 
resting-place  "  in  the  land  of  world-power  which  is  antagon 
istic  to  God,"  we  cannot  altogether  agree  that  "  the  picture 
is  an  ideal  one,"  and  that  "  the  land  of  Shinar  is  an  ideal 
land  contrasted  with  the  land  of  Israel."2 

Without  any  spirit  of  dogmatism,  and  without  entering 
at  this  place  into  the  question  of  the  identity  and  significance 
of  the  Babylon  in  the  Revelation — whether  mystical  or 
actual — we  would  express  our  conviction  that  there  are 
Scriptures  which  cannot,  according  to  our  judgment,  be 
satisfactorily  explained  except  on  the  supposition  of  a 
revival  and  yet  future  judgment  of  literal  Babylon,  which 
for  a  time  will  be  the  centre  and  embodiment  of  all  the 
elements  of  our  godless  Western  "  civilisation,"  and  which 
especially  will  become  the  chief  entrepot  of  commerce  in  the 
world,  in  which  will  be  gathered  "  merchandise  of  gold,  and 
silver,  and  precious  stone,  and  pearls,  and  fine  linen,  and  purple, 
and  silk,  and  scarlet ;  and  all  tJiyine  ivood,  and  every  vessel  of 

1  Pusey. 

3  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright.  According  to  Hengstenberg,  who,  as  I  believe 
erroneously,  regards  the  woman  in  the  ephah  as  symbolising  the  Jewish  people, 
who,  when  the  measure  of  their  sin  became  full,  was  to  be  banished  again  from 
the  land  and  carried  away  into  captivity,  Shinar  stands  for  the  lands  of  their 
present  dispersion  :  that  is,  "  the  future  dwelling-place  of  the  Jews,  who  were  to 
be  banished  from  their  country,  is  called  by  the  name  of  the  land  in  which  they 
were  captives  before."  And  he  finds  in  it  a  "striking  example  of  the  custom 
which  the  prophets  adopted  of  representing  future  events  by  images  drawn  from 
the  past,  and  at  the  same  time  transferring  to  the  former  the  names  which  belong 
to  the  latter." 


1 68     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

ivory,  and  every  vessel  made  of  most  precious  wood,  and  of 
brass,  and  iron,  and  marble  ;  and  cinnamon,  and  spice,  and 
incense,  and  ointment,  and  frankincense,  and  wine,  and  oil, 
and  fine  flour,  and  wheat,  and  cattle,  and  sheep ;  and 
merchandise  of  horses  and  chariots  and  bodies  ;  and  souls  of 
men"  x  until  it  shall  finally  and  for  ever  be  overturned  by 
one  terrible  act  of  judgment  from  God. 

To  this  conviction  we  are  led  chiefly  by  the  fact  that 
there  are  prophecies  in  the  Old  Testament  concerning  the 
literal  Babylon  which  have  never  in  the  past  been  exhaus 
tively  fulfilled,  and  that  Scripture  usually  connects  the  final 
overthrow  of  Babylon  with  the  yet  future  restoration  and 
blessing  of  Israel. 

And  it  is  very  striking  to  the  close  observer  of  the 
signs  of  the  times  how  things  at  the  present  day  are  rapidly 
developing  on  the  very  lines  which  are  forecast  in  the  pro 
phetic  Scriptures.  "  The  fears  and  hopes  of  the  world — 
political,  commercial,  and  religious,"  writes  one  in  a  monthly 
journal  which  lies  before  me,  "  are  at  the  present  day  being 
increasingly  centred  upon  the  home  of  the  human  race — 
Mesopotamia.  ...  As  the  country  from  which  the  father 
of  the  Jewish  nation  emigrated  to  the  land  of  promise,  it  is 
also  occupying  the  thoughts  and  aspirations  of  the  Jews." 

Whatever  may  be  the  outcome  of  the  negotiations 
which  have  been  carried  on  recently  with  the  Turkish 
Government  by  the  Jewish  Territorialists  "  for  the  establish 
ment  of  a  Jewish  autonomous  State  "  in  this  very  region,  in 
which  many  Zionists  and  other  Jews  were  ready  to  join, 
there  is  so  much  truth  in  the  words  of  another  writer  that 
when  once  a  considerable  number  of  such  a  commercial 
people  as  the  Jews  are  re-established  in  Palestine,  "  the 
Euphrates  would  be  to  them  as  necessary  as  the  Thames 
to  London  or  the  Rhine  to  Germany.  It  would  be  Israel's 
great  channel  of  communication  with  the  Indian  seas,  not 
to  speak  of  the  commerce  which  would  flow  towards  the 
Tigris  and  Euphrates  from  the  central  and  northern  districts 
of  Asia  !  It  would  be  strange,  therefore,  if  no  city  should 

1  Rev.  xviii.  12,  13. 


THE  EPHAH  169 

arise  on    its    banks    of  which  it    might  be  said  that    her 
merchants  were  the  great  men  of  the  earth." 

"  Noteworthy  in  this  connection,"  observes  another  writer, 
"  is  the  watchful  eye  of  the  German  Imperial  Government 
upon  the  railway  in  course  of  construction  from  Konia  (the 
biblical  Iconium)  to  Bagdad.  Some  six  hundred  miles  of 
the  Anatolian,  or  Euphratean,  line  have  already  been 
opened  to  traffic."  In  short,  there  is  a  general  impression 
that  this  region,  the  highway  between  Asia  and  Europe, 
and  contiguous  to  Africa,  is  about  to  become  a  great  "  com 
mercial  centre  of  gravity."  The  new  Turkish  Government 
(in  contrast  to  the  old  regime)  is  very  keen  on  the  develop 
ment  of  the  resources  l  of  that  ancient  and  naturally  fertile 
region,  and  alive  to  the  very  important  aid  which  Jewish 
capital  and  energy  could  render  in  that  direction.  Very 
recently,  therefore,  they  engaged  the  services  of  a  distin 
guished  English  hydraulic  engineer,  Sir  William  Willcocks, 
K.C.M.G.,  to  survey  the  district  and  report  on  the  estab 
lishment  and  development  of  irrigation  works.  He  returned 
full  of  enthusiasm,  declaring  that  his  "  future  hopes, 
ambitions,  and  work  are  bound  up  with  the  re-creation 
of  Chaldea." 

A  very  interesting  paper  which  he  read  at  a  meeting  of 
the  Royal  Geographical  Society  last  November  is  published 
in  The  Geographical  Journal  for  January  1910.  The 
following  are  his  concluding  remarks :  "  In  her  long  history 
of  many  thousands  of  years,  Babylonia  has  again  and  again 
been  submerged,  but  she  has  always  risen  with  an  energy 
and  thoroughness  rivalling  the  very  completeness  and 
suddenness  of  her  fall.  She  has  never  failed  to  respond  to 
those  who  have  striven  to  raise  her.  Again,  it  seems  that 
the  time  has  come  for  this  land,  long  wasted  with  misery, 
to  rise  from  the  very  dust  and  take  her  place  by  the  side  of 
her  ancient  rival,  the  land  of  Egypt. 

"  The  works  we  are  proposing  are  drawn  on  sure  and 
truthful  lines,  and  the  day  they  are  carried  out  the  two 
great  rivers  will  hasten  to  respond,  and  Babylon  will  yet 

1  All  this  was  written  in  1910. 


1 70     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

once  again  see  her  waste  places  becoming  inhabited,  and 
the  desert  blossoming  as  the  rose."  l 

All  this  may  be  regarded  by  some  as  a  long  digression 
from  the  subject  before  us ;  but  it  is  not  altogether  so,  for 
it  shows  from  actual  facts  and  events  which  are  before  us 
the  very  strong  probability  that "  the  land  of  Shinar  " — which 
in  the  past  was  so  "  prominent  in  connection  with  the 
manifestation  of  evil  on  the  part  of  man,  and  of  judgment ! 
on  the  part  of  God,  that  it  stands  peculiarly  as  a  memorial  i 
of  proud  ungodliness  met  by  the  visitation  of  righteous 
vengeance  from  above" — will  yet,  as  Scripture  forecasts, 
play  a  very  important  part  in  the  consummation  of  human 
"  wickedness  "  in  the  final  anti-Christian  apostasy,  in  which 
a  godless  Judaism  and  a  corrupt,  unbelieving  Christianity 
will  be  united  for  the  sake  of  the  false  peace,  and  pomp,  and 
luxury,  and  a  humanitarianism  dissociated  from  God  and 
the  truth,  which  the  system,  outwardly  symbolised  by  the 
ephah,  will  for  a  time  minister  to  them,  but  which,  as 
Scripture  also  warns  us,  will  end  in  the  most  terrible  judg 
ment  which  has  yet  befallen  man  upon  the  earth. 

1  The  following  paragraph  forms  the  concluding  remarks  of  an  article  in  the 
London  Standard  for  August  30,  1910,  in  which  the  beginnings  of  the  great 
irrigation  works  proposed  by  Sir  William  Willcocks  are  described  : 

"These  gigantic  schemes  cannot  be  carried  out  in  their  entirety  without  the 
co-operation  of  great  capitalists  ;  but  an  experiment  might  well  be  made  with  a 
limited  area,  when  the  feasibility  of  the  whole  would  be  apparent.  Nowhere  in 
the  world  do  the  natural  conditions  and  the  possibilities  of  hydraulic  science 
offer  a  greater  field  to  the  agricultural  capitalist.  One  hears  from  time  to  time 
of  one  or  other  scheme  of  Jewish  colonisation  on  a  vast  scale.  If  Baron 
Hirsch's  committee,  who  have,  apparently,  ransacked  the  world  for  a  suitable 
locality,  would  give  the  scheme  the  attention  it  deserves,  it  might  mean  great 
things  for  the  Jewish  race.  Here,  in  the  very  cradle  of  their  race,  in  the  land  so 
intimately  and  so  sadly  associated  with  their  subsequent  history,  a  new  Psalmist 
may  arise,  converting  the  sadness  of  the  '  Super  flumina'  into  joy  ;  the  old-time 
captivity  may  yet  be  turned,  'as  the  rivers  in  the  South.'  Here  is  the  land,  and 
here  is  the  water  ;  it  only  needs  money,  intelligently  applied,  to  convert  a  wilder 
ness  into  another  Garden  of  Eden. 

"  One  cannot  take  leave  of  this  subject  without  reference  to  the  certain  advent 
of  the  railway,  possibly  of  more  railways  than  one.  It  will,  indeed,  be  a  wonder 
ful  revival.  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  as  the  centre  of  an  important  trade  and  railway 
system,  must  appeal  to  the  dullest  imagination  ;  yet  such  it  assuredly  will  be  in 
the  not  very  distant  future.  Such  great  possibilities  as  here  exist  cannot,  at  this 
stage  of  the  world's  history,  be  allowed  to  lie  dormant  for  ever." 


CHAPTER    IX 
THE    EIGHTH    VISION 

THE   FOUR   CHARIOTS 
(CHAPTER  vi.  1-8) 


171 


And  again  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and  behold,  there  came  four 
chariots  out  from  between  two  mountains ;  and  the  mountains  were  mountains  of 
brass.  In  the  first  chariot  were  red  horses  ;  and  in  the  second  chariot  black 
horses ;  and  in  the  third  chariot  white  horses  ;  and  in  the  fourth  chariot 
grisled  strong  horses.  Then  I  answered  and  said  unto  the  angel  that  talked 
with  me,  What  are  these,  my  lord  ?  And  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto 
me,  These  are  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  which  go  forth  from  standing  before  the 
Lord  of  all  the  earth.  The  chariot  wherein  are  the  black  horses  goeth  forth 
toward  the  north  country  ;  and  the  white  went  forth  after  them ;  and  the 
grisled  went  forth  toward  the  south  country.  And  the  strong  went  forth, 
and  sought  to  go  that  they  might  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth  :  and  He 
said,  Get  you  hence,  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth.  So  they  walked  to  and 
fro  through  the  earth.  Then  cried  He  to  me,  and  spake  unto  me,  saying, 
Behold,  they  that  go  toward  the  north  country  have  quieted  My  spirit  in  the 
north  country. 


CHAPTER  IX 

WE  come  to  the  eighth,  or  last  vision,  in  which  the 
prophet's  eyes  are  opened  to  see  the  invisible 
chariots  of  God  which  are  being  sent  forth  for 
the  overthrow  of  Gentile  world-power,  and  to  prepare  the 
way  for  the  Kingdom  of  Messiah,  which  "  shall  never  be 
destroyed." 

What  the  Prophet  saw 

Probably  directed  again  by  the  interpreting  angel  to 
do  so,  the  prophet  lifts  up  his  eyes  and  beholds  four 
chariots  coming  forth  from  between  two  mountains  of 
brass.1  These  chariots  were  drawn  by  horses  of  various 
colours.  In  the  first  were  red  horses,  in  the  second  black, 
in  the  third  white,  and  in  the  fourth  grisled,  or  speckled, 
horses,  to  which  also  are  applied  the  epithet  D'ifOX  (amutsim, 
"  strong  "y 

The  Significance  of  the  Symbolism 

I.  The  two  mountains,  which  in  the  Hebrew  have  the 
definite  article,  indicating  that  they  are  well  known,  and 
which,  as  we  may  gather  from  the  5th  verse,  are  associated 
with  the  "  presence,"  or  special  dwelling-place,  of  "  the 
Lord  of  the  whole  earth,"  are  very  probably  Mount  Zion 
and  Mount  Olivet,  "  viewed  as  ideal  mountains,  and  as  the 
place  whence  God's  judgments  go  forth  over  the  world." 

1  The  Rabbis  understood  a  chariot  as  signifying  a  team  of  four  horses.  Their 
reason  is  a  curious  one.  In  I  Kings  x.  29  it  is  said  :  "  And  a  chariot  came  up 
and  went  out  of  Egypt  for  six  hundred  shekels,  and  a  horse  for  a  hundred  and 
fifty."  The  price  of  a  chariot  is  here  four  times  that  of  a  horse.  Thus,  there 
fore,  Kimchi  says,  "  A  chariot  is  a  team  oi  four  horses." 


174     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

This  is  the  more  likely  true  explanation,  since  the  Valley 
of  Jehoshaphat  (the  meaning  of  which  is  "  Jehovah  shall 
judge "),  which  lies  between  these  two  "  mountains,"  or 
"  hills,"  is  associated  in  the  prophetic  Scriptures  with  God's 
judgments  upon  the  nations  (Joel  iii.  2).1 

At  any  rate,  this  much  is  clear  (as  Dr.  Wright  points 
out),  that  the  chariots  are  represented  as  going  forth  from 
a  place  situate  between  "  north  "  and  "  south  " — i.e.,  from 
Palestine,  and  from  that  place  in  the  Holy  Land  where 
Jehovah  was  wont  to  display  His  gracious  presence.  From 
this  spot,  which  God  has  chosen  as  His  earthly  dwelling- 
place,  and  as  the  centre  of  His  governmental  dealings  with 
the  nations,  blessing  goes  forth  in  all  the  world,  and  from 
it  also  judgments  proceed. 

They  are  spoken  of  as  mountains  of  "  brass,"  or,  more 
literally,  "  copper,"  to  indicate  the  strength  and  inaccessible- 
ness  of  God's  dwelling-place.  He  can,  and  does,  send 
forth  His  chariots  to  build  up,  or  to  pull  down  and  destroy, 
but  no  one  can  penetrate  into  His  presence.  Or,  as  Pusey 
observes,  "  the  mountains  of  brass  may  signify  the  height 
of  the  Divine  wisdom  (in  all  His  plans  and  purposes  con 
cerning  the  nations),  and  the  sublimity  of  the  power  which 
putteth  them  in  operation.  As  the  Psalmist  says  :  '  Thy 
righteousness  is  like  the  mountains  of  God.' " 

1  All  sorts  of  fanciful  explanations  have  been  given  by  interpreters  of  these 
two  mountains.  Hengstenberg  regards  them  as  merely  emblematic  of  the  power 
of  God,  which  shields  and  protects  His  people.  Baumgarten  says  that  they 
represent  the  east  and  west  as  the  two  central  points  of  the  world-power.  But 
these  in  Zechariah's  visions,  as  Dr.  Wright  properly  points  out,  are  rather  the 
north  and  south.  Hitzig  would,  it  seems,  locate  them  in  heaven,  and  regards 
the  chariots  as  having  been  seen  coming  forth  from  the  dwelling-place  of  the 
Most  High. 

Von  Hoffmann,  Pressel,  and  others  have  explained  them  to  be  the  mountains 
of  Zion  and  Moriah,  "  for  from  these  two  mountains  in  Messianic  days  the 
Kingdom  of  God  should  be  spread  abroad"  (Pressel);  "and  they  will  be  the 
mountains  whence  God  should  send  forth  His  last  judgments  upon  the  world." 
The  opinion  of  Jasper  Svedberg,  the  father  of  the  renowned  Swedenborg,  may 
be  mentioned  as  a  curiosity  of  exposition.  According  to  him,  the  prophet, 
when  speaking  of  mountains  of  brass  or  copper,  evidently  alluded  to  the  country 
of  Dalarne,  in  Sweden,  which,  he  thought,  was  destined  to  be  of  great  import 
ance  in  thejlatter  daysj 


THE  FOUR  CHARIOTS  175 

II.  The  Chariots.      If,  with  the  prophet,  we  ask,  What 
are  these  ?  the  answer  of  the   Interpreting  Angel  in  ver.  3 
is :  "  These  are  the  four  winds  of  heaven,   which  go  forth 
from   standing  before  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth"     We 
must  therefore   regard    them    either    as    ideal   appearances, 
personifying  the  forces  and    providential    acts  which  God 
often  uses  in  carrying  out  His  judgments  on  the  earth,  or, 
what  seems  to  me  the  simplest  and  most  natural  explana 
tion,  angelic    beings,    or    heavenly  powers  —  those   invisible 
"  messengers  "  of  His  "  who  excel  in  strength,  and  who  ever 
stand  in   His  presence,  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His 
word,"  and  then  go  forth  in  willing  obedience,  as  swift  as 
the  "winds,"  to   carry   out   His   behests  (Ps.  ciii.    20,   21, 
civ.  4). 

These,  no  doubt,  are  also  meant  by  "  the  chariots  of 
God,  which  are  twenty  thousand,  even  thousands  upon 
thousands,"  of  which  we  read  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  17,  though  the 
word  "  angels "  (used  in  the  Authorised  Version)  is  not 
found  in  the  original  of  that  verse.  Indeed,  there  is  a 
striking  connection  between  the  first  and  the  last  visions. 
In  the  first  vision  (chap.  i.  7—17),  at  the  beginning  of  this, 
to  the  prophet,  memorable  night,  he  saw  the  angelic  riders 
with  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  Himself  mounted  on  a  red 
horse  at  their  head,  appearing  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord, 
to  bring  in,  as  it  were,  their  report  after  "  walking  to  and 
fro  through  the  earth  "  as  to  the  condition  of  the  Gentile 
nations  and  their  attitude  to  the  people  and  the  land.  And 
now,  toward  morning,  as  the  visions  were  about  to  be 
brought  to  an  end,  he  sees  the  same  angelic  hosts,  now 
turned  into  God's  war  chariots,  actually  being  sent  forth 
(no  longer  to  report)  but  to  carry  out  the  judgments  of 
God  upon  those  nations  with  whom  He  is  "  very  sore  dis 
pleased,"  because  "  they  helped  forward  the  affliction "  of 
His  own  people,  whom,  even  in  the  time  of  their  banish 
ment  and  scattering,  He  has  never  cast  off. 

III.  We  now  come  to  the  difficult  point  of  the  number 
of  the  chariots  and  the   significance   of  the  colours  of  the 
horses. 


1 76     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  number,  four,  clearly  brings  to  our  mind  again  the 
four  great  Gentile  world-powers,  whose  successive  course 
makes  up  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  and  whose  final  over 
throw  must  precede  the  restoration  and  blessing  of  Israel, 
and  the  visible  establishment  of  the  Messianic  kingdom. 

In  this  connection  it  is  again  interesting  to  observe 
that  these  four  "  chariots  "  are  explained  to  be  the  "  four 
winds."  Now,  in  Dan.  vii.  1—3  we  read  of  the  four  winds 
of  heaven  "  striving,"  or  "  breaking,"  upon  "  the  great  sea," 
which  caused  the  four  great  Beasts,  "  diverse  one  from  the 
other"  (symbolical  of  the  four  great  Gentile  world-powers), 
to  arise ;  and  here  we  see  the  "  four  winds  "  sent  forth  to 
break  up  these  same  empires  ;  from  which  we  may  surely 
learn  that  it  is  by  the  will  and  power  of  God,  and  by  His 
direct  interposition,  either  by  visible,  natural,  or  by  angelic 
agency,  that  empires  rise  and  fall. 

There  is  a  certain  parallelism  to  be  observed  also 
between  this  vision  and  the  second  act  of  the  historical 
prophetic  drama  unfolded  in  the  vision  of  the  four  horns 
and  four  carpenters  (chap.  i.  18-21) — only  here  we  have 
the  great  fact  still  more  clearly  brought  out,  that  behind 
visible  phenomena  and  all  human  motives  and  actions 
there  is  the  eternal  purpose  and  power  of  God,  and  the 
invisible  active  agency  of  His  angelic  hosts. 

But  there  is  a  difficulty  in  connection  with  the  number 
of  the  chariots,  and  in  the  description  of  the  colours  of  the 
horses,  which  we  must  face  before  proceeding  further.  The 
difficulty,  briefly  stated,  is  this :  In  the  vision  itself  (vers. 
2,  3)  the  prophet  beholds  four  chariots,  in  the  first  of  which 
were  red  horses,  in  the  second  black,  in  the  third  white, 
and  in  the  fourth  grisled  horses,  to  which  last  is  also  added 
the  epithet  D^ps  (amutsim>  "  strong ") ;  but  in  the  inter 
pretation  by  the  interpreting  angel  (vers.  5-7)  the  first 
with  the  red  horses  is  passed  over.  The  black  and  the 
white  are  explained  as  going  forth  into  the  north  country, 
the  grisled  into  the  south,  and  then  we  read  of  the  amutsim 
("  strong  "),  which  in  ver.  3  are  the  same  as  the  "  grisled," 
wanting  to  go  forth  on  a  separate,  or  yet  another  mission. 


THE  FOUR  CHARIOTS  177 

The  explanations  of  this  difficulty  which  have  been 
jiven  by  interpreters  both  Jewish  and  Christian,  ancient 
ind  modern,  are  many,  but  for  the  most  part  are  far- 
etched  and  unsatisfactory.  Some  get  over  the  difficulty 
ightly  by  the  very  simple  method  of  correcting  the  text 
md  substituting  DM2TJN  (adummim,  "  the  red  ")  in  the  7th 
/erse  for  DJf"OK  (amutsim,  "  the  strong  "),  which  they  regard 
is  a  scribal  error.  This,  I  might  mention,  had  been  done 
ilready  by  the  translators  of  the  ancient  Syriac  version. 
3ut  this  solution  of  the  difficulty,  apart  from  other  objec- 
ions,  does  not  explain  why  the  description  "  the  strong " 
;hould  be  used  as  an  additional  epithet  of  the  "  grisled  "  in 
he  3rd  verse,  nor  why  the  red,  which  in  the  vision  was 
ieen  first,  should  in  the  Angel's  interpretation  be  spoken  of 
is  going  forth  last. 

Another  explanation  already  adopted  in  the  Septuagint 
version,  the  Targum,  Kimchi,  etc.,  and  by  some  Christian 
nterpreters,  including  Calvin  and  Koehler,  is  that  amutsim 
Iocs  not  here  mean  "  strong,"  but  denotes  a  colour.  They 
•egard  fox  (amots]  as  a  softened  form  of  pon  (Jiamuts),  a 
vord  found  in  Isa.  Ixiii.  I,  and  there  signifying  "red."1 
But  apart  from  the  fact  that  it  is  impossible  (as  Keil 
)bserves)  to  see  why  so  unusual  a  word  should  have  been 
:hosen  by  the  prophet  in  the  7th  verse  to  describe  the 
:olour  "  red,"  instead  of  the  intelligible  word  adummim, 
vhich  he  had  already  used  in  the  3rd  verse,  there  is  no 
;atisfactory  ground  for  identifying  amots  with  hamuts. 

Moreover,  as  Dr.  Wright  points  out,  there  is  a  serious 
lifficulty  in  the  way  of  this  explanation,  that  the  same 
vord  would  then  be  used  in  ver.  3  and  in  ver.  7  in  two 
otally  different  significations — in  the  first  place  as  an 
idditional  description  of  the  "  grisled,"  or  "  speckled,"  and 
n  the  latter  to  denote  the  "  red." 

Hengstenberg  attempts  to  solve  the  difficulty  in  the 
bllowing  manner  :  According  to  him  there  can  be  no 
loubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  amutsim ;  it  can  only 

1  This  conjecture  is  the  basis  of  the  rendering  "bay"  in  the  Authorised  and 
levised  Versions. 


1 78     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

signify  "  powerful,"  or  "  strong,"  but  he  argues  that  this 
predicate,  although  only  formally  connected  with  the  horses 
in  the  fourth  chariot,  at  the  end  of  the  3rd  verse,  "  cannot 
apply  to  them  in  contrast  with  those  of  the  other  three 
chariots,  but  must,  in  fact,  belong  equally  to  all  the  four." 
The  "  strong  "  horses  therefore,  seen  to  go  forth  last,  in  the 
7th  verse,  are  in  reality  the  "  red  "  of  the  first  chariot.  He 
lays  emphasis  on  the  article,  "  the  strong  ones,"  in  ver.  7, 
and  says,  "  the  strong  ones,  that  is,  those  in  comparison  with 
which  the  others  were  to  be  regarded  as  weak,  although 
in  themselves  they  were  really  strong  ;  ...  in  other  words, 
the  strongest  among  them.  They  are  mentioned  last 
because  in  the  consciousness  of  their  strength  they  were 
not  content  like  the  rest  with  one  particular  portion  of  the 
globe,  but  asked  permission  of  the  Lord  to  go  through  the 
whole  earth."  But,  excepting  on  the  supposition  that  a 
word  in  the  3rd  verse  has  dropped  out,  Hengstenberg's 
exposition  is,  as  is  now  pretty  generally  agreed,  on  gram 
matical  reasons  "  impossible."  l 

Let  us  now  give  what  appears  to  be  the  most  likely 
and  satisfactory  solution  of  the  difficulty.  We  have  already 
observed  that  though  these  four  chariots,  which  with  their 
horses  are  interpreted  by  the  angel  to  be  "  the  four  winds," 
or  "  spirits,"  of  the  heavens,  cannot  be  identified  with  the 
four  Gentile  world-powers  of  Dan.  ii.  and  vii.,  on  which 
Zechariah's  second  vision,  that  of  the  horns  and  carpenters, 
is,  as  we  have  seen,  based — they  are  closely  connected,  and 

1  If  D'ycN  (amutsim,  "strong"),  in  the  3rd  verse,  were  intended  to  be 
referred  to  the  horses  in  all  the  chariots,  the  phrase  would  have  been  expressed 
by  D73  O'XSN,  amutsim  kulam — "all  of  them  strong."  As  to  Hengstenberg's 
argument  that  the  article  before  amutsim  (the  strong),  ver.  7,  is  to  be  regarded 
as  emphatic,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  all  the  adjectives  used  in  reference 
to  the  horses  when  first  mentioned  naturally  occur  without  the  article  ;  but 
when  spoken  of  by  the  interpreting  angel  are  all  used  most  naturally  with  the 
article.  "The  use  of  the  article  with  the  adjective  in  ver.  7  can  no  more  be 
regarded  as  emphatic  than  when  used  -with  the  black,  the  -white,  and  speckled 
(or  'grisled')  horses.  Amutsim  is  similarly  used  at  first  without  the  article; 
but  when  mentioned  the  second  time  it  takes  the  article  just  as  the  other 
adjectives." 


THE  FOUR  CHARIOTS  179 

primarily  refer  to  those  empires  whose  united   successive 
course  make  up  the  "  times  of  the  Gentiles." 

These  four  are  the  Babylonian,  the  Medo-Persian,  the 
Grecian  (or  Graeco-Macedonian),  and  the  Roman.  "  These 
are  the  horns  (or  Gentile  powers)  which  have  scattered 
Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem"  (chap.  i.  19),  and  it  is  the 
overthrow  and  judgment  of  these,  by  means  of  invisible 
heavenly  powers  appointed  of  God  as  a  necessary  precursor 
to  the  establishment  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  and  the  blessing 
of  Israel,  which  is  symbolically  set  forth  to  the  prophet  in 
this  last  vision. 

But  these  powers,  though  in  vision  and  prophecy  seen 
together,  are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  successive  in  time* 

Now,  when  these  visions  were  shown  to  Zechariah, 
Babylon  had  already  been  overthrown,  and  its  world-empire 
taken  away,  visibly  and  apparently,  by  the  Medo-Persians, 
behind  whom,  however  (as  the  prophet  beholds),  there  was 
the  invisible  chariot  of  God,  with  its  red  horses  of  blood 
and  vengeance. 

This  act  of  judgment  on  the  first  great  Gentile  world- 
power  which  had  oppressed  Israel  and   laid  waste  his  land 
j  being   already    an    accomplished    fact   (though   in  the   3rd 
verse,  for  completeness'  sake,  all  the  four  are  shown  to  the 
prophet  together,  as  is  the  case  in  the  vision  of  the  four 
!jj  horns,   one  of  which  had  also  been   already   overthrown), 
this  first  chariot  is  passed  over  by  the  Angel  in  the  inter- 
1    pretation,  and  is  not  seen  among  those  who  "go  forth"  in 
i   ver.  6 — its  mission,  as   far  as  the   Babylonian   Empire  is 
i,  concerned,  having  already  been  fulfilled. 

The  black  horses,  significant  probably  of  sorrow  and 
;'sij  mourning  in  consequence  of  sore  judgments  to  be  inflicted, 
go  forth  toward  the  north  country,  and  "after  them,"  going 
forth  in  the  same  direction,  are  the  white,  symbolical  of 
victory,  triumph,  and  glory  over  Gentile  world-power — for 
both  the  Medo-Persian  and  Graeco-Macedonian  Empires, 
being  each  in  turn  successors  of  the  great  Babylonian 
Empire,  were  the  great  hostile  northern  powers  in  relation 
to  Palestine, 


1 8o     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

In  contrast  to  these  who  went  forth  to  the  north 
country,  the  beruddim  ("  grisled,"  or  "  speckled "  horses) 
— the  exact  colour  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  give  with 
certainty,  but  which  probably  answers  to  the  seruqqim 
("  speckled  ")  in  chap.  i.  8 — go  forth  to  the  south  country. 

Now,  the  south  country  is  Egypt,  the  other  direction 
from  which  hostile  world-power  came  into  contact  with 
Israel  and  Palestine ;  and  "  the  king  of  the  south,"  as,  for 
instance,  in  Dan.  xi.,  is  the  king  of  Egypt.  But  there  it 
was  that  the  fourth  great  world-empire  came  into  collision 
with  the  declining  Macedonian  power,  and  that  it  was  first 
brought  into  direct  contact  with  the  Jewish  nation.  It  is 
most  probable,  therefore,  that  the  fourth  chariot,  appointed 
for  the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  the  fourth  great  world- 
empire,  is  seen  to  go  forth,  first  to  the  south,  as  if  to 
encounter  this  fresh  hostile  power  at  the  point  at  which  it 
first  came  into  contact  with  Israel. 

But  the  Spirit  of  God,  foreseeing  that  the  fourth  empire, 
unlike  its  predecessors,  would  spread  itself,  not  only  to  the 
north,  and  south,  and  east,  but  westward  also,  and  practi 
cally  embrace  the  whole  known  world  ;  and  that  it  would, 
in  the  different  stages  of  its  existence,  endure  for  a  con 
siderably  longer  period  than  its  predecessors — the  horses 
of  this  same  chariot  are  represented  as  desiring  also,  after 
having  accomplished  their  mission  in  the  south,  to  go  forth 
to  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth.  "  And  He  "  (that  is, 
the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth,  before  whom  they  were  all 
seen  "  standing  "  in  the  first  instance)  "  said,  Get  you  hence, 
walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth,"  in  order  to  meet  this 
power  in  every  place  where  it  shall  establish  itself,  to  hold 
it  in  check,  and  to  counteract  its  evil  plans,  until  the  signal 
shall  be  given  for  its  final  overthrow. 

If  we  are  asked  why  the  horses  in  this  last  chariot  are 
seen  first  going  forth  as  the  "  grisled  "  or  "  speckled,"  and 
then,  in  the  7th  verse,  as  the  "  strong  "  (which,  be  it  noted, 
was  the  additional  epithet  applied  to  them  already  in  the 
3rd  verse),  the  true  answer  is  probably  that  suggested  by| 
Bredenkamp,  who  says  that  "  speckled  strong  horses  "  ar 


THE  FOUR  CHARIOTS  181 

such  as,  regarded  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  colour, 
are  "  speckled  "  (gefleckte),  but  from  the  point  of  view  of 
their  special  characteristic,  are  "  strong." 

Viewed  as  going  forth  like  the  other  chariots  into  a 
particular  direction,  and  as  encountering  a  particular  power, 
they  are  described,  like  the  previous  ones,  by  their  colour, 
which  is  in  itself  symbolical ;  but  when  the  fact  is  brought 
into  view  that  this  particular  power  which  these  horses  are 
to  encounter  is  unlike  its  predecessors,  but  will  assert  its 
dominion  over  the  whole  earth,  then  their  special  character 
istic  as  "  the  strong  ones  "  is  emphasised. 

To  this  we  may  add  the  striking  fact  that  strength  was 
to  be  an  outstanding  feature  of  the  fourth  great  world- 
empire,  even  as  we  read  in  Dan.  vii.  7  :  "  After  this  I  saw 
in  the  night  visions,  and  behold  a  fourth  beast,  terrible 
and  powerful,  and  strong  exceedingly ;  and  it  had  great  iron 
teeth ;  it  devoured  and  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped  the 
residue  with  his  feet :  and  it  was  diverse  from  all  the 
beasts  which  were  before  it ;  and  it  had  ten  horns." 

Now,  over  against  the  might  of  man,  and  of  all  the 
powers  of  darkness  which  assert  themselves  in  this  last 
great  world-power,  there  is  the  might  of  God  ;  and  we  are 
reminded  in  this  vision  that  His  invisible  hosts  are  a  match 
for  the  mightiest,  and  that  God  is  ever  stronger  than  His 
foes. 

We  now  come  to  the  8th  verse : 

"  And  He  cried  unto  me,  and  spake  unto  me,  saying, 
Behold,  those  which  go  toward  the  north  country  have  quieted 
('  caused  to  rest ')  My  spirit  in  the  north  country" 

The  idiom,  "  to  cause  to  rest  upon  "  a  person,  or,  as  in 
this  case,  upon  a  land,  involves,  as  Pusey  rightly  observes, 
that  that  person  (or  land)  is  the  object  on  whom  it  abides, 
not  that  the  spirit  is  quieted  in  him  whose  it  is,  as  some 
interpreters  have  explained  it.  The  word  nri  (ruach, 
"  spirit ")  must,  I  believe,  be  understood  here  as  anger,  in 
which  sense  it  is  found  also  in  other  scriptures.1  The 
meaning  of  the  8th  verse,  then,  is  that  that  company  of 

1  Judg.  viii.  3  ;  Eccles.  x.  4. 


1 82     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  invisible  host  whose  mission  was  toward  the  north 
country  caused  God's  anger  to  rest  on  it — i.e.,  "  have 
carried  it  thither,  and  deposited  it  there  (made  it  to  rest 
upon  that  people  or  kingdom)  as  its  abode  " ;  as  John  says 
of  the  unbelieving,  "  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him"  * 
The  reason  why  "  the  north  country  "  is  specially  singled 
out  for  the  region  on  which  God's  anger  was  already 
resting,  is  to  be  found,  perhaps,  first  of  all  in  the  fact  that 
there  the  first  great  world-power — namely,  the  Babylonian 
— was  already  overthrown  by  God's  judgments.  Secondly, 
because  it  was  probably  intended  as  a  message  of  comfort 
more  directly  to  the  restored  remnant,  to  whom  the 
prophet  was  primarily  commissioned  to  relate  the  visions — 
to  indicate,  namely,  that  the  second  great  northern  world- 
power,  the  successor  of  Babylon,  under  whose  yoke  they 
were  then  groaning,2  was  already  the  object  of  God's  anger, 
and  would  soon  be  trodden  down  under  the  feet  of  the 
horses  of  God's  war  chariot  which  was  being  sent  forth  in 
that  direction. 

And,  thirdly,  as  Bredenkamp  suggests,  God's  wrath  is 
specially  spoken  of  in  this  last  vision  as  being  caused  to 
rest  on  "  the  north  country,"  because  not  only  was  it  there 
that  the  attempt  was  first  made  to  array  a  world -empire 
against  God,  and  where  apostasy  sought,  so  to  say,  to 
organise  and  fortify  itself;  not  only  did  Babylon  also,  at  a 
later  time,  become  the  final  antagonist  and  subduer  of 
God's  people  and  the  destroyer  of  His  Temple,  but 
probably  because  there,  "  in  the  land  of  Shinar,"  the 
metropolis  of  world-power,  Babylon,  the  great  rival  of  the 
city  of  God — wickedness,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  con 
sideration  of  the  last  vision,  will  once  again  establish  itself, 
and  all  the  forces  of  evil  again  for  a  time  be  concentrated. 

Then  God's  judgments  shall  be  fully  poured  out,  and 
anti-Christian  world-power  be  finally  overthrown  to  make 
room  for  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  whom  the  Father  has 
invested  with  all  power  and  dominion  and  glory,  "  that  all 
nations  and  languages  should  serve  Him."  His  dominion 
1  Pusey.  2  Neh.  ix.  36,  37. 


THE  FOUR  CHARIOTS  183 

is  an  everlasting  dominion,  "  and  His  Kingdom  shall  never 
be  destroyed." 

And  this,  dear  reader — the  establishment  of  Messiah's 
throne  of  righteousness  on  Mount  Zion,  that  from  it,  and 
Israel  as  a  centre,  His  beneficent  rule  may  extend  over  the 
whole  earth  and  bless  all  peoples — is  the  appointed  goal  of 
history  toward  which  all  things  are  moving.  It  is  the 
motive,  also,  of  all  God's  providential  dealings  with  the 
nations.  "  Political  changes,"  as  one  has  expressed  it, 
"  are  the  moving  of  the  shadow  on  the  earth's  dial-plate 
that  marks  the  mighty  motions  going  forward  in  the 
heavens " ;  and  however  conflicting  and  confusing  to  our 
poor  human  judgments,  they  mark  but  the  various  stages 
of  a  plan  and  counsel  which  God  formed  from  eternity. 

In  reference  to  the  four  great  world-powers,  whose 
successive  course  was  to  make  up  "  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles,"  we  have  to  note  that  three  of  them  have  already 
long  ago  disappeared,  in  accordance  with  the  clear  pre 
dictions  of  Scripture,  and  the  fourth,  which  (as  also  foreseen 
and  foretold)  was  to  drag  on  longest,  is  now,  as  is  generally 
agreed  by  all  students  of  the  sure  Word  of  Prophecy,  fast 
approaching  its  very  last  phase  of  existence.  We  may, 
therefore,  say  with  confidence  that  we  are  on  the  eve  of 
the  most  solemn  events  in  the  world's  history,  and  are  very 
fast  approaching  "  the  day,"  not  only  of  our  own  final  and 
complete  "  redemption  "  as  believers  at  the  manifestation  of 
Christ,  but  the  "  set  time,"  when  God  shall  again  arise  and 
have  mercy  upon  Zion,  and  when,  through  the  restoration 
and  blessing  of  Israel,  "  the  nations  shall  fear  the  Name  of 
Jehovah,  and  all  kings  of  the  earth  His  glory." 


CHAPTER    X 
THE   CLIMAX    OF   THE  VISIONS 

THE   CROWNING   OF   JOSHUA 
(CHAPTER  vi.  9-15) 


,8S 


The  word  of  Jehovah  came  unto  me,  saying,  Take  of  them  of  the  captivity, 
even  of  Heldai,  of  Tobijah,  and  of  Jedaiah  ;  .and  come  thou  the  same  day,  and  go 
into  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Zephaniah,  whither  they  are  come  from 
Babylon  ;  yea,  take  of  them  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns,  and  set  them 
upon  the  head  of  Joshua  the  son  of  Jehozadak,  the  high  priest ;  and  speak  unto 
him,  saying,  Thus  speaketh  Jehovah  of  hosts,  saying,  Behold,  the  Man  whose 
name  is  the  Branch  :  and  He  shall  grow  up  out  of  His  place  ;  and  He  shall  build 
the  Temple  of  Jehovah  ;  even  He  shall  build  the  Temple  of  Jehovah  ;  and  He  shall 
bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  His  throne  ;  and  He  shall  be  a  priest 
upon  His  throne  ;  and  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both.  And  the 
crowns  shall  be  to  Helem,  and  to  Tobijah,  and  to  Jedaiah,  and  to  Hen  the  son 
of  Zephaniah,  for  a  memorial  in  the  Temple  of  Jehovah.  And  they  that  are  far 
off  shall  come  and  build  in  the  Temple  of  Jehovah  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that 
Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  sent  Me  unto  you.  And  this  shall  come  to  pass,  if  ye  will 
diligently  obey  the  voice  of  Jehovah  your  God. 


1 86 


CHAPTER    X 

THE  series  of  eight  visions  is  followed  by  a  very 
significant  symbolical  transaction,  which  must  be 
regarded  as  the  crowning  act — the  headstone  of 
the  rich  symbolico-prophetical  teaching  which  was  unfolded 
to  the  prophet  on  that  memorable  night. 

It  shows  us  what  will  follow  the  banishment  of  evil 
from  the  land,  and  the  overthrow  of  world-power  in  the 
earth,  as  set  forth  particularly  in  the  last  three  visions — 
namely,  the  crowning  of  the  true  King,  the  Mediator  of 
Salvation,  who  shall  be  "  a  Priest  upon  His  throne,"  and 
build  the  true  temple  of  Jehovah,  into  which  not  only 
Israel,  but  "  they  that  are  far  off" — the  Gentiles — shall  have 
access. 

To  indicate  that  the  visions  are  now  ended,  the  pro 
phet  adopts  the  usual  formula  by  which  the  prophets 
always  authenticated  that  they  spake,  not  of  themselves,  but 
as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit:  "And  the  word  of 
Jehovah  came  unto  me,  saying"  The  whole  section  divides 
itself  into  two  parts — the  first  (vers.  9-11)  gives  the  ac 
count  of  the  symbolical  transaction  ;  and  the  second  (vers. 
13  —  15)  records  the  verbal  prophecy. 

The  symbolical  act  was  occasioned  by  the  following 
circumstance :  There  arrived  in  Jerusalem,  probably  on  the 
very  morning  after  the  vision,  three  prominent  men  as  a 
deputation  from  the  Haggolah,  "  the  Captivity  " — that  is, 
from  those  who  were  still  settled  in  Babylon,  whither  they 
were  originally  carried  "  captive  " — bringing  with  them  an 
offering  of  silver  and  gold  for  the  Temple,  which  was  then 
still  in  building.  The  sight  of  these  men  from  "  far-off" 

Babylon,  bearing  their  offering  for  the  Lord's  House,  was 

.87 


1 88     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  occasion  of  the  opening  of  the  prophet's  eyes  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  behold  the  future  glorious  Temple,  which 
in  Messiah's  time  shall  be  established  in  Jerusalem  as  an 
House  of  Prayer  for  all  nations,  and  to  which  even  the 
Gentile  peoples  which  are  "  far  off"  shall  flock,  bringing 
their  worship  and  their  offerings. 

The  incident  recorded  in  John  xii.  20-33  may  m  a 
sense  be  regarded  as  parallel  to  this.  There  the  coming  of 
Andrew  and  Philip  to  our  Lord  with  the  touching  request 
made  in  the  first  instance  to  the  latter  of  these  two  disciples 
by  the  Greeks  who  came  up  to  Jerusalem  among  those 
who  came  up  to  worship  at  the  feast :  "  Sir,  we  would  see 
Jesus,"  took  our  Saviour's  mind  to  the  time  when  "  all  men," 
without  distinction  of  race  or  nationality,  shall  be  "  drawn  " 
unto  Him,  and  to  the  only  possible  way  by  which  this 
could  be  brought  about.  In  the  temple  of  His  pre- 
resurrection  body,  as  the  Son  of  David,  there  was  no  room 
for  these  poor  Gentiles.  The  Son  of  Man  must  be  lifted 
up :  except  the  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die, 
it  abideth  alone  ;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit. 
So  here  the  appearance  in  Jerusalem  of  these  strangers 
takes  the  prophet's  mind  from  the  Temple  they  were  then 
building,  over  the  second  outer  court  of  which  when  com 
pleted  there  was  the  inscription  put  up  in  Greek  and  Latin  : 
"  No  stranger  may  enter  here  on  pain  of  death" l  to  the 

1  The  interesting  discovery  in  1871  by  Clermont-Ganneau,  the  learned  Oriental 
archaeologist  (the  same  who  discovered  and  translated  the  inscription  of  the 
Moabite  Stone),  of  the  block  of  stone  with  the  Greek  version  of  this  inscription, 
which  was  actually  built  into  the  wall  or  enclosure  of  the  Second  Temple, 
separating  the  "Court  of  the  Gentiles"  from  the  "Court  of  the  Women,"  is 
now  well  known.  I  have  myself  more  than  once  seen  and  examined  the  block 
with  the  inscription  on  it,  which,  with  many  other  precious  archaeological 
treasures,  is  now  in  the  Constantinople  Museum.  The  actual  words  of  the  Greek 
inscription  upon  which  our  Lord  Jesus  and  Paul  most  probably  looked  more  than 
once,  read,  translated,  thus  .\  "  No  stranger  born  may  enter  within  the  circuit  of 
the  barrier  (rpv<t>6.KTov)  and  enclosure  (7repi/3o\oC)  that  is  around  the  sacred  court 
(rd  lepbv).  And  whoever  shall  L-e  caught  there,  upon  himself  be  the  blame  of  the 
death  which  will  consequently  follow."  Josephus  (Antiq.  xv.  n.  5),  speaking  of 
the  enclosures,  or  Courts  of  the  Temple,  which  he  describes  as  very  spacious  and 
surrounded  by  cloisters  of  much  grandeur,  says:  "Thus  was  the  first  enclosure. 
In  the  midst  of  which,  and  not  far  from  it,  was  the  second,  to  be  gone  up  by  a 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  189 

future  Temple,  which  Messiah,  the  true  Prince  and  Priest, 
of  whom  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  were 
types,  would  build  ;  which,  as  already  said,  shall  be  an 
House  of  Prayer  for  all  nations,  and  in  which  those  that 
are  "  far  off" — by  which  we  must  understand  not  only  the 
Jews  who  were  still  in  the  far  lands  of  their  "  captivity," 
but  the  Gentiles,  "  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the 
going  down  of  the  same,"  as  the  last  post-exilic  prophet 
Malachi  predicts — "  shall  come  and  build." 

The  symbolical  act  itself  which  the  prophet  is  com 
manded  to  perform  was  as  follows : 

He  was  to  go  to  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of 
Zephaniah,  "  whither  they  (i.e.,  these  distinguished  strangers) 
are  come  from  Babylon,"  as  the  original  words  in  the  i8th 
verse  are  properly  rendered  in  the  Revised  Version — the 
1 4th  verse  indicating,  as  we  shall  see,  that  this  Josiah,  like 
a  true  son  of  Abraham,  was  a  man  "  given  to  hospitality," 
and  lodged  these  strangers  in  his  house  as  an  act  of  "  kind 
ness."  Having  gone  that  "  same  day  "  to  that  hospitable 
house,  he  was  to  take  some  of  the  silver  and  gold  which 
they  had  brought  as  an  offering  from  those  still  in  Babylon, 
and  make  'ataroth.  The  word  is  in  the  plural,  and  is 
rendered  in  the  Authorised  Version  and  in  the  text  of 
the  Revised  Version  "  crowns," l  some  commentators  sup 
posing  that  there  were  at  least  two  crowns — one  made  of 
silver  and  the  other  of  gold  :  the  first  for  the  high  priest,  or 
at  any  rate  as  an  emblem  of  the  priestly  dignity ;  and  the 
other  of  royalty.  But  what  follows  does  not  at  all  agree 
with  this  supposition,  for  the  prophet  is  commanded  to  put 
the  'ataroth  upon  the  head  of  Joshua ;  and,  as  Keil  and 
Lange  well  observe,  "  You  do  not  put  two  or  more  crowns 
upon  the  head  of  one  man."  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  others,  to 

few  steps  ;  this  was  encompassed  by  a  stone  wall  for  a  partition,  with  an  inscrip 
tion  which  forbade  any  foreigner  to  go  in  under  pain  of  death." 

How  significant,  in  the  light  of  this  fact,  are  the  words  of  the  apostle  :  "  But 
now  in  Christ  Jesus  ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of 
Christ.  For  He  is  our  peace  who  hath  made  both  (i.e.,  Jew  and  Gentile)  one, 
and  hath  broken  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  "  (Eph.  ii.  13,  14). 

1  In  the  margin  of  the  R.V.  it  is  rendered  in  the  singular,  "a  crown." 


1 90     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

meet  the  supposed  difficulty,  would  interpolate  the  words 
"  and  upon  the  head  of  Zerubabbel "  in  the  I  ith  verse,  as  if 
one  crown  was  to  be  put  upon  the  head  of  Zerubbabel  and 
the  other  upon  Joshua ;  but  there  is  no  justification  what 
ever  for  such  a  free-and-easy  method  of  handling  the  sacred 
text,  and  the  interpretation  based  upon  their  "  reconstruc 
tion  "  only  obscures  the  rich  significance  and  spiritual  beauty 
of  the  truth  set  forth  in  this  symbolical  transaction. 

There  is  no  mention  whatever  of  Zerubbabel  in  this 
passage,  neither  was  a  silver  crown,  or  indeed  any  crown, 
ever  worn  by  the  high  priest — the  priestly  mitre  being 
never  so  designated.1  In  fact,  the  whole  significance  of  the 
incident  lies  in  the  fact  that  these  crowns,  or  crown,  was 
placed  upon  the  head  of  Joshua.  The  plural  "'ataroth"  is 
used  in  Job  xxi.  36  for  one  crown,  and  what  most  probably 
is  meant  is  a  single  "  splendid  royal  crown,"  consisting  of  a 
number  of  gold  and  silver  twists  or  circlets  woven  together. 

The  Verbal  Prophecy 

Having  placed  this  crown  upon  the  head  of  Joshua,  the 
prophet  was,  by  the  Lord's  command,  to  deliver  to  him  the 
following  message  :  "  Thus  speaketh  Jehovah  of  hosts,  saying, 
Behold  the  Man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  and  He  shall  grow 
up  out  of  His  place,  and  He  shall  build  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  : 
even  He  shall  build  the  Temple  of  the  Lord :  and  He  shall 
bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  His  throne  ;  and  He 
shall  be  a  priest  upon  His  throne  ;  and  the  counsel  of  peace 
shall  be  between  them  both" 

This  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  and  precious 
Messianic  prophecies,  and  there  is  no  plainer  prophetic 
utterance  in  the  whole  Old  Testament  as  to  the  Person  of 
the  promised  Redeemer,  the  offices  He  was  to  fill,  and  the 

1  "  The  silver  might  have  formed  a  circlet  in  the  crown  of  gold,  as  in  modern 
times  the  iron  crown  of  Lombardy  was  called  iron  because  it  had  a  plate  of  iron 
in  its  summit,  being  else  of  gold  and  most  precious." — Pusey. 

In  Rev.  xix.  our  Lord  Jesus  is  spoken  of  as  wearing  many  crowns  (dtaS^^ara 
TroXXd) ;  but  what  is  probably  meant  is  a  diadem  composed  of,  or  encircled  with, 
manv  crowns. 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  191 

mission    He    was    to    accomplish.     Let    us    examine    the 
sentence  in  detail. 

wx  nan — j$6  o  avOpwiros — Ecce  Homo  ! — "  Behold  the 
Man  !  " — an  expression  which  has  become  famous  and  of 
profound  significance,  since  some  five  centuries  later,  in  the 
overruling  providence  of  God,  it  was  used  by  Pilate  on  the 
day  when  He  Who  came  to  bring  life  into  the  world  was 
Himself  led  forth  to  a  death  of  shame. 

Here,  however,  it  is  not  to  the  Son  of  Man  in  His 
humiliation,  to  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows  and  acquainted  with 
grief,"  that  our  attention  is  directed  by  God  Himself,  but 
to  the  only  true  Man  after  God's  own  heart— the  Man  par 
excellence — the  Ideal  and  Representative  of  the  race,  Who, 
after  having  for  our  salvation  worn  the  crown  of  thorns, 
shall,  as  the  reward  of  His  sufferings,  be  "  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour,"  and  have  all  things  put  in  subjection 
under  His  feet. 

"  Behold  the  Man  !  "  "  Behold  My  Servant !  "  (Isa.  xlii.  I, 
lii.  1 3),  "  Behold  thy  King !  "  (Zech.  ix.  9),  "  Behold  your 
God  !  "  (Isa.  xl.  9) :  thus  variously,  as  calling  attention  to 
the  different  aspects  of  the  character  of  the  same  blessed 
Person,  is  this  word  "  Behold  "  used  by  God  Himself. 

"  Behold  the  Man  !  " — the  words  are  indeed  addressed  to 
Joshua,  but  by  no  possibility  can  they  be  made  to  apply 
to  him  as  the  subject,  as  modern  Jews  and  some  rational 
istic  Christian  interpreters  seek  to  do.1 

1  Rashi,  Aben  Ezra,  and  Kimchi  assert  that  "  the  Man,  the  Branch."  is  Zerub- 
babel ;  but,  for  obvious  controversial  reasons,  they  have  departed  from  the  older 
received  interpretation,  as  is  seen  from  Targum  of  Jonathan,  where  the  passage 
(ver.  12)  is  paraphrased  thus:  "Behold  the  Man  ;  Messiah  is  His  Name.  He 
will  be  revealed,  and  He  will  become  great  and  build  the  Temple  of  God." 

The  Messianic  interpretation  is  also  defended  with  great  force  by  Abarbanel, 
who  thus  decisively  refutes  the  interpretation  adopted  by  the  great  trio  of 
Jewish  commentators,  Rashi,  Aben  Ezra,  and  Kimchi.  He  says,  "  Rashi  has 
written  that  the  words,  '  Behold  the  Man  Whose  Name  is  the  Branch,'  have  by 
some  been  interpreted  of  the  Messiah."  He  here  means  Jonathan,  whose  inter 
pretation  he  did  not  receive,  for  he  adds  that  the  building  here  spoken  of  refers 
altogether  to  the  Second  Temple  ;  but  I  wish  that  I  could  ask  them,  if  this  pro 
phecy  refers  to  the  Second  Temple  and  Zerubabbel,  why  it  said,  "The  Man 
Whose  Name  is  the  Branch,"  "and  He  shall  grow  up  from  beneath  Him." 
Surely  we  know  that  every  man  grows  up  to  manhood,  and  even  to  old  age  and 


1 92     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Joshua  himself  knew  of  a  certainty  that  that  which 
was  set  forth  by  the  symbolical  act  of  his  being  crowned, 
and  the  great  prophecy  contained  in  the  words  which 
followed,  could  not  refer  to  himself. 

Perhaps  if  it  had  been  Zerubbabel — who  was  a  prince 
of  the  House  of  David — who  had  been  so  crowned,  and  to 
whom  the  words  had  been  addressed,  there  might  have 
been  some  shadow  of  ground  for  such  a  mistake ;  but 
Joshua,  as  priest,  never  could  wear  a  crown,  nor  sit  and  rule 
upon  a  throne,  since  as  long  as  the  old  Dispensation  lasted 
the  priesthood  and  royalty  were,  by  God's  appointment, 
apportioned  to  different  tribes,  and  no  true  prophet  would 
ever  think  or  speak  of  any  one  but  a  son  of  David  as 
having  a  right  to  sit  and  rule  on  a  throne  in  Jerusalem. 
This,  in  all  probability,  was  the  reason  why  the  crown  was 
placed  on  the  head,  not  of  Zerubbabel,  but  of  Joshua.  But 
Zechariah,  who  was  a  priest-prophet,  and  Joshua,  to  whom 
the  words  are  addressed,  knew  well  that  there  were  pre- 

hoary  hairs.  Rashi,  perceiving  this  objection,  has  interpreted  this  to  mean  that 
He  shall  be  of  the  royal  seed ;  but  this  is  not  correct,  for  the  word  vmnp  ("from 
beneath  Him  ")  teaches  nothing  about  the  royal  family.  .  .  .  But,  at  all  events, 
I  should  like  to  ask  them,  if  these  words  be  spoken  of  Zerubbabel,  why  does  the 
prophet  add  that  "  He  shall  build  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  :  even  He  shall  build 
the  Temple  of  the  Lord."  Why  this  repetition  to  express  one  single  event  ?  The 
commentators  have  got  no  answer  but  this,  "  It  is  to  confirm  the  matter."  But, 
if  this  be  the  case,  it  would  be  better  to  repeat  the  words  three  or  four  times,  for 
then  the  confirmation  would  have  been  greater  still.  I  should  further  ask  them 
how  they  can  interpret  of  Zerubbabel  those  words,  "  He  shall  bear  the  glory, 
and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  His  throne"  ;  " for  he  (Zerubbabel)  never  ruled  in 
Jerusalem,  and  never  sat  upon  the  throne  of  the  kingdom,  but  only  occupied  himself 
in  building  the  Temple,  and  afterwards  returned  to  Babylon "  (Abarbanel, 
Comment,  in  loc.). 

Dr.  Alexander  McCaul  says  on  this  passage,  "The  prophecy  promises  these 
particulars  :  first,  '  He  shall  be  a  priest  upon  His  throne  ' ;  secondly,  '  He  shall 
build  the  Temple  of  the  Lord '  ;  thirdly,  '  He  shall  bear  the  glory  (Tin,  the 
"majesty"),  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  His  throne,  and  they  that  are  far  oft 
shall  come  and  build  the  Temple  of  the  Lord.'  "  It  is  not  necessary  to  point  out 
the  well-known  passages  which  prove  that  these  four  particulars  are  all  features 
of  Messiah's  character,  and  in  that  of  no  one  else.  It  is  also  easy  to  identify 
these  features  in  the  character  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He  is  represented  in  the 
New  Testament  as  a  High  Priest,  as  a  King  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  Gentiles, 
who  were  then  afar  off,  have  acknowledged  His  dignity  ;  and,  as  for  building  a 
Temple,  He  did  this  also.  (See  John  ii.  29 ;  Eph.  ii.  22.) 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  193 

dictions  in  the  former  prophets  that  in  a  time  to  come  the 
Redeemer,  whom  God  promised  to  raise  up  in  Israel  out  of 
the  House  of  David,  would  combine  in  His  own  Person  the 
two  great  mediatorial  offices  of  Priest  and  King,  and  be  at 
the  same  time  the  last  and  greatest  Prophet,  through  Whom 
God  would  reveal  Himself  more  fully  and  perfectly  to  man. 
Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  I  loth  Psalm  it  is  predicted  of  the 
theocratic  King,  Who  "  shall  strike  through  kings  in  the 
day  of  His  wrath,"  and  "judge  among  nations" — 

"  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  repent.  Thou  art 
a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek" 

Now,  of  this  royal  Priest,  whose  priesthood  was  to  be 
"  for  ever,"  Joshua  was  already  told  in  the  3rd  chapter 
that  both  he  and  his  "  fellows  of  the  Aaronic  family  were 
anshei  mopheth — literally,  "  men  that  are  a  sign,"  i.e.,  types — 
so  that  there  could  be  no  shadow  of  a  possibility  of  his 
understanding  this  new  and  fuller  message  about  the 
Priest-King  in  the  6th  chapter  as  referring  to  himself, 
beyond  the  fact  that  in  his  official  capacity  as  high  priest 
he  (like  all  the  other  priests  of  the  House  of  Aaron)  fore 
shadowed  the  Person  and  office  of  the  One  who  should  be 
the  true  and  only  Mediator  between  God  and  man. 

To  return  for  a  moment  to  the  symbolical  action  which 
preceded  the  delivery  of  the  verbal  message,  there  is  truth 
in  Pusey's  observation,  that  the  act  of  placing  the  crown  on 
the  head  of  Joshua,  the  high  priest,  pictured  not  only  the 
union  of  the  offices  of  Priest  and  King  in  the  person  of  the 
Messiah,  but  that  He  should  be  King,  being  first  our 
High  Priest.  "  Joshua  was  already  high  priest ;  being 
such,  the  kingly  crown  was  added  to  him.  It  says  in  act 
what  the  Apostle  says  in  plain  words,  that  Christ  Jesus, 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  humbled  Himself, 
and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of 
the  Cross.  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted 
Him." 

But  to  remove  any  possibility  of   mistake    or    doubt, 
"  the  Man "  to  whom  the  attention  of  Joshua  is  directed 
away    from     himself    is    introduced     by    the    well-known 
'3 


194     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Messianic  title,  which  in  the  Book  of  Zechariah  is  used  as  a 
proper  name  of  the  promised  Deliverer. 

"  Behold  the  man  Tsemach — The  Branch — is  His  Name" 

We  have  fully  entered  into  this  point  in  the  exposition 
of  the  8th  verse  of  chap,  iii.,  and  have  there  shown  also 
how,  under  this  title,  the  Messiah  is  brought  before  us  in  the 
Old  Testament  prophecy  in  the  four  different  aspects  of 
His  character  to  which  reference  has  already  been  made 
above — namely,  as  the  King  (Jer.  xxiii.  5,  6),  the  Servant 
(Zech.  iii.  8),  the  Man  (Zech.  vi.  1 2),  and  as  "  the  Branch 
of  Jehovah  "  (Isa.  iv.  2)  :  which  answer  so  beautifully  to  the 
fourfold  portraiture  of  the  Christ  of  history  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  has,  through  the  Evangelists,  given  us  in  the 
four  different  Gospels.  We  therefore  pass  on  to  the  next 
clause. 

"  And  He  shall  grow  up  out  of  His  place  " — umitachtav 
itsmach  1 — literally,  "  He  shall  branch  up  from  under  Him  " 
— from  His  own  root  or  stock. 

First,  as  to  the  race  or  nation,  He  shall  be  of  the  seed 
of  Abraham,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  of  the  family  of 
David  ;  and,  secondly,  as  to  the  soil  or  country,  it  shall  be 
"  Immanuel's  Land,"  and  out  of  Bethlehem  Ephratha,  that 
this  glorious  Branch  shall  spring  up,  as  foretold  by  the  former 
prophets. 

At  the  same  time  it  is  true,  as  Hengstenberg  observes, 
that  the  expression  presupposes  the  lowliness  from  which 
He  will  first  rise  by  degrees  to  glory.  "  Thus,"  to  quote 
another  writer,  "  in  this  one  significant  sentence  the  lowly 
origin  of  the  Messiah  on  the  one  hand,  and  His  royal 
dignity  on  the  other,  are  both  not  obscurely  referred  to."  z 

From  His  glorious  Person  and  family,  or  place  of  His 
origin,  as  "  the  Man,"  or  "  Son  of  David,"  our  thoughts  are 
next  directed  to  the  great  work  He  is  to  accomplish : 

"  And  He  shall  build  the  Temple  of  Jehovah  ;  even  He 
(or,  literally,  He  Himself)  shall  build  the  Temple  of  Jehovah" 

1  The  only  other  place  where  "umitachtav"  is  found  in  the  Old  Testament 
is  Ex.  x.  23,  where  it  means  "out  of  his  own  place." 

2  Dr.  Wright. 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  195 

The  repetition  and  the  strong  emphasis  laid  upon  the 
pronoun  "  He  "  being  intended  as  an  affirmation  both  of 
the  certainty  of  the  fact,  and  the  greatness  of  the  task  to  be 
accomplished  by  Him.  Joshua  the  priest  and  Zerubbabel 
the  prince  were  then  engaged  in  the  building  of  a  Temple, 
and  one  primary  object  in  the  visions  and  prophecies  of 
Zechariah — even  as  it  was  of  Haggai — was  to  encourage 
them  in  the  task  which  was  now  nearing  completion.  But, 
perhaps  as  a  reward  for  his  faithfulness,  or  as  an  encourage 
ment  to  those  who  sorrowed  because  of  the  apparent 
insignificance  of  the  House  they  were  then  able  to  build,1 
the  prophet  is  commissioned  of  God  to  reveal  to  Joshua 
that  another,  greater  than  he  and  his  companion,  but  whom 
they  in  their  respective  offices  had  the  honour  to  foreshadow 
— He  who  would  combine  in  His  own  Person  the  dignities 
of  priesthood  and  royalty — would  build  the  Temple  of 
Jehovah,  of  which  also  that  they  were  now  engaged  in 
building  was  a  type  and  pledge. 

But,  we  may  ask,  what  Temple  is  it  which  the  Messiah, 
according  to  this  and  other  predictions,  was  to  build  ? 

In  answer  to  this  question  we  would  say  first  of  all  that 
we  cannot  exclude  from  this  prophecy  the  reference  to  a 
literal  Temple  in  Jerusalem,  which  shall,  after  Israel's 
national  conversion,  be  built  under  the  superintendence 
of  their  Messiah-King,  and  which  will,  during  the  millennial 
period,  be  "  the  House  of  Jehovah  "  on  earth,  to  which  "  the 
nations  will  flow  "  and  many  peoples  go,  in  order  that  they 
may  be  taught  His  ways,  and  learn  to  walk  in  His  paths, 
and  which  will  be  literally  "  An  House  of  Prayer "  and 
worship  "  for  all  nations." 2 

But  there  is  something  greater  and  deeper  in  this 
prophecy  than  the  reference  to  a  future  material  Temple 
on  earth,  however  glorious  that  may  be.  The  Temple  in 
Jerusalem  was  the  outward  visible  symbol  of  communion 
between  God  and  His  people,  which  in  the  past  has  never 
been  perfectly  realised.  And  let  us  remember,  mysterious 

1  Ezra  iii.  10-13 ;  Hag.  ii.  3  ;  Zech.  iv.  10. 

2  Isa.  ii.  2-4,  Ivi.  6,  7  ;  Mic.  iv.  1-7  ;  Ezek.  xl.  to  xliii. 


196     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  wonderful  as  it  may  appear  to  us,  that  not  only  is  the 
blessedness  of  man  created  in  the  image  of  God  conditional 
on  communion  with  his  Maker,  but  the  infinite  and  ever- 
blessed  God,  the  Father  of  spirits,  seeks  communion  with 
man.  Indeed,  it  might  be  said  that  this  was  the  chief 
object  which  God  had  in  creating  man — that  he  might  be 
a  temple  to  contain  His  perfection  and  fulness ;  that  the 
mind  with  which  He  had  endowed  him  might  comprehend 
and  admire  His  infinite  wisdom,  and  his  heart  respond  to 
His  love.  In  the  Garden  of  Eden  we  get  a  beautiful 
glimpse  of  what  was  intended  as  the  beginning  of  a  fellow 
ship  between  God  and  man,  which  was  to  go  on  and  unfold 
through  limitless  ages. 

But  soon  sin — that  hateful  and  accursed  thing  in  God's 
universe — entered,  and  communion  between  God  and  man 
was  interrupted.  The  outward  token  of  this  was  the 
banishment  of  the  man  from  the  garden,  and  the  placing 
of  the  cherubim  with  the  "  flaming  sword  which  turned 
every  way "  to  bar  the  way  against  his  re-entering  that 
blessed  abode. 

But  the  heart  of  God  yearned  for  man,  and  in  His 
infinite  wisdom  and  grace  He  devised  a  means  by  which 
His  banished  be  not  for  ever  an  outcast  from  Him. 

He  chose  Israel,  whom  He  suffered  to  approach  to  Him 
through  the  sprinkling  of  blood,  which  in  His  mind 
pointed  to  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant  which  the 
Messiah,  who  was  to  be  "  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter," 
was  to  shed  as  an  atonement  for  sin  ;  and  to  them  His 
proclamation  went  forth,  "  Make  Me  a  tabernacle,  that  I  may 
dwell  among  you"  The  tabernacle  was  built,  and  then  the 
Temple  on  Mount  Moriah ;  but  soon,  alas  !  this  Temple, 
too,  was  defiled,  and  sin  in  its  progress  made  such  rapid 
strides  that  it  penetrated  even  into  the  Holy  of  Holies, 
and  God  was  obliged  entirely  to  withdraw  His  manifest 
presence  even  from  His  chosen  dwelling-place. 

After  the  destruction  of  the  first  Temple  by  the  Chal 
deans  under  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Kings  xxv.)  the  Jews  built 
another  one  after  their  restoration  from  Babylon ;  but  the 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  197 

manifest  presence  of  Jehovah  no  more  returned  to  it ;  for 
Rabbi  Samuel  Bar  Juni,  in  the  Talmud  (Yoma,  f.  21,  c.  2), 
and  Rabbis  Solomon  and  Kimchi,  in  their  comment  on 
Hag.  i.  8,  all  agree  that  five  things  that  were  in  the  first 
Temple  were  wanting  in  the  second — ?>.,  the  ark,  wherein 
were  the  tables  of  the  Covenant,  and  the  cherubim  that 
covered  it ;  the  fire  that  used  to  come  down  from  heaven 
to  devour  the  sacrifices  ;  the  SJiekinah  Glory ;  the  gift  of 
prophecy,  or  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  the  miraculous  Urim  and 
Thummim. 

But  before  that  Temple  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans, 
another  Temple,  not  built  by  the  hands  of  man,  arose,  and 
in  it  dwelt  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  (Col.  ii.  9). 
One  came,  and  in  sight  of  the  magnificent  structure  which 
had  then  become  more  a  "  den  of  thieves  "  than  a  "  house 
of  prayer,"  proclaimed,  "  Destroy  this  Temple,  and  in 
three  days  I  will  raise  it  up  again ;  and  this  He  spake 
of  the  Temple  of  His  body."  Who  was  this  who  thus 
spoke  but  the  promised  Messiah,  with  whose  advent  the 
presence  of  Jehovah  should  again  return  to  His  people, 
as  is  implied  in  His  very  name  Immanuel,  which  being 
interpreted  means  "  God  with  us."  Behold,  "  the  tabernacle 
of  God  is  with  men "  once  more,  "  and  He  doth  dwell 
with  them."  For  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
among  us ;  and  we  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the 
only-begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth " 
(John  i.  14). 

Behold,  therefore,  O  Christian,  in  the  Person  of  the 
Redeemer  Himself,  the  fulfilment  of  these  words,  "  He  shall 
build  the  Temple  of  Jehovah"  for  in  Him  we  have  the 
fullest  manifestation  of  the  Divine  glory,  and  "  in  Christ 
Jesus  "  is  the  true  meeting-place  where  communion  between 
God  and  man  is  consummated. 

But  there  is  another  Temple  of  which  the  Messiah 
Himself  is  actually  the  builder,  and  in  which  we  may  see  a 
fulfilment  of  this  and  other  prophecies. 

"  Thou  art  Peter,"  were  the  words  of  Jesus  on  a  certain 
solemn  occasion,  "  and  upon  this  rock  (i.e.,  the  confession 


198     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Peter  had  just  uttered,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
living  God  ")  I  will  build  My  Church,  and  the  gates  of 
Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  And  what  is  the 
Church  but  the  Temple  of  the  living  God,  of  which  the 
Tabernacle  and  material  Temple  in  Jerusalem  were  but 
types,  and  in  which  His  fulness  and  glory  shall  be  eternally 
manifested  ?  Thus  the  Apostle  Peter,  addressing  primarily 
Jewish  believers,  says  :  "  Ye  also  as  living  stones  are  built 
up  a  spiritual  House "  ;  and  in  a  yet  fuller  manner,  Paul, 
addressing  Gentile  believers,  writes :  "  Ye  are  no  more 
strangers  and  sojourners,  but  ye  are  fellow-citizens  with  the 
saints  and  of  the  household  of  God,  being  built  upon  the 
foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Christ  Jesus 
Himself  being  the  Chief  Corner-stone ;  in  whom  each 
several  building,  fitly  framed  together,  groweth  into  a  holy 
temple  in  the  Lord;  in  whom  ye  also  are  builded  together 
for  an  habitation  of  God  in  the  Spirit"  (Eph.  ii.  19-22, 
R.V.).  And  how  glorious  is  this  Temple  which  "  the  Man 
Whose  Name  is  the  Branch  "  is  now,  by  His  Spirit  through 
His  servants,  building !  It  is  He  Who,  as  the  Eternal 
Word,  built  the  material  Temple  of  the  Universe,  which  is 
filling  the  minds  of  men  in  successive  generations  more  and 
more  with  wonder  and  astonishment.  What  a  spectacle, 
for  instance,  do  the  starry  heavens  present  to  us !  The 
more  we  contemplate  them,  the  more  we  are  lost  in  wonder 
at  their  immeasurable  immensity,  and  the  more  do  our 
hearts  go  up  in  reverent  adoration  of  the  God  Whose 
eternity,  glory,  power,  and  wisdom  they  ceaselessly  proclaim 
in  language  intelligible  to  every  human  heart.  But  the 
spiritual  Temple  which  He  is  now  engaged  in  building, 
when  completed,  will  astonish  even  the  admiring  angels, 
and  will  throughout  eternity  show  forth  to  principalities  and 
powers  in  heavenly  places  "  the  manifold  wisdom  "  as  well 
as  the  infinite  grace  of  God  (Eph.  iii.  10). 
But  to  proceed  to  the  next  sentence : 

"  And  He  shall  bear  the  glory,  or  regal  majesty''  a 
1  The  word  Yin — hod — is  used  in  different  significations,  but  it  is  especially 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  199 

The  pronoun  is  again  emphatic :  He  Himself,  and  none 
other,  shall  build  the  Temple  of  Jehovah,  and  He  Himself 
shall  bear  the  glory,  or  regal  majesty,  as  none  other  has 
borne  it.  He  is  peerless  in  His  work  and  in  His  reward. 
His  is  the  glory  of  the  only -begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of 
grace  and  truth. 

Already,  as  the  result  of  His  sufferings,  having  by  the 
grace  of  God  tasted  death  for  every  man,  He  is  "  exalted 
and  extolled,  and  lifted  very  high,"  "  crowned  with  honour 
and  glory " ;  but  this  prophecy  speaks  especially  of  the 
royal  majesty  which  He  shall  bear  when  He  shall  come 
forth  again  from  the  presence  of  the  Father — and,  all  His 
enemies  having  been  made  a  footstool  for  His  feet,  He  shall 
sit  down  upon  His  own  throne  as  the  theocratic  King  of 
Israel. 

Then,  indeed,  upon  His  head  there  shall  be  "  many 
crowns "  ;  for,  not  only  will  God  the  Father  invest  Him 
with  glory  and  majesty,  but  men  too,  especially  His  own 
nation,  will  glorify  Him ;  "  and  He,"  as  the  true  Son  of 
David,  the  One  Whose  right  it  is  to  reign,  "  shall  be  for  a 
throne  of  glory  to  His  Father's  house  :  and  they  shall  hang 
upon  Him  all  the  glory  of  His  Father  s  house,  the  offspring 
and  the  issue,  every  small  vessel,  from  the  vessels  of  cups 
to  the  vessels  of  flagons"  (Isa.  xxii.  23,  24).  We  come  to 
the  next  sentence  of  the  prophecy  : 

"And  He  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  His  throne" 

i.e.)  He  shall  not  only  possess  the  honour  and  dignity  of  a 
king ;  He  shall  not  be  "  a  constitutional "  monarch,  who 
reigns  but  does  not  rule  ;  but  He  shall  Himself  exercise  all 
royal  power  and  authority.  Yes,  the  rule  of  King- Messiah 
will  be  absolute  and  autocratic,  but  autocracy  will  be  safe 

employed  to  describe  royal  majesty  (Jer.  xxii.  18 ;  I  Chron.  xxix.  25 ;  Dan.  xi. 
21 ).  Pusey  observes  :  "  This  word  is  almost  always  used  of  the  special  glory  of 
God,  and  then,  although  seldom,  of  the  majesty  of  those  on  whom  God  confers 
majesty,  as  Moses  or  Joshua  (Num.  xxvii.  20),  or  theory  of  the  kingdom  given 
to  Solomon"  (i  Chron.  xxix.  25).  It  is  used  of  the  glory  or  majesty  to  be  laid 
on  the  ideal  King  in  Ps.  xxi.  5 — which  the  Jews  themselves  interpreted  of  the 
Messiah. 


200     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  beneficent  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  One,  Who  is 
infinite  in  wisdom,  power,  and  love.  The  result  of  His 
blessed  rule  will  be  that — 

"  In  His  days  shall  the  righteous  flourish  ; 
And  abundance  of  peace  till  the  moon  be  no  more. 
He  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea, 
And  from  the  River  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth. 
Yea,  all  kings  shall  fall  down  before  Him ; 
All  nations  shall  serve  Him. 
He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people, 
He  shall  save  the  children  of  the  needy, 
And  shall  break  in  pieces  the  oppressor ; 
For  He  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  crieth, 
And  the  poor  that  hath  no  helper. 

He  shall  redeem  their  soul  from  oppression  and  violence  : 
And  precious  shall  their  blood  be  in  His  sight.  .   .   . 
And  men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him  : 
All  nations  shall  call  Him  blessed." 

(Ps.  Ixxii.) 

The  character  of  His  blessed  rule  is  further  explained 
in  the  next  sentence : 

"  And  He  shall  be  a  priest  upon  His  throne" 

How  full  of  significance  is  this  one  sentence  of  Holy 
Writ !  As  is  the  manner  of  Zechariah,  we  have  in  these 
four  Hebrew  words  a  terse  summary  of  nearly  all  that  the 
former  prophets  have  spoken  of  Messiah  and  His  work. 

Here  is  the  true  Melchizedek,  Who  is  at  the  same  time 
King  of  Righteousness,  King  of  Salem,  which  is  King  of 
Peace,  and  the  great  High  Priest,  whose  priesthood,  unlike 
the  Aaronic,  abideth  "  for  ever."  "  He  shall  be  a  Priest 
upon  His  throne." 

Now  He  royally  exercises  His  high  priestly  office  as 
the  Advocate  with  the  Father,  and  only  Mediator  between 
God  and  man,  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  heaven.  From 
thence  He  shall  come  forth  again  to  take  possession  of  His 
throne,  and  to  commence  His  long-promised  reign  on  the 
earth.  But,  even  when  as  King  he  exercises  His  sovereign 
rule,  He  will  still  be  "  a  Priest  upon  His  throne,"  who  will 
have  compassion  upon  the  ignorant  and  erring  (Heb.  v.  2), 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  201 

and  cause  His  righteous  severity  to  go  forth  only  against 
the  wilfully  froward  and  rebellious.  For  our  Lord  Jesus  is 
"  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  "  ;  and  that  which 
will  eternally  constitute  His  chief  glory  will  be,  not  His 
power,  but  His  grace,  manifested  once  in  His  laying  down 
His  life — a  ransom  for  many — and  since  in  His  priestly 
mediatorial  rule,  whether  in  heaven  or  on  earth. 

"  And  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both" 

The  expression  atsath  shalom,  "  counsel  of  peace,"  means 
not  merely  "  peace,"  for  if  that  alone  were  meant,  the  simple 
idiom  Di-'K'  rprn,  vehayah  shalom,  "  there  shall  be  peace 
between  them  both,"  would  be  used.  The  word  used  here 
signifies  a  counsel  planning  or  procuring  peace  for  some  other 
than  those  who  counsel. 

But  who  are  "  the  twain  "  who  thus  devise  peace  for 
man  between  them  ? 

Some  commentators  consider  that  the  offices  of  Priest 
and  King  are  alluded  to,  but  the  phraseology  naturally 
constrains  us  to  think  of  persons,  not  of  things  or  abstract 
offices.  The  explanation  advocated  by  Hengstenberg,  and 
adopted  by  Koehler,  is  a  probable  and  reasonable  one — 
namely,  that  "  the  reference  is  to  the  two  offices  of  Priest 
and  King  combined  in  the  Person  of  Messiah,  and  that  the 
prophecy  speaks  of  a  plan  devised  by  Messiah  in  His  double 
character,  whereby  peace  and  salvation  should  be  secured 
for  the  people  of  God,"  and  on  the  earth  during  His  reign. 
"  This  fact,"  observes  Dr.  Wright,  "  agrees  with  the  New 
Testament  statements  in  which  the  angelic  choirs  are  re 
presented  announcing  '  Peace  on  earth  '  as  one  of  the  results 
of  Christ's  birth  ;  and  with  our  Lord's  own  words,  '  Peace  I 
leave  with  you — My  peace  I  give  unto  you,'  the  full  realisa 
tion  of  which  is  exhibited  in  the  final  vision  of  the  Book  of 
Revelation."  But  I  am  personally  inclined  to  think  that 
another  view,  which  is  held  by  many  scholars,  is  the  right 
one — namely,  that  "  the  two  "  are  Jehovah  and  the  Messiah, 
or  "  Jesus  and  the  Father."  1  "  It  is  clear,  no  doubt,  that  the 

1  Pusey. 


202     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

pronoun  '  His '  in  the  expression  '  His  throne '  is  used  twice 
in  ver.  1 3  in  reference  to  the  Messiah,  and  cannot  well  be 
regarded  as  relating  to  Jehovah.  The  royal  dignity  of  the 
Messiah  is  specially  referred  to,  inasmuch  as  the  Messiah, 
as  King,  would  have  power  to  perform  the  work  which  He 
had  to  do.  But  the  fact  that  the  pronoun  in  the  phrase 
'  His  throne '  cannot  refer  to  Jehovah,  does  not  prove  that 
Jehovah  cannot  be  one  of  the  two  persons  referred  to  at 
the  close  of  the  verse.  Two,  and  only  two,  persons  are 
referred  to  in  the  verse — namely,  the  Lord  and  the  Lord's 
Christ ;  and  many  eminent  scholars — as  Vitringa,  Reuss, 
Pusey,  and  Jerome — have  considered  that  these  are  the  two 
Persons  to  whom  reference  is  made  in  the  clause,  '  the 
counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both.' 

"  The  prophecy  indeed  is  closely  connected  with  Ps.  ex., 
where  a  '  counsel '  between  the  Lord  and  His  Christ  is 
plainly  referred  to,  and  where  Messiah  is  predicted  as  King 
and  Priest.  This  is  the  natural  meaning,  and  the  way  in 
which  the  words  were  no  doubt  interpreted  by  the  hearers 
of  the  prophet  Zechariah."  l 

"  In  Christ,"  to  quote  another  writer,  "  all  is  perfect 
harmony.  There  is  a  counsel  of  peace  between  Him  and 
the  Father  whose  Temple  He  builds.  The  will  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son  is  one.  Both  have  one  will  of  love 
toward  us,  the  salvation  of  the  world,  bringing  forth  peace 
through  our  redemption.  God  the  Father  so  loved  the  world 
that  He  gave  His  only -begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  Him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life  ;  and  God 
the  Son  is  our  peace \  who  hath  made  both  one,  that  He  might 
reconcile  both  unto  God  in  one  body  by  the  cross,  and  came  and 
preached  peace  to  them  whicJi  were  afar  off,  and  to  them  that 
were  nigh"  (Eph.  ii.  14,  16,  17). 

In  all  fulness,  however,  the  blessed  fruit  of  this 
"  counsel  of  peace,"  and  the  "  thoughts  of  salvation  "  between 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  will  only  be  realised  by  Israel 
and  the  nations  of  the  earth  during  the  period  of  Messiah's 
reign,  and  by  the  one  Church  of  the  living  God  through 

1  Dr.  Wright. 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  203 

the  eternity  that  is  to  follow.  Then — in  the  limitless  ages 
to  come — "  He  will  show  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace 
in  kindness  toward  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  according  to  His 
good  pleasure  which  He  purposed  in  Him  unto  a  dispensa 
tion  of  the  fulness  of  the  times,  to  sum  up  all  things  in 
Christ,  the  things  in  the  heavens,  and  the  things  upon  the 
earth  .  .  .  according  to  the  purpose  of  Him  who  worketh  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will  "  (Eph.  i.  9-1 1,  ii.  7,  R.V.). 

We  now  come  to  the  I4th  verse.  First  let  me  give  a 
word  of  explanation  in  reference  to  the  difference  of  the 
names  here  as  compared  with  the  loth  verse.  As  to  0?n, 
Helem,  it  is  the  same  as  ^n,  Heldai,  the  difference  being 
probably  occasioned  by  a  very  slight  scribal  error  of 
running  two  separate  Hebrew  letters  into  one.  "  Hen  "  is 
not  a  proper  name  at  all,  but  an  appellative,  meaning  "  the 
favour,"  or  "  grace,"  and  is  rightly  rendered  in  the  margin 
of  the  R.V.  and  by  all  scholars,  "  and  for  the  kindness 
of  the  son  of  Zephaniah." 

This  is  very  beautiful.  The  crowns  were  to  be 
deposited  in  the  Temple  of  God  as  a  memorial,  not  only 
of  these  three  distinguished  strangers  who  had  brought 
their  own  and  their  brethren's  offerings  for  the  House  of 
God,  but  as  a  memorial  also  of  "  the  kindness  "  of  this  true 
son  of  Abraham,  who,  as  stated  at  the  beginning  of  this 
exposition,  was  evidently  a  man  given  to  hospitality,  and 
received  these  three  strangers  into  his  house.  It  was 
apparently  a  small  service  rendered  to  the  cause  of  God, 
but  it  was  very  precious  to  Him  because  it  was  doubtless 
done  for  His  Name's  sake.  And  so  many  a  little  and 
apparently  insignificant  deed  done  out  of  love  for  our  Lord 
Jesus — yea,  even  the  cup  of  cold  water  given  in  the  name 
of  a  disciple — is  treasured  up  in  His  memory,  and  shall  in 
no  wise  lose  its  reward — "  For  God  is  not  unrighteous  to 
forget  your  work,  and  labour  of  love,  which  ye  have  showed 
toward  His  Name,  in  that  ye  have  ministered  to  the  saints, 
and  do  minister"  (Heb.  vi.  10).  "As  we  have  therefore 
opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  especially  unto 
them  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith  "  (Gal.  vi.  i  o). 


204     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  while  the  crowns  were  to  be  thus  deposited  in  the 
Temple  as  a  memorial  of  these  four  men,  they  were  also  to 
serve  as  a  pledge  and  earnest  of  the  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy,  and  of  the  realisation  of  the  symbolical  action 
on  which  it  was  based  :  "  And  they  that  are  far  off  shall 
come  and  build  in  the  Temple  of  the  Lord." 

These  words  not  only  refer  to  those  Jews  who  were 
still  in  the  far  lands  of  the  dispersion,  who  in  Messiah's 
time  would  be  gathered,  and  take  their  share  in  the  build 
ing  of  the  future  Temple,  as  some  have  explained,  but  are 
a  glorious  promise,  as  I  have  already  stated  at  the  begin 
ning,  of  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  and  of  the  time 
when  all  nations  would  walk  in  the  light  of  Jehovah.  "  It 
is  probable,"  as  another  writer  suggests,  "  that  the  great 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  may  have  had  this  prophecy  in  his 
view  when  he  reminded  his  converts  in  Ephesus  that  now 
in  Christ  Jesus  ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off  have  become 
nigh  through  the  blood  of  Christ  (Eph.  ii.  1 3)."  On  the 
other  hand,  Peter  probably  understood  the  similar  expres 
sions  to  which  he  gave  utterance  as  referring  (primarily)  to 
the  dispersed  of  Israel.  "  The  promise  is  to  you  and  to 
your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as 
the  Lord  our  God  shall  call  "  (Acts  ii.  39). 

But  again,  I  repeat,  that  whatever  fulfilment  of  the 
words  we  may  already  see,  the  full  realisation  of  them  will 
not  be  until  Messiah  sits  and  reigns  a  "  Priest  upon  His 
throne"  over  Israel.  Then,  when  the  law  shall  go  forth 
out  of  Zion,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem,  and 
converted  Israel  goes  forth  declaring  among  the  peoples 
the  wonderful  works  of  God,  shall  the  nations  which  are 
still  "  afar  off"  learn  His  ways  and  walk  in  His  paths,  and 
come  with  their  tribute  of  worship  and  service  to  His 
Temple. 

"  And  ye  shall  know  that  Jehovah  of  hosts  has  sent  Me 
unto  you"  The  fulfilment,  or  realisation,  of  what  had  here 
been  predicted  in  symbol  and  verbal  prophecy  would  be, 
so  to  say,  the  Divine  authentication  of  the  Message  and 
Messenger,  and  "  Israel  will  perceive  that  the  speaker  had 


THE  CROWNING  OF  JOSHUA  205 

been  sent  to  them  by  Jehovah  of  hosts."  Keil,  however, 
from  whom  I  quote  the  last  sentence,  contends  that  it  is 
not  the  prophet  who  thus  speaks,  but  the  Angel  of  Jehovah. 
"  For  although  in  what  precedes,  only  the  prophet,  and  not 
the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  has  appeared  as  acting  and  speak 
ing,  we  must  not  change  the  '  sending '  into  '  speaking ' 
here,  or  understand  the  formula,  or  expression,  used  in  any 
other  sense  here  than  in  chap.  ii.  8— I'l  and  iv.  9.  We 
must  therefore  assume  that  just  as  the  words  of  the  prophet 
pass  imperceptibly  into  words  of  Jehovah,  so  here  they 
pass  into  words  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  who  says,  con 
cerning  Himself,  that  Jehovah  hath  sent  Him." 

The  final  sentence  of  the  prophecy  reads :  "  And  this 
shall  come  to  pass  (vehayah  :  '  this  shall  be ')  if  (or  when)  ye 
diligently  obey  (lit.,  '  if  hearkening  ye  shall  hearken  ' — i.e., 
'  give  heed  with  a  view  to  obey'}  the  voice  of  Jehovah  your 
God." 

Not  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  will  be  condi 
tional  on  their  obedience — that  is,  conditional  on  the  will 
and  unchangeable  purpose  of  God  alone — but  their  participa 
tion  in  it  depends  on  their  faith  and  obedience.  "  Because 
He  had  said,  '  And  ye  shall  know  that  Jehovah  of  hosts 
hath  sent  Me  unto  you,' "  observes  an  old  writer.  "  He 
warns  them  that  the  fruit  of  that  coming  will  reach  to 
those  only  who  should  hear  God,  and  with  ardent  mind 
join  themselves  to  His  Name.  For  as  many  as  believed  in 
Him  were  made  sons  of  God,  but  the  rest  were  cast  into 
outer  darkness." 

The  whole  Hebrew  phrase,  I  may  point  out,  is  taken 
bodily  from  Deut.  xxviii.  i ,  where  it  is  rendered :  "  And  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  if  thou  shalt  hearken  diligently  unto 
the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God  " — then  all  the  blessings 
promised  to  them  under  the  old  covenant  would  be  enjoyed 
by  them.  Under  the  law,  however,  though  they  were  very 
ready  to  promise,  they  had  no  power  "  diligently  to  hearken  " 
or  to  obey  the  voice  of  Jehovah  their  God,  and  instead  of 
enjoying  the  blessings  they  came  under  the  curse  of  the 
law.  But  what  was  impossible  under  the  law  shall  be 


206     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

realised  under  grace.     Then,  as  one  great  blessing  of  the 

New  Covenant  under  which  they  shall  be  brought,  the  law 

of  God  shall  be  put  in  their  inward  parts  and  written  ir 

their  hearts,  or,  as  we  read  in   Jer.  xxxii.    38-41,  "  The}' 

shall  be  My  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God ;  and  I  will  give 

them  one  heart,  and  one  way,  that  they  may  fear  Me  for  ever, 

for  the  good  of  them,  and  their  children  after  them  :  and  I 

will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them  that  I  will  no 

turn  away  from  them,  to  do  them  good ;  and  I  will  put  My 

fear  in  their  hearts,  that  they  shall  not   depart  from   Me. 

Yea,  I  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good,  and  I  will 

plant  them  in  this  land  assuredly  with  My  whole  heart  and 

with  My  whole  soul" 

And  then,  also — after  Israel  shall  yield  ready  and 
joyful  obedience  to  the  voice  of  Jehovah  their  God — "  shall 
come  to  pass  "  what  is  stated  in  the  first  part  of  the  last 
verse  of  the  prophecy  which  we  have  been  considering,  and 
the  Gentile  nations  "  that  are  afar  off  shall  come  and  build 
in  the  Temple  of  Jehovah."  "  And  Jehovah  shall  be  King 
over  all  the  earth :  in  that  day  shall  Jehovah  be  One,  and 
His  Name  One'' 


\ 
\ 


\ 
\ 


\ 

\ 


CHAPTER    XI 

ADDRESS  TO  THE  DEPUTATION  FROM 
BETHEL  ON  THE  QUESTION  OF 
THE  CONTINUED  OBSERVANCE  OF 
THE  FASTS 

(A)  THE   NEGATIVE  ANSWER 
(CHAPTER  vn) 


207 


And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of  King  Darius,  that  the  word  of 
Jehovah  came  unto  Zechariah  in  the  fourth  day  of  the  ninth  month,  even  in 
Chislev.  Now  they  of  Bethel  had  sent  Sharezer  and  Regem-melech,  and  their  men, 
to  entreat  the  favour  of  Jehovah,  and  to  speak  unto  the  priests  of  the  house  of 
Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  to  the  prophets,  saying,  Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month, 
separating  myself,  as  I  have  done  these  so  many  years  ?  Then  came  the  word  of 
Jehovah  of  hosts  unto  me,  saying,  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and  to 
the  priests,  saying,  When  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the  fifth  and  in  the  seventh 
month,  even  these  seventy  years,  did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  Me,  even  to  Me  ?  And 
when  ye  eat,  and  when  ye  drink,  do  not  ye  eat  for  yourselves,  and  drink  for 
yourselves?  Should  ye  not  hear  the  words  which  Jehovah  cried  by  the  former 
prophets,  when  Jerusalem  was  inhabited  and  in  prosperity,  and  the  cities 
thereof  round  about  her,  and  the  South  and  the  lowland  were  inhabited? 
And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  unto  Zechariah,  saying,  Thus  hath  Jehovah 
of  hosts  spoken,  saying,  Execute  true  judgment,  and  show  kindness  and  com 
passion  every  man  to  his  brother ;  and  oppress  not  the  widow,  nor  the  fatherless, 
the  sojourner,  nor  the  poor  ;  and  let  none  of  you  devise  evil  against  his  brother 
in  your  heart.  But  they  refused  to  hearken,  and  pulled  away  the  shoulder,  and 
stopped  their  ears,  that  they  might  not  hear.  Yea,  they  made  their  hearts  as  an 
adamant  stone,  lest  they  should  hear  the  law,  and  the  words  which  Jehovah  of 
hosts  had  sent  by  His  Spirit  by  the  former  prophets  :  therefore  there  came  great 
wrath  from  Jehovah  of  hosts.  And  it  came  to  pass  that,  as  lie  cried,  and  they 
would  not  hear,  so  they  shall  cry,  and  I  will  not  hear,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  ; 
but  I  will  scatter  them  with  a  whirlwind  among  all  nations  which  they  have  not 
known.  Thus  the  land  was  desolate  after  them,  so  that  no  man  passed  through 
nor  returned  :  for  they  laid  the  pleasant  land  desolate. 


208 


CHAPTER    XI 

NEARLY  two  years  had  elapsed  since  that  memorable 
night  on  which  the  series  of  eight  visions  were 
shown  to  the  prophet — in  which  are  unfolded,  as 
in  a  wonderful  panorama,  the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  God 
concerning  Israel  and  the  nations  from  the  beginning  to  the 
very  end  of  this  age — when  the  word  of  Jehovah  came 
again  to  Zechariah.  The  day,  the  month,  and  the  year  of 
this  divine  oracle  are  clearly  given — it  was  "  in  the  fourth 
day  of  the  ninth  month,  even  in  Chislev "  (answering  to 
December),  "  in  the  fourth  year  of  King  Darius" x 

The  occasion  when  the  prophet  was  inspired  to  utter 
this  great  and  comforting  prophecy,  which  stands  separate 
and  complete  in  itself,  though  going  over  in  plain,  verbal 
prophecy  the  same  line  of  thought  as  unfolded  by  the 
visions,  is  clearly  stated  in  the  first  three  verses  of  chap.  vii. 

To  understand  the  circumstances  which  brought  about 
the  very  significant  incident  recorded  in  these  verses,  we 
have  to  remember  that  the  fourth  year  of  Darius  was  a  time 
when  things  seemed  to  go  well,  and  looked  promising  to 
the  remnant  who  had  returned  to  the  land.  Every 
hindrance  to  the  completion  of  the  building  of  the  Temple 
had  been  removed  by  the  royal  decree  of  Darius,  as 
recorded  in  Ezra  vi.  Even  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  in  spite 
of  the  desolations  which  still  prevailed  in  some  of  its 
quarters,  and  the  ruinous  condition  of  its  walls,  was  begin 
ning  to  improve  and  revive,  and  contained  already  some 
fine  private  residences,  as  we  may  judge  from  Hag.  i.  4. 

The  question,  therefore,  naturally  agitated  the  minds  of 

1  Compare  chap.  i.  7.     From  Ezra  vi.  15  we  learn  that  it  was  just  about  two 
years  before  the  final  completion  of  the  Temple,  which  they  were  then  building. 


210     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  people  whether,  with  these  signs  of  apparent  prosperity 
the  restored  remnant  should  continue  to  observe  the  days 
of  national  sorrow  and  fasting  which  had  been  instituted  in 
commemoration  of  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  and  the 
desolation  of  the  land  at  the  commencement  of  the  seventy 
years'  captivity. 

The  initiative  in  bringing  this  point  to  an  issue  was 
taken  by  the  inhabitants  of  Bethel,  who  sent  a  deputation 
of  two  of  their  prominent  citizens,  "  with  his  men  " x  (i.e., 
attendants  or  retainers  of  Regem-melech — he  being  probably 
a  man  of  importance),  "  to  entreat  the  favour  of  Jehovah,  and 
to  speak  unto  the  priests  of  the  house  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and 
to  the  propliets,  saying,  Should  I  (or,  '  Shall  I  continue  to ') 
weep  in  the  fifth  month,  separating  myself  as  I  have  done 
these  so  many  years  ?  " 

One  or  two  further  explanatory  notes  are  necessary  on 
these  first  verses  before  we  can  proceed. 

(i)  It  will  be  noticed  that,  together  with  the  Revised 
Version,  and  almost  all  modern  scholars,  we  discard  the 
rendering  given  of  the  first  line  of  the  2nd  verse  in  the 
Authorised  Version,  namely,  "  When  they  sent  unto  the 
House  of  God"  Now,  Bethel  does  mean  literally  "  House 
of  God  " ;  but  it  is  never  used  of  the  Temple,  but  only  and 
always  of  the  well-known  town  of  Ephraim,  one  of  the 
great  centres  of  the  Israelitish  idolatrous  worship  set  up  by 
Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat.2  Some  commentators,  with 
the  Septuagint  and  some  of  the  Jewish  interpreters,  have 
taken  Bethel  in  the  accusative,  and  have  rendered  the 
words,  "  When  they  (the  Jews)  sent  to  Bethel " ;  but  no 
reason  can  be  assigned  for  such  a  deputation  being  sent  to 
Bethel,  since  the  "  priests  of  the  House  of  Jehovah  of 
Hosts,"  which  all  agree  must  mean  the  Temple,  "  and  the 
prophets,"  whom  the  deputation  was  to  consult,  most 

1  The  rendering  "their  men"  in  the  Authorised  and  Revised  Versions  is  not 
accurate  according  to  the  Massoretic  text. 

2  mrr  n'3  ("  Beth  Jehovah")  is  used  altogether  about  two  hundred  and  fifty- 
nine  times,  and  D-nSx  rra  ("  Beth  Klohim  "),  or  D'nSxn  rva  ("  Beth  ha-Elohim  "), 
about  fifty  times  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  of  the  Temple  ;  but  h*  JV3  ("  Bethel  ") 
not  once. 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  211 

certainly  lived  in  and  about  Jerusalem.     Besides,  consider 
ing  its  previous  history  as  a  centre  of  Israelitish  idolatry, 
the  Jews  were  not  in  the  least  likely  to  have  gone,  or  sent 
there,   "  to   entreat   the   face  of  Jehovah."     On    the   other 
hand,  it  is  not  only  in  accord  with  Bible  history,  but  there 
is  a  special  significance  in  a  deputation  coming  from  Bethel 
to  Jerusalem.     According  to  the  original    division  of  the 
land  by  Joshua,  Bethel  fell  to  Benjamin  (Josh,  xviii.  1 3) ; 
but  at  the  great  schism  from  the  House  of  David  under 
Jeroboam  it  went  with  that  part  of  Benjamin  which  fell 
away  with  the  northern  tribes,  and  became  the  chief  centre, 
as  already  stated,  of  the  idolatrous  worship  set  up  by  the 
son  of  Nebat,  who  built  there  a  "  sanctuary,"  or  temple,  in 
imitation  of,  and  as  a  rival  to,  the  Temple  in  Jerusalem,  as 
well  as  a  royal  palace  for  his  own  residence  (Amos  vii.  1 3). 
It  was  overthrown  and  became  desolate  in  the  over 
throw,  first  of  the  northern  kingdom  of  Israel  by  Assyria, 
and  again  in  the  subsequent  overthrow  of  Judah,  and  the 
desolation  of  the  whole  land  by  the  Babylonians ;  but  it 
was  rebuilt  after  the  partial  restoration  at  the  conclusion  of 
the  seventy  years'  captivity,  and   a  considerable  number  of 
the  former  inhabitants,  mixed  probably  with  some  from  the 
other  tribes,  once  again  settled  in  it  (Ezra  ii.  28  ;  Neh.  vii. 
32,  xi.  31). 

Now,  the  special  significance  in  this  deputation  from 
Bethel  to  the  "  House  of  Jehovah  "  in  Jerusalem  lies  in  the 
fact  that  it  is,  as  J.  P.  Lange  and  Dr.  Wright  well  point 
out,  an  evidence  "  that  the  lessons  taught  by  the  Assyrian 
and  Babylonian  captivities  were  not  lost  upon  the  men  of 
Bethel."  The  men  who  had  formerly  belonged  to  the 
northern  ten-tribed  kingdom  no  longer  cherished  hopes  of 
a  separate  destiny,  nor  looked  to  a  different  centre  than 
their  brethren  of  Judah.  "  Notwithstanding  the  many 
sacred  memories  connected  with  their  city,  and  the  fact 
that  it  had  been  the  seat  of  a  Temple  in  the  days  of  the 
Israelitish  kingdom,  to  which  the  tribes  of  Israel  had 
resorted  in  numbers,  no  attempt  was  now  made  on  their 
part  to  dispute  the  legitimate  right  to  Jerusalem  being 


212     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

regarded  as  the  only  place  where  the  sacrifices  and  services 
enjoined  by  the  precepts  of  the  Mosaic  Law  could  be 
offered." 

(2)  Owing    to    the    omission    of  the    particle    ns  (etJi) 
after   Bethel,   which    in    such    cases    usually    indicates    the 
accusative,   Ewald,   Koehler,   Dr.   Wright,  and   others  have 
taken   the  clause,  "  Sharezer  Regem-melech  and  his   men," 
as    in    apposition    with    Bethel,   and    have    translated    the 
2nd   verse   thus :    "  And   Bethel,  that  is  Sharezer  Regem- 
melech  and  his  men,  sent  to  entreat  Jehovah,"  etc. ;  but  we 
agree   with    Keil    that    there   is    something   so   harsh   and 
inflexible  in  the  assumption  of  such  an  apposition  as  this, 
that,  in  spite  of  the  omission  of  the  particle,  it  is  preferable 
to   regard    the    names    as    in    the   accusative,  even    as   the 
Revised  Version  has  done. 

(3)  As    to    the   names    of   these    men,   it   is    a   rather 
striking  fact  that,  while  those  who  came  as  a  deputation 
from  Babylon  with  the  offering  to  the  House  of  the  Lord, 
in   chap.   vi.    9—15,    bore    names    all    expressive    of   some 
relationship  to  Jehovah,  those  who  came  from  Bethel  have 
foreign    names  which   originally  were    associated  with   the 
false  worship  of   their  oppressors,     "I-^P^  (Sharetser)  was 
the  name  of  one  of  the  parricide  sons  of  Sennacherib  (Isa. 
xxxvii.  38),  and  also  of  one  of  the  princes  of  Babylon  who 
desolated  Jerusalem  and  destroyed  the  Temple  (Jer.  xxxix. 
3—13).      The  full   Assyrian    name  was  Nergal-Sarusur,  or 
Nergal-Shar-Ezer,    which,    according    to    Schrader,    means 
"  May  Nergal  protect  the  king."      Here  Nergal,  the  name 
of   the    Assyrian    false    god,    is   dropped,    but    the   prayer, 
originally  idolatrous,  is  retained. 

Dfn  (Regent)  is  found  as  a  proper  name  in  I  Chron. 
ii.  47.  Gesenius  explains  Regem-melech  as  signifying 
"  friend  of  the  king."  It  may  originally  also  have  been 
an  Assyrian  name,  though  Regem  has  not  been  found  in 
that  language,  but  has  been  explained  from  the  Arabic. 
But  it  is  probable  that,  as  in  the  case  of  Daniel,  Hananiah, 
and  Mishael,  so  these  men  also,  apart  from  the  names 
bestowed  upon  them  by  their  Gentile  conqueror,  in  whose 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  213 

service  they  stood,  had  also  their  proper  Jewish  names ; 
and  the  reason  why  their  Babylonian  or  Assyrian  names 
are  given  here  is  probably  to  mark  them  out  as  men  of 
importance,  who  very  likely  held  positions  of  office  in  the 
Court  of  Assyria  or  Babylon. 

(4)  The  deputation,  after  entreating  the  favour  of  the 
Lord  by  presenting  gifts  and  offerings,1  was  instructed  to 
address  the  inquiry  "  to  the  priests  of  the  House  of 
Jehovah  of  hosts,"  because  according  to  the  Mosaic 
institution  they  in  all  such  matters  were  to  teach  Jacob 
God's  judgments,  and  Israel  His  law  (Deut.  xxxiii.  8— 10); 
or,  as  we  have  it  in  the  beautiful  picture  in  Mai.  ii. 
5—7,  "the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge,  and  they 
should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth."  That  they  should  also 
consult  "  the  prophets  " — that  is,  Haggai  and  Zechariah — 
was  very  natural,  since  by  their  ministry,  and  its  immediate 
powerful  effect  in  rousing  the  people  to  the  long-neglected 
task  of  rebuilding  the  Temple,  they  had  indeed  proved  and 
authenticated  themselves  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  people 
to  be  "  Jehovah's  messengers  in  Jehovah's  message  "  (Hag. 

i-  13). 

(5)  The  question  itself  was,  "  Shall  I  (i.e.,  the  city  of 
Bethel}  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  separating  myself  (i.wn — 
hinnazer — like  the  Nazarite  who  '  separated  himself,'  or 
abstained  from  strong  drink  and  other  bodily  indulgences),2 
as  I  have  done  these  many  years  ?  " 

The  fast  of  the  fifth  month,  which  is  the  month  of  Ab, 
answering  to  August,  is  still  observed  by  the  Jews  on  the 
ninth  day,  in  celebration  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by 
Nebuchadnezzar  ;  but,  according  to  the  Talmud  and  Jewish 
historians,  the  following  list  of  calamities  all  happened  on 

1  The  phrase  'J9  n^n  (hilah  penei)  primarily  signifies  to  "stroke  the  face," 
hence  to  entreat  favour,  or  to  appease,  or  propitiate.  It  is  used  of  entreating 
the  favour  of  the  rich  with  gifts  (Job  xi.  19 ;  Prov.  xix.  6 ;  Ps.  xlv.  12),  and  is 
often  used  in  reference  to  God.  No  intelligent  reader  is,  of  course,  in  any  danger 
of  misunderstanding  these  anthropomorphic  expressions  in  the  Bible  when 
applied  to  God. 

•  Fasting  and  mourning  were  generally  accompanied  with  weeping  (comp. 
Judg.  xx.  26 ;  i  Sam.  i.  7  ;  2  Sam.  i.  12  ;  Ezra  x.  i  ;  Neh.  i.  4,  etc.). 


214     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  same  day,  namely:  (i)  On  that  day  the  decree  went  forth 
from  God  in  the  wilderness  that  the  people  should  not 
enter  the  land  because  of  their  unbelief;  (2)  on  the  very 
same  day  of  the  destruction  of  the  First  Temple  by  the 
Chaldeans,  the  Second  Temple  also  was  destroyed  by  the 
Romans;  (3)  on  that  day,  after  the  rising  under  Bar 
Cochba,  the  city  of  Bethar  was  taken,  "  in  which  were 
thousands  and  myriads  of  Israel,  and  they  had  a  great 
king  whom  all  Israel  and  the  greatest  of  the  wise  men 
thought  was  King  Messiah " ;  but  (4)  he  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Gentiles,  and  they  were  all  put  to  death,  and 
the  affliction  was  great,  like  as  it  was  in  the  desolation  of 
the  Sanctuary;  (5)  and  lastly,  on  that  day  "the  wicked 
Turnus  Rufus,  who  is  devoted  to  punishment,  ploughed  up 
the  (hill  of  the)  Sanctuary,  and  the  parts  round  about  it, 
to  fulfil  that  which  was  said  by  Micah,  '  Zion  shall  be 
ploughed  as  a  field.'  " l 

Here,  however,  the  inquiry  doubtless  had  reference  only 
to  the  fast  in  celebration  of  the  destruction  of  the  First 
Temple  by  the  Chaldeans,  the  continued  observance  of 
which,  now  that  the  new  Temple  was  almost  finished, 
might  seem  to  them  almost  incongruous,  especially  as  the 
prophets  proclaimed  that  the  restoration  of  the  Temple 
would  be  a  sign  that  Jehovah  had  once  more  restored  His 
favour  to  His  people.  The  question,  as  Keil  observes,  also 
involved  the  prayer  "  that  the  Lord  would  continue  per 
manently  to  bestow  upon  His  people  the  favour  which  He 
had  restored  to  them,  and  not  only  to  bring  to  completion 
the  restoration  of  the  Holy  Place,  but  accomplish  generally 
the  glorification  of  Israel  which  had  been  predicted  by 
the  earlier  prophets " ;  or,  to  quote  another  writer,  "  the 
question  was  in  some  respects  similar  to  that  asked  by  the 
Apostles  of  the  Lord  after  His  resurrection,  '  Lord,  wilt 
Thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  Kingdom  to  Israel  ? ' ' 

The  Lord's  answer  to  this  question  through  the  mouth 
of   His    prophet   divides   itself   into    two   parts — the    first, 

1  See  Maimonides  yad  ha-chazaqah,  Hilchoth  Taanith,  c.  5. 
8  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  215 

which  may  be  described  as  the  negative  part  of  the  answer, 
being  contained  in  chap.  vii.  4—14;  and  the  second,  or 
positive  part,  in  chap.  viii.  Each  of  these  two  larger 
divisions  is,  however,  again  subdivided  into  two  sections. 
The  whole  answer,  thus  falling  into  four  parts,  each  of 
which  begins  with  the  words,  "And  the  word  of  Jehovah  of 
hosts  came  to  me>  saying"  (vii.  4,  8,  viii.  I,  18) — the  usual 
formula,  as  has  already  been  poiflkd  out,  by  which  the 
prophets  authenticated  their  messages  as  being  not  of,  or 
from,  themselves,  but  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord. 

We  said  at  the  beginning  that,  though  these  two  chapters 
are  a  prophecy  separate  and  complete  in  itself,  it  will  be 
found  on  close  examination  to  go  over  the  same  line  of 
thought  as  unfolded  in  the  series  of  visions  in  the  first  six 
chapters.  The  outstanding  feature  of  this  prophecy,  even 
as  it  was  of  the  visions,  is  that  they  are  debharim  tobhim, 
debharim  nichummim  ("  good  words,  even  comforting  words," 
chap.  i.  1 3).  In  both  there  are  the  consolatory  anounce- 
ments  that  "  Jehovah  is  jealous  for  Zion  with  great 
jealousy,"  and  will  "  return  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies " ; 
and  that  not  only  would  the  people  be  restored  and  the 
land  be  rebuilt,  but  that  He  Himself  would  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem,  which  should  be  known  henceforth  as 
the  "  city  of  truth  "  and  "  the  holy  mountain  " — the  centre 
to  which  the  Gentile  nations  shall  come  to  seek  Jehovah  to 
be  taught  in  His  way.1 

But  as  the  consolatory  messages  in  the  visions  are 
introduced  by  a  call  to  repentance,  and  the  reminder  that 
all  their  sorrows  and  troubles  were  occasioned  by  their 
disobedience  to  the  words  which  Jehovah  had  spoken  to 
them  through  the  former  prophets  (chap.  i.  I— 6),  so  also 
the  wonderful  prophecy  of  the  future  blessing  of  Israel  and 
the  future  glory  of  Jerusalem  in  chap.  viii.  is  preceded  by 
what  is  practically  also  a  call  to  repentance  in  chap.  vii.  4-14, 
and  the  exhortation  to  give  heed  at  last  to  the  words  of 
the  same  "  former  prophets." 

1  Comp.  chap.  i.  14  with  viii.  2  ;  chap.  i.   16  with  viii.  3  ;  chap.  ii.  4  with 
viii.  4,  5  ;  chap.  ii.  10,  II  with  viii.  3,  20-23. 


216     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  let  us  now  examine  in  detail  the  different  parts  of 
the  answer. 

The  first  "  word  of  Jehovah  "  which  the  prophet  was 
commissioned  to  speak  not  only  to  the  deputation  from 
Bethel,  but  to  "  all  the  people  of  the  land"  whose  thought 
the  men  of  Bethel  expressed,  "  and  to  the  priests"  who, 
instead  of  answering  to  the  ideal  "  messengers  of  Jehovah 
of  hosts  "  (Mai.  iii.  5),  and  being  able  to  give  answer  in 
such  an  emergency,  had,  in  Haggai's  and  Zechariah's  time, 
sunk  to  the  same  level  as  the  people — was  designed  to 
show  the  worthlessness  before  God  of  mere  outword  acts,  or 
forms  of  repentance  and  piety,  if  the  inner  spirit  of  them  be 
wanting. 

"  When  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the  fifth  month  and  in 
the  seventh,  even  these  seventy  years,  did  ye  at  all  fast  unto 
Me,  even  Me  f  " 

In  these  words  the  Lord  overthrows  the  false  notion 
which  they  may  have  entertained,  which  certainly  the  Jews 
now  do  entertain,  that  fasting  in  itself  is  a  meritorious  act. 
He  admits  that  they  had  fasted  long,  "  seventy  years,"  and 
often,  not  only  in  the  fifth  but  also  "  in  the  seventh  month," 
which  was  the  fast  appointed  for  the  murder  of  Gedaliah, 
which  completed  the  calamities  of  Jerusalem,  and  led  to 
the  migration  of  the  little  remnant  to  Egypt  for  fear  of 
the  vengeance  of  the  Chaldeans. 

Moreover,  they  were  very  thorough  and  earnest  about 
their  fasts ;  they  not  only  abstained  from  food  (as  in 
Jewish  fasts  still,  which  are  one  unbroken  abstinence  from 
food  and  drink  from  sunset  to  sunset),  but  they  accom 
panied  their  fasting  with  mourning  and  lamentations — the 
word  used  in  the  5th  verse  being  used  for  mourning  for  the 
dead  or  for  special  great  public  calamities — and  yet  their 
observance  of  these  fasts  was  a  matter  of  utter  indifference 
to  God.  Why  ?  Because  even  in  their  fasting  and 
mourning  they  were  centred  on  themselves ;  they  fasted 
not  unto  God.  It  was  not  the  outward  sign  and  accom 
paniment  of  true  sorrow  and  repentance  for  sin,  but  of 
sorrow  for  their  calamities.  They  were  self-imposed,  to 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  217 

begin  with ;  and  they  regarded  them,  not  only  as  intrinsi 
cally  meritorious,  but  as  an  end  in  themselves  rather  than 
as  the  means  of  turning  away  from  self  and  all  idea  of 
self-merit  to  the  grace  of  God.  And  not  only  in  their  fasts 
but  also  in  their  feasts  there  was  the  same  concentration  on 
self  and  regardlessness  of  God.  "And  when  ye  eat  and 
when  ye  drink,  do  not  ye  eat  for  yourselves  and  drink  for 
yourselves  ? "  which  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  apostolic 
exhortation,  which  really  sums  up  the  intention  and  spirit 
of  the  many  precepts  and  commandments  of  the  law — 
"  Whether,  therefore,  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do 
all  to  the  glory  of  God" 

But  apart  from  the  special  message  which  they 
conveyed  to  those  to  whom  they  were  originally  addressed, 
and  their  application  to  the  Jewish  people  at  the  time, 
there  is  a  solemn  lesson  in  these  words  which  men  at  the 
present  time,  both  Jews  and  Christians,  should  lay  to 
heart.  Are  there  not  thousands  now  who  are  very  zealous 
and  regular  in  religious  observances,  and  who  think  that 
they  are  acquiring  great  merit  before  God,  to  whom  Christ 
in  that  day  will  say,  "  Depart  from  Me ;  I  never  knew 
you  ?  "  Did  ye  at  all  do  it  unto  Me,  even  Me  ?  Was  it  not 
for  the  most  part  will-worship  and  mere  religiousness, 
without  any  knowledge  of,  or  real  regard  for,  the  will  of 
God? 

The  7th  verse  begins  in  the  Hebrew  with  the  words, 
Halo  eth  haddebharim  asher  qara  Yehovah — to  which  most 
translators  and  commentators  have  supplied  a  verb,  on  the 
supposition  that  the  sentence  is  elliptical,  and  have  rendered 
it,  "  Should  ye  not  hear  the  words  which  Jehovah  hath 
cried,"  as  the  Authorised  and  Revised  Versions  do ;  or, 
"  Should  ye  not  do  the  words,"  etc.,  as  Maurer  and  others 
translate ;  or,  "  Do  ye  not  know  the  words,"  according  to 
Ewald,  Koehler,  Pusey,  and  others.  But  the  sentence  is 
also  capable  of  another  rendering,  which  we  are  inclined  to 
think  is  the  correct  one,  namely:  "Are  not  these  the  very 
things  which  Jehovah  cried  (that,  is  '  did  He  not  have  the 
same  complaints  to  make,  and  the  same  remonstrances  to 


218     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

address  '),  through  the  former  prophets,  when  Jerusalem  was 
inhabited  and  in  prosperity  (or  '  in  safety '),  and  her  cities 
round  about  her,  and  the  South  and  the  lowland  were 
inhabited?  "  the  three  districts  named  being  those  into  which 
the  land  of  Judah  was  divided,  namely,  the  Negebh,  which 
is  "  the  southern  district,"  extending  as  far  as  Beersheba 
(Josh.  xv.  21);  the  Shephelak,  or  "lowland"  district, 
toward  the  west;  and  the  "hill  country  of  Judah,"  which 
is  here  included  under  "  Jerusalem  and  the  cities  round 
about." 

There  are  many  Scriptures  in  the  former  prophets 
which  bear  witness  to  the  truth  of  what  Zechariah  here 
affirms,  namely,  God's  repudiation  of  mere  outward  acts  of 
religious  observances,  and  particularly  of  fasting,  as  being 
in  any  way  pleasing  to  Him.  "  Wherefore  have  we  fasted," 
we  read,  for  instance,  in  Isa.  Iviii.,  "  and  thou  seest  not  ? 
Wherefore  have  we  afflicted  our  soul,  and  Thou  takest  no 
knowledge  ?  "  Then  the  answer,  which  is  very  much  the 
same  as  in  Zechariah,  "  Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  Me,  even 
Me  ?  " — "  Behold  in  the  day  of  your  fast,  you  find  your  own 
pleasure.  .  .  .  Ye  shall  not  fast  as  ye  do  this  day  to  make 
your  voice  to  be  heard  on  high.  Is  it  such  a  fast  that  I  have 
chosen  ?  A  day  for  a  man  to  afflict  his  soul  ?  Is  it  to  bow 
down  his  head  like  a  bulrush,  and  to  spread  sackclotJi  and 
ashes  under  him  ?  Wilt  thou  call  this  a  fast,  and  an  accept 
able  day  to  the  Lord?"  (Isa.  Iviii.  3—5). 

But  it  is  quite  true,  as  another  writer  observes,  that 
reference  is  here  made,  not  so  much  to  the  passages  in  the 
former  prophets,  in  which  fasting  is  specially  referred  to  (as, 
e.g.,  the  one  from  Isaiah  just  quoted)  as  to  those  numerous 
Scriptures  in  which  the  general  principle  was  taught  which 
was  enunciated  by  Samuel  in  his  question,  "  Hath  the 
Lord  as  great  delight  in  burnt-offering  and  sacrifices  as  in 
obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord  ?"  (i  Sam.  xv.  22,  23);  or, 
as  set  forth  in  the  words  of  the  great  lawgiver,  "  And  now, 
Israel,  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee,  but  to 
fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in  His  ways,  and  to  love 
Him,  and  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart  and 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  219 

with  all  thy  soul,  to  keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord, 
and  His  statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this  day  for  thy 
good"  (Deut.  x.  12,  13). 

This — that  "  to  obey  "  is  in  God's  sight  "  better  than 
sacrifice,"  and  "  to  hearken  "  "  than  the  fat  of  rams,"  and 
that  obedience  to  the  great  moral  precepts  of  the  law  is 
infinitely  more  important  than  meaningless  ceremonies  and 
abstinence  from  meat  and  drinks,  is  brought  out  still  more 
clearly  in  the  second  section  of  the  first  part  of  the  answer 
(vers.  8-10). 

"  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Zechariah,  saying, 
Thus  hath  the  Lord  of  hosts  spoken,  saying,  Execute  true 
judgment,  and  show  mercy  and  compassion  every  man  to  his 
brother :  and  oppress  not  the  widow,  nor  the  fatherless,  the 
stranger,  nor  the  poor ;  and  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil 
against  his  brother  in  your  heart'' 

Here  we  are  reminded  of  Isa.  Iviii.  6-12,  and  many 
other  scriptures  in  the  earlier  prophets,  where  the  Lord 
tells  us  the  kind  of  fast  in  which  He  does  takes  pleasure — 
"  Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen  ?  to  loose  the  bonds 
of  wickedness,  to  undo  the  bands  of  the  yoke,  and  to  let  the 
oppressed  go  free,  and  that  ye  break  every  yoke  ?  Is  it  not  to 
deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  that  thou  bring  the*  poor 
that  are  cast  out  to  thy  house  ?  when  thou  seest  the  naked, 
that  thou  cover  him ;  and  that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from 
thine  own  flesh  ?  (Isa.  Iviii.  6-8,  R.V.). 

But  Zechariah,  in  the  passage  we  are  now  considering 
(vers.  8-10),  instead  of  quoting  the  exact  words  of  the 
former  prophets,  gives  the  substance  of  their  preaching  on 
this  subject  in  words  renewed  to  himself  by  the  direct 
inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

We  note  also  that  it  is  particularly  man's  duties  to  his 
neighbours  which  are  here  summarised  ;  but  man's  duty  to 
God  is  presupposed,  for  even  the  precepts  which  inculcate 
love  and  mercy  to  our  fellow-men,  are  enforced  by  the 
words,  "  I  am  Jehovah  thy  God"  which  remind  us  of  our 
relation  and  obligations  to  Him,  even  as  in  the  New  Testa 
ment  it  is  our  debt  of  love  and  gratitude  to  Christ  which  is 


220     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  impelling  motive  of  love  to  the  brotherhood.  And  let 
me  remind  you,  dear  reader,  that  Christians  do  have  need 
to  lay  these  moral  precepts  to  heart,  for  though  we  are  not 
under  the  law,  the  law  of  God  is  written  on  our  hearts,  and 
it  is  His  purpose  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  should 
be  fulfilled  in  us  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the 
Spirit.  Beside,  whatever  be  our  relation  to  the  law  of 
Moses,  we  are  "  under  law  to  Christ,"  and  it  is  in  the  New 
Testament  that  we  are  commanded  to  live  and  act  justly 
and  righteously,  and  to  "  have  compassion  one  upon  the 
other,"  and  "  to  think  no  evil,"  which  is  the  equivalent  of 
the  beautiful  word  we  have  in  this  passage  in  Zechariah, 
"  Let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  against  his  brother  in  your 
heart." 

But  to  return  to  our  context.  This  was  the  summary 
of  the  teaching  of  the  former  prophets ;  the  result  is  stated 
in  vers.  1 1  and  12  :"  But  they  refused  to  hearken,  and  pulled 
away  the  shoulder,  and  stopped  their  ears  that  they  should  not 
hear.  Yea,  they  made  their  hearts  as  an  adamant  stone,  lest 
they  should  hear  the  law,  and  the  words  which  the  Lord  of 
hosts  had  sent  by  His  Spirit  by  the  hand  of  the  former  pro 
phets  :  therefore  came  there  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  of 
hosts? 

We  have  already  pointed  out  the  parallelism  between  the 
line  of  thought  in  the  consolatory  message  contained  in 
chaps,  vii.  and  viii.  and  that  which  is  unfolded  in  the  series 
of  visions.  The  same  is  true  also  of  the  introductory 
addresses,  or  calls  to  repentance,  which  in  each  case  pre 
cede  the  prophecies  of  hope  and  of  future  glory.  The 
parallel  to  chap.  vii.  8—14  is  chap.  i.  4-6.  There  also  we 
read,  "  Be  not  as  your  fathers,  to  whom  the  former  prophets 
cried,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  Return  ye  now 
from  your  evil  ways  and  your  evil  doings  ;  but  they  did  not 
hear  nor  hearken  unto  Me,  saith  Jehovah."  Here,  however, 
the  process  of  Israel's  self-hardening  and  disobedience, 
which  brought  about  the  desolation  of  the  land  and  the 
scattering  of  the  people,  is  enlarged  upon,  (a]  "  They 
refused  to  hearken  "  or  to  give  heed  to  the  word  of  God 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  221 

through  the  prophets.  (<£)  "  They  pulled  away  the  shoulder" 
vayyitfnu  khatheph  soraretk,  a  Hebrew  phrase  which  is  found 
elsewhere  only  in  that  great  confession  in  Neh.  ix.  29, 
and  means  literally  they  offered  a  recusant,  or  unwilling, 
rebellious  shoulder?-  instead  of  serving  Jehovah  "  with  joyful- 
ness  and  gladness  of  heart "  (Deut.  xxviii.  47),  and  finding 
His  yoke  easy  and  His  burden  light,  (c)  "  And  stopped 
their  ears"  *T*2pn  (hikhbidu),  literally,  "  made  it  heavy"  the 
word  being  the  same  as  in  that  solemn  passage,  Isa.  vi.  10, 
"  Make  the  heart  of  the  people  fat,  and  make  their  ears  heavy, 
and  shut  their  eyes ;  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear 
with  their  ears,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and  turn 
again,  and  be  healed." 

It  is  one  of  the  terrible  moral  consequences  of  men 
turning  away  from  doing  the  will  of  God,  that  the  more  they 
hear,  the  duller  their  perceptions  become,  so  that  in  the  end, 
though  having  eyes,  they  see  not.  (d]  The  final  stage  of 
this  process  of  rebellious  self-hardening  is  expressed  in  the 
first  line  of  the  1 2th  verse  :  "  And  they  made  their  hearts  as 
an  adamant  stone"  It  is  not  quite  certain  what  stone  is 
meant  by  T'OB'  (shamir),  but  it  was  harder  than  flint 
(Ezek.  iii.  9).  In  Jer.  xvii.  I  it  is  rendered  "diamond." 
"  It  was  hard  enough  to  cut  ineffaceable  characters ;  it 
would  cut  rocks,  but  could  not  be  graven  itself  or  receive 
the  characters  of  God."  2 

Truly  a  fit  figure  to  set  forth  the  hardness  and  obduracy 
of  the  natural  unregenerate  heart.  It  is  altogether  hopeless, 
and  nothing  can  be  done  to  improve  or  soften  it ;  the  only 
hope  for  men  in  such  condition  being  in  this  stony  heart 
being  altogether  taken  away  by  the  power  and  grace  of 
God,  and  in  the  creation  within  them  of  "  an  heart  of  flesh," 
responsive  and  impressionable  to  the  Spirit  and  Word  of 
God. 

The  enormity  of  the  guilt  of  Israel  is  magnified  by  the 

1  That  is,  they  shook  off  the  yoke  which  was  sought  to  be  laid  upon  them,  "as 
if  they  had  been  a  refractory  heifer  struggling  with  all  its  might  against  the  yoke 
laid  upon  it." — Wright;  comp.  Hos.  iv.  16. 

-  Pusey. 


fact  that  that  which  they  refused  to  hear  and  to  receive  into 
their  hearts  in  order  to  obey  was  the  rnin  (torak)  "  law," 
which  we  must  take  in  the  usual  sense  as  describing  the 
law  of  Moses,  and  the  B1'"1.^  (debharim),  "words"  of  "the 
former  prophets,"  neither  of  which  originated  with  man, 
both  being  "  sent  by  Jehovah  of  hosts  through  the  Spirit " ; 
which  is  a  very  remarkable  incidental  statement  of  the  Bible's 
own  claim  to  inspiration.1 

The  human  channel  of  communication  used  of  God 
may  be  Moses,  or  Isaiah,  or  Jeremiah,  or  any  of  the  other 
"  prophets,"  but  the  wonderful  things  they  spoke  came 
not  by  the  will  of  man,  but  these  holy  men  of  God 
"  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost "  (2  Pet.  i. 
20,  21). 

And  the  process  of  apostasy  here  described  by  Zechariah 
did  not  end  with  the  rejection  of  the  law  and  the  words 
which  God  spoke  through  the  prophets.  It  continued  even 
after  the  partial  restoration,  as  far  as  the  great  majority  of 
the  people  was  concerned.  The  climax  was  reached  when, 
after  the  continued  process  of  disobedience  and  self-harden 
ing,  and  because  their  hearts  were  already  alienated  from 
God,  Israel  turned  their  backs  upon  Him  Who  was  not  only 
the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  but  was  Himself  "  the  Word 
of  God" — "the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  express 
image  of  His  person." 

Nor,  alas !  can  Christendom  boast  or  glory  over  the 
Jews,  for  its  history,  too,  is  one  of  continued  rebellion,  not 
only  against  the  law  and  the  prophets,  but  against  the 
greater  light  of  New  Testament  revelation,  and  culminates 
in  the  greatest  apostasy  in  the  history  of  the  human  race, 
when  Satan  shall  be  worshipped  instead  of  God,  and  Anti 
christ  preferred  to  Christ. 

The  consequence  of  this  continued  provocation  of  God 
and  the  hardening  of  their  hearts  against  His  word  was 
that  there  came  great  wrath  from  Jehovah  of  hosts"  for  God 
is  not  mocked,  and,  however  great  and  wonderful  His 

1  The  same  we  have  in  Nch.  ix.  30;  "And  testifies!  against  (hem  by  Thy 
Spirit  through  the  prophets." 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  223 

patience  and  long-suffering,  His  anger  is  in  the  end  poured 
out  upon  all  who  are  obdurately  impenitent. 

On  the  last  page  of  the  Hebrew  Bible — which,  as  the 
books  are  there  arranged,  closes  with  2  Chronicles — we  read 
these  very  sad  and  pathetic  words :  "  Moreover  all  the 
chiefs  of  the  priests,  and  the  people,  trespassed  very  greatly 
after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heatJien  ;  and  they  polluted 
the  Jiouse  of  the  Lord  which  He  had  /tallowed  in  Jerusalem. 
And  the  Lord,  the  God  of  their  fathers,  sent  to  them  by  His 
messengers,  rising  up  early  and  sending ;  because  He  had 
compassion  on  His  people  and  on  His  dwelling-place  :  but  they 
mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  and  despised  His  words,  and 
scoffed  at  His  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose 
against  His  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy "  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  14-1 6) — "  till  there  was  no  remedy "  and  "  there 
came  great  wrath  from  Jehovah." 

How  His  wrath  showed  itself  is  next  described :  "  And 
it  came  to  pass  as  He  cried  (that  is,  '  called,  remonstrated, 
and  reasoned  ivith  them  through  tJte  prophets ')  and  they 
luould  not  hear,  so  they  shall  cry "  (in  their  distress  and 
anguish)  "  and  I  will  not  hear  " — solemn  and  awful  words, 
which  have  not  only  verified  themselves  in  the  terrible 
history  of  the  Jewish  people  these  past  two  thousand  years, 
but  are  a  warning  to  the  individual  sinner,  whether  Jew  or 
Gentile,  of  whom  similar  language  is  used,1  when  he  hears 
God's  voice,  not  to  harden  his  heart  and  refuse  to  obey 
His  word  as  Israel  did,  "in  the  provocation  and  the  day 
of  temptation  in  the  wilderness,"  and  who  entered  not  into 
God's  rest  because  of  unbelief. 

The  last  verse  of  the  7th  chapter  shows  the  awful 
consequences  of  the  "  great  wrath "  which  came  from 
Jehovah : 

(a)  In  relation  to  the  people.  "  But  I  will  scatter  them  " 
D1V9^1  (ve' esa-areim — "  as  with  a  whirlwind"  or,  "  /  will  toss 
them  ")  "  among  all  tlie  nations  w/iom  they  have  not  known  "  ; 
who  will  therefore  have  no  pity  or  compassion  upon  them 
— a  process  which  only  began  with  the  destruction  of  the 

1  Prov.  i.  24-33. 


224     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

First  Temple  and  the  seventy  years'  captivity  in  Babylon, 
but  has  continued  all  through  the  centuries  since,  during 
which  the  Jewish  nation  continues  to  be  "  sifted,"  or  "  tossed 
about  among  all  nations  as  corn  is  tossed  about  in  a 
sieve  "  (Amos  ix.)  1 — until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  shall  be 
fulfilled,  and  "  He  that  scattered  Israel  shall  gather  him  and 
keep  him  as  a  shepherd  doth  his  flock." 

(#)  In  relation  to  the  land.  "And  tJie  land  was 
desolate  (or  most  probably,  '  shall  be  desolate]  the  perfect 
tense  standing  here  for  the  future,  or  '  prophetic  perfect ') 
after  them,  so  that  there  shall  be  no  one  passing  through  or 
returning"  (meobher  umishabh) — an  idiom  expressing  the 
fact  that  the  land  shall  be  destitute  of  a  population,  so  that 
there  shall  be  none  to  pass  to  and  fro,  or  "  up  and  down  " 
in  it ;  a  prophecy  also  which  has  not  only  verified  itself 
during  the  seventy  years'  captivity,  but  in  the  course  of  the 
many  centuries  since  the  destruction  of  the  Second  Temple 
by  the  Romans,  during  which  the  land  has  in  the  providence 
of  God  been  practically  ^without  a  people,  while  the  people 
has  been  ivithout  a  land. 

Hitherto  in  vers.  13  and  14  God  in  the  first  person 
has  been  the  speaker,  but  the  last  sentence  with  which  the 
chapter  closes  seems  to  be  a  reflection  or  ejaculation  of  the 
prophet's,  in  which  he  gives  God  the  glory  by  ascribing  the 
desolation  which  has  come  upon  the  land  as  due  entirely 
to  their  sins:  "And  they  made  the  pleasant  land"  (eretz 
hemdah,  a  beautiful  and  true  description  of  the  promised 
land  which  is  carried  over  from  Jer.  iii.  19)  "  a  desolation  "  ; 
for,  just  as  all  nature  was  involved  in  Adam's  sin,  and  ever 
since  the  Fall  "  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth 
in  pain  together  until  now  "  (Rom.  viii.)  ;  so  Palestine,  which 
is  indeed  naturally  "  a  delightsome "  and  fertile  land,  has 
in  a  special  manner  become  involved  in  the  sin  of  Israel, 
and  lies  desolate  until  the  people's  covenant  relationship  to 

1  See  also  Deut.  xxviii.  49,  50,  64,  65  ;  Jer.  xvi.  13  ;  and  other  places. 
Pusey  rightly  observes  that  the  expressions  "nations  whom  they  know  not," 
"  whose  tongue  thou  shall  not  understand"  are  meant  to  set  forth  the  intensifica 
tion  of  their  sufferings  in  captivity  because  the  common  bond  between  man  and 
man,  mutual  speech,  shall  be  wanting. 


THE  NEGATIVE  ANSWER  225 

God  is  restored,  when  the  land  shall  once  again,  and  more 
than  ever  before,  flow  with  milk  and  honey,  and  "  the 
wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad,  and  the 
desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose." 

Now,  in  conclusion,  to  sum  up  the  negative  part  of  the 
answer  to  the  question  put  by  the  deputation  from  Bethel. 
Its  purport  was  as  follows :  There  is  no  occasion  as  yet  to 
abrogate  the  observances  of  the  fasts  in  which  you  call  to 
mind  the  calamities  which  you  and  your  fathers  have  brought 
upon  the  land,  by  your  evil  ways  and  doings,  for  the 
underlying  cause  of  the  evil  which  came  upon  you — 
namely,  sin  and  rebellion  against  the  word  which  God  spake 
to  you  through  the  former  prophets — you  have  not  yet 
truly  repented  of.  Your  fasting  and  mourning,  however, 
are  in  themselves  nothing  to  God  so  long  as  they  are  not 
the  accompaniment  of  a  real  sorrow  for  sin,  and  a  heart- 
desire  to  do  His  will  as  expressed  in  His  moral  law.  Take 
warning,  therefore,  from  the  experience  of  your  fathers — 
who  kept  on  hardening  their  hearts,  until  there  was  no 
more  remedy,  and  great  wrath  from  God  came  upon  them 
—lest  the  same,  and  something  worse  yet,  happen  to  you. 
The  positive  part  of  the  answer,  which  tells  when  and 
how  the  fasts  shall  be  abrogated,  yea,  turned  into  feasts, 
follows  in  chap.  viii. 


CHAPTER  XII 

ADDRESS  TO  THE  DEPUTATION  FROM 
BETHEL  ON  THE  QUESTION  OF  THE 
OBSERVANCE  OF  FASTS 

(B}  THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER 
(CHAPTER   vin) 


And  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  to  me,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah 
of  hosts  :  I  am  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy,  and  I  am  jealous  for  her 
with  great  wrath.     Thus  saith  Jehovah  :    I  am   returned   unto  Zion,  and  will 
dwell  in   the  midst  of  Jerusalem  :   and  Jerusalem  shall    be  called  The  city   of 
truth  ;  and  the  mountain  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  The  holy  mountain.     Thus  saith 
Jehovah   of  hosts  :    There   shall  yet   old   men   and   old   women   dwell  in   the 
streets  of  Jerusalem,  every  man  with  his  staff  in  his  hand  for  very  age.     And 
the  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full    of  boys  and   girls  playing  in   the   streets 
thereof.     Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  If  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the 
remnant  of  this  people  in  those  days,  should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  Mine  eyes  ? 
saith  Jehovah  of  hosts.     Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  Behold,    I  will  save  My 
people  from  the  east  country,  and  from  the  west  country ;  and  I  will  bring  them, 
and  they  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  I  will  be  their  God,  in  truth 
and  in  righteousness.     Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  Let  your  hands  be  strong, 
ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words  from  the  mouth  of  the  prophets,  that  were 
in  the  day  that  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  was  laid,  even 
the  Temple,  that  it  might  be  built.     For  before  those  days  there  was  no  hire  for 
man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast  ;  neither  was  there  any  peace  to  him  that  went  out  or 
came  in  because  of  the  adversary  :  for  I  set  all  men  every  one  against  his  neigh 
bour.     But  now  I  will  not  be  unto  the  remnant  of  this  people  as  in  the  former  days, 
saith  Jehovah  of  hosts.     For  there  shall  be  the  seed  of  peace  ;  the  vine  shall  give 
its  fruit,  and  the  ground  shall  give  its  increase,  and  the  heavens  shall  give  their 
dew  ;  and  I  will  cause  the  remnant  of  this  people  to  inherit  all  these  things. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that,  as  ye  were  a  curse  among  the  nations,  O  house  of 
Judah  and  house  of  Israel,  so  will  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing.     Fear 
not,  but  let  your  hands  be  strong.     For  thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :    As  I 
thought  to  do  evil  unto  you,  when  your  fathers  provoked  Me  to  wrath,  saith 
Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  I  repented  not ;  so  again  have  I  thought  in  these  days  to 
do  good  unto  Jerusalem  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  :  fear  ye  not.     These  are  the 
things  that  ye  shall  do  ;  Speak  ye  every  man  the   truth  with  his  neighbour  ; 
execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates  :   and  let  none  of  you 
devise  evil  in  your  hearts  against  his  neighbour  ;  and  love  no  false  oath  :  for  all 
these  are  things  that  I  hate,  saith  Jehovah.     And  the  word  of  Jehovah  of  hosts 
came  unto  me,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts :  The  fast  of  the  fourth  month, 
and  the  fast  of  the  fifth,  and  the  fast  of  the  seventh,  and  the  fast  of  the  tenth,  shall  be 
to  the  house  of  Judah  joy  and  gladness,  and  cheerful  feasts  ;  therefore  love  truth 
and  peace.     Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  It  shall  yet  come  to  pass,  that  there 
shall  come  peoples,  and  the  inhabitants  of  many  cities  :  and  the  inhabitants  of 
one  city  shall  go  to  another,  saying,  Let  us  go  speedily  to  entreat  the  favour  of 
Jehovah,  and  to  seek  Jehovah  of  hosts  :   I  will  go  also.     Yea,  many  peoples 
and  strong  nations  shall  come  to  seek  Jehovah  of  hosts  in  Jerusalem,  and  to 
entreat  the  favour  of  Jehovah.     Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :    In  those  days  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  that  ten  men  shall  take  hold,  out  of  all  the  languages  of 
the  nations,  they  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is  a  Jew,  saying,  We 
will  go  with  you,  for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you. 


228 


CHAPTER  XII 

AS  shown  in  the  exposition   of  the  7th  chapter,  of 
which  the  scripture  we  are  now  to  consider  is  a 
continuation,  the  message  which  the  prophet  was 
inspired  to  deliver,  not  only  to  the  deputation  from   Bethel, 
but  "  to  all  the  people  of  the  land,"  in  answer  to  the  ques 
tion  whether  they  should  continue  to  observe  the  fasts  which 
had  been  appointed  in  celebration  of  certain  sad  anniversaries 
connected    with    the   destruction    of   the    Temple   and   the 
desolations  of  the  land  by  the  Chaldeans,  divides  itself  into 
two  parts. 

The  first,  which  I  have  described  as  the  negative  part  of 
the  answer,  is  contained  in  chap.  vii. ;  and  the  second,  or 
positive  part,  in  chap.  viii.  "  Each  of  these  two  larger 
divisions,"  to  repeat  some  sentences  from  the  previous 
exposition,  "  is,  however,  again  subdivided  into  two  sections 
—the  whole  answer  thus  falling  into  four  parts,  each  of 
which  begins  with  the  words,  '  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  of 
hosts  came  to  me,  saying'  (vii.  4,  8,  viii.  I,  18) — the  usual 
formula,  as  has  already  been  pointed  out,  by  which  the 
prophets  authenticated  their  messages  as  being  not  of,  or 
from,  themselves,  but  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord." 

The  negative  part  of  the  answer  in  the  7th  chapter 
may,  moreover,  be  regarded  in  a  very  important  sense  as 
preparatory  to  the  debharim  tobltim  debharim  nicJiummim 
("good  words,  even  comforting  words,"  i.  13),  which  the 
prophet  proceeds  to  unfold  in  the  glorious  prophecy  in 
chap,  viii.,  inasmuch  as  chap.  vii.  is  practically  a  call  to 
repentance,  and  a  solemn  reminder  that  their  sorrows  were 
the  direct  consequence  of  their  sins,  and  that  before  Israel's 
fasts  shall  at  last  turn  to  feasts,  and  they  shall  enjoy  the 


230     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  good  thing "  which  Jehovah  has  promised  them,  they 
must  give  heed  to  the  voice  of  the  prophets,  and  be  no 
more  like  their  fathers,  who  brought  all  these  calamities 
upon  themselves  by  obdurate  disobedience  and  progressive 
apostasy  from  God. 

The  first  section  of  the  consolatory  message  in  chap, 
viii.  consists  of  vers.  i  to  17. 

The  first  thing  which  strikes  us 'in  reading  the  series  of 
great  and  precious  promises  in  this  scripture  is  the  frequent 
reiteration  of  the  sentence — "  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts." 
Apart  from  the  authenticating  formula,  "  The  word  of 
Jehovah  of  hosts  came  unto  me,"  by  which  each  of  the 
four  sections  is  introduced,  it  is  repeated  eleven  times  in  the 
first  seventeen  verses  of  the  8th  chapter  ;  and  the  object  and 
reason  for  it  is  to  strengthen  our  faith,  and  to  assure  us  at 
the  very  outset  that,  however  incredible  from  a  natural  or 
human  point  of  view  the  fulfilment  of  these  things  may  be, 
they  will  most  certainly  come  to  pass,  because  the  Name  of 
the  infinite,  eternal,  and  faithful  Jehovah,  with  Whom 
nothing  is  too  hard  or  impossible,  stands  pledged  to  their 
accomplishment.1 

Let  us  bear  this  in  mind  as  we  proceed,  and  not  stagger 
at  the  promises  of  God  through  unbelief,  saying,  as  many, 
alas,  do  say,  "  How  is  it  possible  ? "  The  series  of 
promises  commences  with  the  words,  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah 
of  hosts,  I  am  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy,  and  I 
am  jealous  for  her  with  great  wrath  (or  '  fury  ')." 

This  is  a  repetition,  with  one  slight  variation  in  the 
original,  but  "  in  the  same  rhythm,"  of  the  declaration  of 
His  tender  love  for  Zion  in  the  first  of  the  series  of  visions 

"At  each  word  and   sentence  in  which  good   things,  for  their  greatness 
almost  incredible,  are  promised,  the  prophet  declares,  '  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of 
hosts,'  as  if  he  would  say,  Think  not  that  what  I  pledge  you  are  my  own,  and 
refuse  me  not  credence  as  man.     What  I  unfold  are  the  promises  of  God."- 
Jerome. 

So  also  Lange  :  "Es  handelt  sich  darum  eine  ganze  Reihe  scheinbaren  un- 
moglichkeiten  durch  die  Gewahr  des  Namens  Jehovah  Zebaoth  in  Gewissheiten 
zu  verwandeln."  By  making  the  name  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  surety  for  their 
accomplishment,  a  whole  series  of  apparent  impossibilities  are  thus  turned  into 
certainties. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    231 

(chap.  i.  1 4).1  And  because  His  love  for  Zion  is  so  great, 
He  is  jealous  on  her  account,  and  His  anger  is  stirred  to 
the  heat  of  "fury "  against  the  nations,  for  the  reason 
already  stated  in  the  first  vision,  namely,  because  when  He 
was  but  "  a  little  displeased  "  and  gave  over  "  the  dearly 
beloved  of  His  soul  "  for  a  time  into  the  hands  of  her 
enemies  (Jer.  xii.  7),  the  nations  among  whom  they  were 
scattered  "  showed  them  no  mercy,"  but  rather  "  helped 
forward  the  affliction." 

We  have  dwelt  fully  on  these  solemn  and  fervent  words 
of  Jehovah  and  their  application,  not  only  to  the  great 
world-powers  of  antiquity,  but  to  the  nations  of  Christen 
dom,  in  my  exposition  of  the  first  vision,  so  we  need  not 
tarry  on  this  point  here.  But  I  may  take  the  opportunity 
of  again  emphasising  one  fact  in  connection  with  the  warn 
ing  to  the  nations  contained  in  these  words,  and  this  is  the 
testimony  which  history  supplies,  that  God's  jealous  anger 
and  hot  displeasure  against  the  nations,  because  of  their 
oppression  and  cruelty  to  Israel,  is  to  be  greatly  dreaded. 
"  Where,"  to  repeat  a  few  sentences,  "  are  the  great  nations 
of  antiquity  who  have  lifted  up  their  hands  against  the 
Jewish  people  ?  " 

And  in  modern  times  the  ancient  word  which  God 
spake  to  Abraham  is  still  verifying  itself  in  the  experience 
of  nations  as  of  individuals :  "  I  will  bless  them  that  bless 
thee,  and  him  that  curseth  thee  will  I  curse." 

And  the  fervent  inalienable  love  of  Jehovah  for  His 
people  will  manifest  itself,  not  only  in  His  wrath  and 
indignation  against  the  nations  who  have  oppressed  and 
persecuted  them,  but  in  the  full  restoration  of  the  long- 
interrupted  communion. 

"  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  I  am  returned  to  Zion,  and  will 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem  " — the  glad  announcement 
of  which,  contained  in  the  two  verbs  shabhti  and  shakhanti 

1  Only  n^n?  nan,  fyemah  gedolah,  "  great  heat  of  anger,"  or  "  fury,"  is  here 
substituted  for  Vnj  'jsjs,  qetseph  gadol  (chap.  i.  14),  there  rendered,  "very  sore 
displeased"  in  the  English  versions,  but  literally  "great  anger,"  though  not 
quite  so  strong  an  expression  as  here. 


232     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

("  I  am  returned  "  and  "  I  will  dwell,"  which  are  in  the 
prophetic  perfect  tense),  being  again  an  inspired  repetition 
of  the  "  good  and  comfortable  words  "  which  were  set  forth 
in  the  first  vision. 

Thus  the  word  shabhti  ("  I  am  returned ")  takes  us 
back  to  chap.  i.  1 6  ("  /  am  returned — sliabhtti — to  Jerusalem 
with  mercies "),  and  sliaklianti  ("  I  will  dwell ")  to  chap, 
ii.  i  o,  where  we  read,  "  Sing  and  rejoice,  O  daughter  of 
Zion  :  for,  lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  tkee, 
saith  JeJiovah" 

According  to  some  commentators  these  glad  announce 
ments  of  the  return  and  dwelling  of  Jehovah  in  the  midst 
of  His  people,  in  chap,  viii.,  "  signify  nothing  more  nor  less 
than  the  restitution  of  His  favour  and  goodwill  toward 
Israel,"  x  as  shown  in  their  partial  restoration  from  Babylon, 
and  in  the  relief  which  the  remnant  then  experienced.  But 
this  is  a  very  poor  and  inadequate  view  to  take  of  this 
prophecy,  as  its  very  connection  with  the  glorious  predic 
tions  in  chaps,  i.  and  ii.  itself  shows.  No,  as  I  have  shown 
in  my  notes  on  the  first  vision,  the  announcement,  "  I  am 
returned  to  Zion  with  mercies,"  is  itself  the  very  heart  and 
substance  of  the  consoling  part  of  the  message  which  the 
prophet  was  commissioned  to  deliver ;  and  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promise,  "  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,"  is  the  goal 
to  which  all  the  former  prophets  looked  forward,  and  will 
in  its  fulness  be  realised  only  in  the  visible  and  manifest 
reign — in  and  from  Mount  Zion,  in  the  midst  of  restored 
and  converted  Israel,  of  Him  Whose  Name  is  "  Immanuel " 
— which,  being  interpreted,  is  "  God  with  us." 

We  take  this  promise,  then,  not  only  in  a  more  literal, 
but,  if  we  may  use  the  expression,  also  in  a  more  personal 
sense.  At  the  commencement  of  "  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles,"  which  began  with  the  Babylonian  Captivity, 
when  God  was  about  to  give  Israel  over  into  the  hands 
of  their  enemies,  the  prophet  Ezekiel  saw  the  slow  and 
reluctant  departure  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah  from  the 
Temple  and  City  of  Jerusalem.  And  with  this  withdrawal 

1  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    233 

of  the  presence  of  Jehovah  from  the  midst  of  His  people, 
commenced  Israel's  Ichabod  period,  and  the  long  night  of 
darkness  which  has  rested  on  the  people  and  on  the  land. 
But  not  for  ever  has  Jehovah  forsaken  His  land  and  cast 
off  His  people.  "  I  will  go,"  He  said  through  the  prophet 
Hosea,  "  and  return  to  My  place  //'//  they  acknowledge 
their  offence  "  (or,  lit,  "  till  they  declare  themselves  guilty  "), 
"  and  seek  My  face :  in  their  affliction  (lit.,  '  in  their 
tribulation ')  they  shall  seek  Me  early."  Then  He  will 
return  unto  them  with  mercies,  and  "  His  going  forth  is 
sure  as  the  morning ;  and  He  shall  come  unto  us  as  the  rain, 
as  the  latter  rain  that  wateretJi  the  earth"  (Hos.  v.  15, 
vi.  1-3). 

In  its  fulness,  to  repeat  again  some  sentences  from 
the  notes  on  the  first  vision,  this  promise  will  only  be 
fulfilled  when  this  same  Jesus,  Whom  at  His  first  coming 
they  handed  over  to  the  Gentiles  to  be  crucified,  and  Who, 
after  His  resurrection,  ascended  back  into  heaven  to  the 
glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was, 
shall  return  in  the  manner,  and  under  the  circumstances, 
described  by  the  same  prophet  in  the  last  three  chapters 
of  his  prophecy. 

Then  Jehovah,  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  "  will 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem"  which  shall  become  the 
centre  of  His  governmental  dealings  with  the  world,  and  the 
place  whence  light  and  truth  shall  go  forth  unto  all  the 
nations.  "  And  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  'Ir  ha-emeth,  the 
City  of  Truth " ;  first,  because  it  shall  be  the  seat  of  the 
El-emeth)  "  The  God  of  Truth  "  ;  and,  secondly,  because  "  the 
remnant  of  Israel,"  which  shall  then  dwell  in  it,  "  shall  not 
any  longer  do  iniquity,  nor  speak  lies"  (Zeph.  iii.  13),  but 
be  known  throughout  the  earth  for  their  truth  and  fidelity 
toward  God  and  man.  "  And  the  mountain  of  Jehovah  of 
hosts"  i.e.,  Mount  Zion,  shall  be  called  "  The  Holy 
Mountain"  because  there  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  shall 
once  more  take  up  His  abode,  and  by  His  presence  in 
their  midst  sanctify  His  people,  so  that  they,  too,  shall 
be  holy  ;  and,  Qodesh  la-  Yehovah — "  Holiness  (or  '  holy  ') 


234     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

unto  Jehovah,"  shall  be  written,  not  only  upon  their  hearts 
and  foreheads,  but  upon  all  their  possessions,  down  to  the 
very  "  bells  of  their  horses,"  and  the  "  pots  "  which  they 
shall  use  to  prepare  their  food.1 

Now  follows  a  beautiful  picture  of  restored  and 
flourishing  Jerusalem.  No  longer  shall  the  holy  city,  and 
the  land  of  which  it  is  the  metropolis,  be  depopulated  by 
wars  and  other  grievous  calamities,  and  lie  desolate ;  no 
longer  shall  such  terrible  sights  be  witnessed  in  her  streets 
as  are  described  by  inspired  writers  who  witnessed  the  siege 
and  capture  of  the  city  by  the  Babylonians,  which,  however, 
were  surpassed  in  the  still  more  awful  and  horrible  condi 
tions  which  prevailed  during  the  siege  and  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  by  the  Romans,  and  in  subsequent  sieges  since 
then — when  old  and  young  were  cut  off  without  mercy, 
and  those  children  and  sucklings  who  were  not  destroyed 
by  the  sword  "  fainted  for  hunger  in  the  top  of  every 
street."  2  But  the  promises  contained  already  in  the  law,  of 
prolongation  of  life  and  numerous  offspring,  which  in  the 
past  have  been  only  at  certain  intervals  partially  fulfilled, 
because  of  Israel's  sin  and  disobedience,  shall,  under  the 
new  and  unconditional  covenant,  into  which  the  people 
shall  then  be  brought,  be  fully  realised.  There  and  then 
"  there  shall  be  no  more  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old  man 
that  hath  not  filled  his  days"  Then  "they  shall  not  build 
and  another  inhabit ;  they  shall  not  plant  and  another  eat ; 
for  as  the  days  of  a  tree  shall  be  the  days  of  My  people,  and 
My  chosen  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of  their  hands " 
(Isa.  Ixv.  20-22).  And  thus  it  shall  come  to  pass,  saith 
Jehovah  of  hosts,  that  "  there  shall  yet  old  men  and  old 
women  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  every  man  with  his 
staff  in  his  hand,  for  multitude  of  days.  And  the  streets  of 
the  city  shall  be  full  of  boys  and  girls  playing  in  the  streets 
thereof"  "  The  two  opposite  pictures,"  to  adopt  words  of 

1  Chap.  xiv.  20,  21.  See  also  Isa.  i.  26  :  "  Thou  shall  be  called  The  City  of 
Righteousness,  The  Faithful  City";  Ix.  14:  "They  shall  call  thee  The  City 
of  Jehovah,  the  Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel";  Ixii.  12:  "They  shall 
call  them  The  Holy  People,  the  Redeemed  of  the  Lord." 

3  Lam.  ii.  11-19;  PS-  Ixxviii.  63,  64. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    235 

another  writer,  "  the  old  man  so  aged  that  he  has  to  lean 
on  his  staff  for  support  because  of  the  multitude  of  his 
days,"  and  the  young  in  the  glad  buoyancy  of  recent  life, 
fresh  from  their  Creator's  hands  (shall  in  that  day)  "  attest 
alike  "  (as  in  measure  they  do  now  in  all  communities  of 
men)  "  the  goodness  of  the  Creator  Who  protecteth  both, 
the  children  in  their  yet  undeveloped  strength,  and  the 
very  old,  whom  He  hath  brought  through  all  the  changes 
and  chances  of  this  mortal  life,  in  their  yet  sustained  weak 
ness  ;  for  the  tottering  limbs  of  the  very  old,  and  the 
elastic,  perpetual  motion  (and  playfulness)  of  childhood, 
are  like  far  distant  chords  of  the  diapason  of  the  Creator's 
love." l 

Then,  as  if  doubly  to  confirm  the  immutability  of  His 
counsel,  and  to  strengthen  our  hearts  in  the  certain  fulfil 
ment  of  the  things  just  announced,  as  well  as  of  those 
which  follow — however  "  marvellous  "  or  "  impossible  "  they 
may  appear  to  human  sight — there  follows  a  brief  paren 
thetical  statement  (ver.  6)  which  is  closed  in,  so  to  say,  by 
a  twofold  use  of  the  divine  attesting  formula,  "  saith  Jehovah 
of  hosts." 

Even  the  saved  remnant,  contemplating  the  actual 
fulfilment  of  these  great  and  precious  promises,  will  exclaim, 
"  This  is  Jehovah's  doing  "  (or,  lit.,  "  This  is  of  Jehovah  "  ; 
for  by  no  human  or  natural  means  could  this  have  been 
brought  about) — "  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes  "  (Ps.  cxviii. 
23).  But  "  thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  If  it  is  marvellous 
in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  this  people  in  those  days?  should 
it  also  be  marvellous  in  Mine  eyes  ?  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts" 

The  word  Nbs',  yipalei,  used  in  this  verse,  from  N?s, 
polla>  rendered  variously  "  wonderful,"  "  marvellous,"  "  hard," 
"  difficult,"  "  hidden,"  in  the  Authorised  Version,  reminds  us 
of  its  use  in  at  least  two  other  places  in  the  Old  Testament 
in  which  God  wants  to  teach  us  the  great  and  prominent 
lesson  which  He  has  designed  the  whole  of  mankind  to 

1  Pusey. 

z  Bayyamim  hahtm.     The  Authorised  Version  has  "  these  days"  ;  but  this  is 
incorrect. 


236     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

learn  from  the  history  of  Israel.  One  is  in  Gen.  xviii. 
There  we  read  that  "  Sarah  laughed  within  herself "  when 
she  heard  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  give  the  definite  promise 
to  Abraham  of  the  birth  of  Isaac,  for  to  nature  and  human 
reasoning  it  was  no  longer  possible  for  Sarah  to  bear  a  child. 
But  "  Jehovah  said  to  Abraham,  Wherefore  did  Sarah  laugh, 
saying,  Shall  I  of  a  surety  bear  a  child,  which  am  old  ? 
Is  anything  too  hard  (or  '  wonderful'}  for  Jehovah  f" 

Indeed,  one  great  reason  of  the  long  delay  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  the  birth  of  the  child,  in  whom 
the  great  promise  of  blessing  for  all  nations  was  to  be 
handed  down,  was  because  God  wanted  to  lay  a  super 
natural  basis  for  the  history  of  Israel ;  and  that  both  Israel 
and  the  nations  of  the  future  might  learn  that  the  things 
which  are  naturally  impossible  are  not  super  naturally 
impossible,  and  that  nothing  which  Jehovah  has  ever  spoken 
is  "  too  hard  "  for  Him  to  accomplish. 

The  other  place  where  the  word  is  used  is  in  Jer.  xxxii., 
a  prophecy  which  is  in  some  respects  parallel  to  Zech.  vii. 
and  viii.  Jeremiah  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prison 
adjoining  the  palace,  when  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to 
him  that  his  uncle's  son,  Hanameel,  would  come  to  him 
with  the  request  that  he  should  buy  a  piece  of  ground 
which  belonged  to  him  in  Anathoth ;  and  the  prophet,  in 
obedience  to  God's  command,  went  through  all  the  legal 
formalities  connected  with  the  purchase  of  land  in  Palestine. 
Now,  from  the  human  and  natural  point  of  view,  the  whole 
transaction  seemed  a  mere  farce  and  absurdity.  The 
Chaldeans  had  already  laid  waste  the  whole  land,  and  were 
even  then  besieging  Jerusalem.  How  unlikely,  so  far  as 
human  probabilities  went,  that  houses,  or  fields,  or  vine 
yards,  would  ever  again  be  possessed  by  Jews  in  Palestine. 

Jeremiah's  own  faith  in  the  promises  of  God  in  refer 
ence  to  the  future  of  the  people  and  the  land,  was  strongly 
put  to  the  test  by  this  symbolical  transaction  which  he  was 
commanded  to  carry  through,  but  he  stood  the  test ;  he 
staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God  through  unbelief. 
He  looked  away  from  human  improbabilities  and  natural 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    237 

impossibilities  to  the  Almighty  and  covenant-keeping  God, 
and  exclaims  (ver.  17),  "Ah,  Lord  God,  behold  Thou  hast 
made  the  heaven  and  the  earth  by  Thy  great  power  and 
stretched- out  arm,  and  there  is  nothing  too  hard"  (or 
'  wonderful ')  for  Thee" — to  which  God  Himself  adds,  so 
to  say,  His  "  Amen,"  by  repeating  in  ver.  2  3  the  prophet's 
own  words — "  Behold,  I  am  Jehovah,  the  God  of  all  flesh ; 
is  there  anything  too  hard"  (or  '  marvellous ')  for  Me?" 
and  proceeds  to  tell  him  that,  though  the  city  and  land 
would  now  be  given  over  to  desolation,  and  the  people 
carried  into  captivity  because  of  their  great  sin  and  mani 
fold  provocations  of  the  Holy  One,  yet  the  time  would 
assuredly  come  when  "  men  shall  buy  fields  for  money,  and 
subscribe  the  deeds  and  seal  them,  and  call  witnesses  in  every 
part  of  the  promised  land ;  for  I  will  cause  their  captivity  to 
return,  saith  Jehovah" 

Before  passing  on  to  the  following  verses,  let  me  ask 
you,  dear  reader,  Have  you  learned  this  great  lesson  ? 
Have  you  experienced  personally  the  supernatural  power 
of  the  living  God,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth, 
Who  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  and 
with  Whom  nothing  is  impossible,  or  "  marvellous,"  in  your 
own  heart  and  life  ?  For  only  then  can  you  believe  in  the 
great  and  marvellous  things  which  God  promised  to  do  for 
Israel  in  the  future,  and  through  them  for  the  whole  world. 

But  let  us  proceed  to  the  next  brief  paragraph  (vers. 
7,8).  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  Behold  I  will  save  My 
people  from  the  east  country,  and  from  the  west  country  :  and 
I  will  bring  them,  and  they  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jeru 
salem  ;  and  they  shall  be  My  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God, 
in  truth  and  righteousness" 

This  is  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  comprehensive 
promises  in  reference  to  Israel's  restoration  and  conversion 
to  be  found  in  the  prophetic  Scriptures,  but  on  which  I 
may  not  tarry  long  for  want  of  space,  and  because  I  have 
fully  dwelt  on  this  subject  in  some  of  my  other  writings.1 

1  The  Jewish  Problem — Its  Solution  ;  also,   The  Shepherd  of  Israel  and  His 
Scattered  Flock. 


238     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  let  me  very  briefly  point  out  in  passing — first,  that 
it  is  a  promise  which  has  manifestly  not  yet  been  fulfilled. 
The  expression  BWn  siao  pKtM  rrjTO  pK»,  literally,  "from 
the  land  of  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  from  the  land  of  the 
going  down  of  the  sun"  properly  rendered,  "  from  the  east 
country,  and  from  the  west  country,"  in  the  English  versions, 
really  includes  all  parts  of  the  earth,  as  may  be  seen  from 
Ps.  1.  i,  cxiii.  3  ;  Mai.  i.  II,  etc.,  where  the  same  Hebrew 
idiom  is  used.  Now,  never  in  the  past  has  such  a  restora 
tion  taken  place.  A  representative  section,  but  a  mere 
handful  out  of  the  whole  people,  was  indeed  brought  back 
to  the  land  after  the  seventy  years'  captivity  in  Babylon,  of 
which  Zechariah  himself  was  a  witness,  but  that  could  not 
possibly  be  the  restoration  here  promised ;  first,  because,  as 
is  to  be  inferred  from  the  whole  prophecy,  this  was  to  be 
something  which  should  take  place  at  a  \\\n&  future  in  the 
point  of  view,  or  outlook,  of  this  post-exilic  prophet,  to 
whom,  what  we  may  call  the  chief  act  in  the  restoration  from 
Babylon  was  already  an  accomplished  fact ;  and,  secondly, 
because  that  partial  restoration  was  only  from  one  direction, 
namely,  from  the  east,  or  "  north  "  (as  Babylon  and  Persia 
were  called,  because  their  invasions  of  Palestine  were  from 
the  north).  From  the  "  west "  they  could  not  then  have 
been  brought  back,  since  very  few  of  the  Jewish  nation  had 
as  yet  wandered  westward. 

It  was  only  at  the  second  stage  of  Israel's  dispersion, 
which  was  brought  about  by  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
and  the  Temple  by  the  Romans,  that  Israel  became  in  the 
fullest  sense  a  Diaspora — scattered  over  all  the  face  of  the 
earth — the  majority  always  found  in  lands  more  or  less  to 
the  west  of  Palestine.  No ;  the  promise  here  is  a  divine 
summary  and  repetition  of  the  many  promises  of  the  yet 
future  restoration  which  were  uttered  by  the  former  prophets, 
as,  for  instance,  Isa.  xliii.  5,  6,  where  we  read,  "Fear  not : 
for  I  am  with  thee  :  I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  east,  and 
gather  thee  from  the  west ;  I  will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up  ; 
and  to  the  south,  Keep  not  back  :  bring  my  sons  from  far,  and 
my  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  " ;  and  will  be  ful- 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    239 

filled  when  "Jehovah  shall  set  His  hand  again  the  second 
time  to  recover  the  remnant  of  His  people  ;  .  .  .  and  He  shall 
set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations,  and  shall  assemble  the  out 
casts  of  Israel,  and  gather  together  the  dispersed  of  Judah 
from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth"  (Isa.  xi.  1 1,  12). 

That  the  restoration  spoken  of  here  is  yet  future,  is 
proved  also  by  the  fact  that  it  is  to  be  followed  by  Israel's 
national  conversion,  which  has  certainly  never  yet  taken 
place.  "And  they  shall  be  My  people,  and  I  will  be  their 
God,  in  truth  and  in  righteousness" 

The  restoration  of  Israel  to  their  own  land  after  the 
many  centuries  of  dispersion  and  wanderings,  will,  as  I  have 
stated  elsewhere,  "  be  a  great  mercy  and  a  wonderful  event 
in  the  world's  history " ;  but  a  still  greater  mercy,  and  a 
still  more  wonderful  thing,  will  be  the  restoration  of  the 
long  -  interrupted  covenant  relationship  and  communion 
between  them  and  their  God.  This  is  what  is  promised 
in  the  last  words  of  the  8th  verse :  "  They  shall  be  My 
people"  —  the  "  Lo-ammi"  period,  during  which  Israel, 
separated  from  God,  is  given  over  into  the  hands  of  his 
enemies,  shall  at  last  be  ended,  and  God  shall  again  receive 
them  graciously  and  acknowledge  them  as  "  Ammi"  and 
He,  Jehovah,  shall  be  their  God,  be'emeth  u-bhits*  dakah,  "  in 
truth  and  in  righteousness  " — even  as  we  read  in  Hos.  ii. 
19,  20  :  "  And  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  for  ever  ;  yea,  I 
will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  in  righteousness,  and  in  judgment, 
and  in  loving-kindness,  and  in  mercies.  I  will  even  betroth 
thee  unto  Me  in  faithfulness  ;  and  thou  shalt  know  the  Lord" 
But  the  expression  be'emeth  u-bhits' dakah — "  in  truth  and 
in  righteousness " — belongs  to  both  clauses  of  the  brief 
statement  which  announces  the  restoration  of  the  covenant 
relationship  between  Israel  and  God,  for  not  only  will  God 
act  toward  them  (as,  indeed,  on  His  part  He  has  ever  done) 
in  truth  and  in  righteousness,  but  this  also  shall  henceforth 
be  the  condition  of  the  people.  No  longer  shall  it  be  said 
of  them  that  "  they  swear  by  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and 
make  mention  of  the  God  of  Israel,  but  not  in  truth  nor  in 
righteousness"  (Isa.  xlviii.  i),  but  like  the  man  after  God's 


240     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

own  heart,  of  whom  the  expression  is  first  used  (i  Kings 
iii.  6),  and  their  other  fathers,  who  "  walked  with  God  "  ;  so 
also  restored  and  converted  Israel  shall  walk  before  Him 
"  in  truth  and  in  righteousness,  and  in  uprightness  of  heart " 
throughout  the  rest  of  their  national  history — even  as  we 
read  in  Jer.  xxxii.  38-41,  which,  as  already  stated,  is  in 
some  respects  parallel  to  Zech.  viii. :  "  A  nd  they  shall  be  My 
people,  and  I  will  be  their  God ;  and  I  will  give  them  one 
heart,  and  one  way,  that  they  may  fear  Me  for  ever,  for  the 
good  of  tJiem,  and  of  their  children  after  them  :  and  I  will 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  witli  them,  that  I  will  not  turn 
away  from  them,  to  do  them  good;  and  I  will  put  My  fear 
in  their  hearts,  that  they  shall  not  depart  from  Me.  Yea,  I 
will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good,  and  I  will  plant  them 
in  this  land  assuredly  with  My  whole  heart  and  with  My 
whole  soul." 

A  word  more,  perhaps,  needs  to  be  said  on  the  ex 
pression  in  the  8th  verse,  "  And  they  shall  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem"  upon  which  the  allegorising  com 
mentators  have  fixed  as  a  proof  that  it  is  not  a  literal 
restoration  of  literal  Israel  which  is  spoken  of. 

Thus  Pusey,  Dr.  Wright,  Keil,  and  others  are  quite 
dogmatic  that  it  is  not  the  literal  Jerusalem,  because  this, 
to  quote  the  words  of  the  first  of  the  above-named  authors, 
"  could  not  contain  the  Jews  from  all  quarters  of  the  world, 
whom,  as  they  multiplied,  the  whole  land  could  not  contain  ; 
but  the  promised  Jerusalem,  the  Jerusalem  which  should  be 
inhabited  as  towns  without  walls,  to  which  the  Lord  should 
be  a  wall  of  fire  round  about,"  which,  as  is  to  be  seen  from 
his  comments  on  the  ?th  verse,  he  interprets  of  the  Church. 

To  this  I  would  reply  that  the  enlarged  Jerusalem, 
which  "  should  be  inhabited  as  towns  without  walls,"  and  of 
which  Jehovah  Himself  shall  be  the  defence  and  "  the  glory 
in  the  midst  thereof,"  is  also  the  literal  Jerusalem,  as  I  have, 
I  think,  clearly  shown  in  my  exposition  of  the  2nd  chapter. 
As  to  the  expression,  "  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,"  even  Dr. 
Wright,  who  denies  any  future  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy 
to  literal  Israel,  says :  "  The  allusion  is  evidently  to  Jeru- 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    241 

salem,  not  so  much  as  the  actual  residence  of  all  the  people, 
but  as  the  place  where  Israel  should  worship  Jehovah." 
Jerusalem  stands  here  for  the  land  of  which  it  is  the  centre 
and  metropolis,  to  which  restored  and  converted  Israel  (in 
whatever  part  of  the  country  they  may  be  located)  will  turn, 
as  the  place  where  the  glory  of  their  Divine  Messiah  will 
then  be  especially  manifested — even  as  in  times  past  the 
tribes  from  all  parts  of  the  land  went  up  during  the  three 
great  festivals,  there  to  appear  before  God,  being  thus  taught 
to  regard  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt,  and  His  glory 
was  specially  manifested,  as  their  true  home. 

The  great  and  glorious  promises  contained  in  the  first 
eight  verses  of  this  chapter,  like  all  prophecy  about  the 
future,  are  to  be  turned  to  practical  account.  Not  only  is 
the  restored  remnant  to  derive  comfort  and  stimulus  from 
"  these  words,"  but  they  are  to  act  as  incentives  in  the  path 
of  obedience  and  to  the  more  perfect  accomplishment  of  the 
will  of  God  in  the  present :  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts : 
Let  your  hands  be  strong,  ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these 
words  from  the  mouth  of  the  prophets  which  were  in  the  day 
that  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  was  laid, 
even  the  Temple,  that  it  'might  be  built? 

"  Let  your  hands  be  strong,"  which  is  an  idiom  for  the 
expression  "  Be  of  good  courage "  (Judg.  vii.  1152  Sam. 
ii.  7;  Ezek.  xxii.  14,  etc.),  reminds  us  of  the  words  of 
Zechariah's  contemporary  and  colleague,  whose  voice  was 
now  silenced  by  death :  "  Be  strong,  O  Zerubbabel,  saith 
Jehovah ;  and  be  strong,  O  Joshua,  son  of  Jehozadak,  the 
high  priest ;  and  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of  the  land,  and 
work"  (Hag.  ii.  4) — though  here,  in  the  8th  chapter  of 
Zechariah,  the  phrase  is  used  as  an  exhortation  not  merely  or 
especially  to  the  continuation  of  the  building  of  the  Temple, 
as  is  the  case  in  Haggai,  but  with  reference  to  their  doing, 
individually  and  collectively,  the  will  of  God  in  all  things. 

"  These     words "     refer     particularly    to    the    words    of 

promise  which  had  just  been   uttered  by  Zechariah  in  the 

preceding  verses   of  this   chapter,  and   by  Haggai  in  the 

prophecy  from  which  I  have  just  quoted,  who  are  together 

16 


242     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

spoken  of  as  "  the  prophets"  who  were  God's  mouthpieces  to 
the  people  since  a  beginning  was  made  by  them  in  rebuild 
ing  the  Temple,  and  are  thus  contrasted  with  the  "former 
prophets"  to  whom  Zechariah  so  often  refers. 

The  word  nfoan^,  fhibanoth  ("that  it  might  be  built"), 
is  added  as  a  more  precise  definition  of  the  time  to  which 
the  prophet  refers  in  the  expression,  "  in  the  day  that  the 
foundation  of  the  house  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  was  laid  "  ; 
for  there  had,  in  fact,  been  two  beginnings,  or  foundation- 
layings,  of  the  Temple.  Already,  in  the  seventh  month  of 
the  very  year  of  the  return  of  the  first  colony  of  exiles, 
under  the  leadership  of  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  the  high 
priest,  the  altar  of  Jehovah  was  rebuilt,  and  the  sacrificial 
service  restored  in  Jerusalem ;  and  in  the  second  month  of 
the  second  year  the  foundation  was  laid  amid  solemn  and 
joyous  scenes  described  in  the  3rd  chapter  of  Ezra.  But 
very  soon  difficulties  and  hindrances  came  in  the  way. 
There  were  the  Samaritans  and  their  intrigues  and  accusa 
tions  at  the  Persian  Court ;  and  there  were  the  still  more 
insidious  and  dangerous  enemies  in  their  own  midst,  and 
in  their  own  hearts — namely,  the  selfish  love  of  ease  and 
comfort,  and  their  unwillingness  to  devote  their  time  and 
means  to  the  building  of  the  house  of  God,  because  they 
wanted  to  build  "  ceiled  houses "  for  themselves  (Hag. 
i.  3-5).  And  so  they  neglected  the  work,  excusing  them 
selves  that  "  the  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  Jehovah's 
house  should  be  built " ;  with  the  result  that  for  about 
thirteen  years  the  work  which  they  began  was  suspended 
and  "  lay  waste."  But  in  the  second  year  of  Darius  the 
king  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  Haggai  and  Zechariah, 
whose  rebukes,  exhortations,  and  appeals,  "  in  the  Name  of 
the  God  of  Israel"  (Ezra  v.  I,  2),  roused  the  people  to 
make  a  new  beginning,  and  then  it  was  that  they  took  up 
the  task  "  with  set  purpose  of  heart"  Fhibanoth — "  that  it 
might  be  built"  (Hag.  i.  12—15). 

And  with  "  the  day  "  in  which  they  set  their  hearts  to 
obey  the  voice  of  Jehovah  their  God  in  this  matter,  there 
began  a  new  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  remnant  of  the 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    243 

people,  and  their  leaders,  for  "  from  this  day  will  I  bless 
you,"  saith  Jehovah  (Hag.  ii.  19). 

Then  there  follows  a  contrast  between  the  time  before 
they  obeyed  the  voice  of  Jehovah  their  God  and  took  up 
the  work  of  building  the  Temple,  and  the  condition  of 
things  since  they  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  the  Word  of 
God  through  Haggai  and  Zechariah.  Before,  when  they 
cared  only  for  their  own  affairs,  nothing  prospered  with 
them,  and  there  was  nothing  but  disaster  and  disappoint 
ment  :  "  For  before  those  days  there  was  no  hire  (or  '  wages ') 
for  man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast"  so  little  was  the  produce 
that  it  did  not  pay  the  labour  of  man  and  beast ;  which 
answers  to  the  description  of  those  same  days  by  Haggai : 
"  Ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  little  ;  ye  eat,  but  ye  have 
not  enough  ;  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  drink  ;  and 
he  that  earneth  wages  earneth  wages  to  put  into  a  bag  with 
holes"  (Hag.  i.  6).  And  not  only  so,  but  (to  return  to  our 
passage  in  Zechariah)  "for  him  that  went  out  and  for  him 
that  came  in  (literally)  there  was  no  peace,  because  of  the. 
adversary"  which  is  most  probably  a  true  and  graphic 
description  of  the  conditions  which  then  prevailed ;  for,  to 
quote  words  from  another  writer,  "  in  such  an  empire  as 
the  Persian  there  was  large  scope  for  actual  hostility 
among  the  petty  nations  subject  to  it ;  so  that  they  did 
not  threaten  revolt  against  itself,  or  interfere  with  the 
payment  of  tribute,  as  in  the  Turkish  Empire  now."  * 

On  the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  (a  little  later)  we 
actually  read  that  "  the  adversaries  " — z>.,  the  Samaritans, 
Arabians,  Ammonites,  and  Ashdodites — conspired  to  fight 
against  Jerusalem,  and  to  slay  the  Jews,  but  were  frustrated 
because  the  Lord's  protection  was  now  over  the  little 
remnant  of  the  people. 

And  not  only  was  there  no  peace  "  in  those  days  "  to 
him  that  went  out  and  to  him  that  came  in,  because  of  the 

1  According  to  Hitzig  the  expedition  of  Cambyses  to  Egypt  occurred  at  this 
time  ;  and  though  it  was  not  referred  to  in  the  Book  of  Ezra,  the  march  of  the 
Persian  army  through  the  land  southward  must  have  caused  no  little  affliction  to 
the  colonists  under  their  then  distressing  circumstances. 


244     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

adversary  without,  but  the  misery  was  increased  because 
there  was  strife  and  contention  which  prevailed  among 
themselves,  for  "  the  Lord  hath  set  (vaashallacJt)  all  men 
every  one  against  his  neighbour''  But  now,  having  entered 
on  the  path  of  obedience,  and  made  God's  service  their 
delight,  God  was  going  to  "  make  their  wants  His  care  " : 
"  But  now  I  will  not  be  unto  this  people  as  in  the  former 
days,  saith  JeJwvah  of  hosts.  For  there  shall  be  the  seed  of 
peace  "  (or,  the  seed  of  peace  even)  ;  "  the  vine  1  shall  give  her 
fruit,  and  the  ground  shall  give  her  increase,  and  the  heavens 
shall  give  their  dew"  which  reminds  us  somewhat  of  the 
promise  in  Hos.  ii.  21,  22  :  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  I  will  answer,  saitJi  Jehovah,  I  will  answer  the 
heavens,  and  they  shall  answer  the  earth  ;  and  the  earth  shall 
answer  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil"  etc. 

And  not  only  shall  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  resting  on 
their  toil  produce  plentiful  harvests  and  abundant  vintage, 
but  no  one  shall  despoil  them  of  these  gifts  of  God's 
bountifulness. 

"  And  I  will  cause  tJie  remnant  of  this  people  to  inherit 
all  these  things" 

And  the  improvement  in  the  condition  of  the  restored 
remnant  since  they  set  themselves  earnestly  to  the  task  of 
building  God's  house,  was  only  a  pledge  of  the  greater 
things  which  God  has  promised  them,  and  which  yet  await 
their  fulfilment  in  the  day  of  Israel's  national  restoration 
and  conversion,  as  announced  by  the  prophet  in  the  first 
part  of  this  chapter.  The  whole  may  be  said  to  be  summed 
up  in  the  words  in  the  I3th  verse:  "And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  that,  as  ye  were  a  curse  among  the  nations,  O  house  of 
Judah  and  house  of  Israel,  so  will  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
a  blessing :  fear  not,  let  your  hands  be  strong" 

1  The  expression  j^jn  c'l^n  jnj  (zera-hashalom  haggepheti)  is  peculiar,  but 
I  think  that  the  rendering  adopted  by  Keil,  Koehler,  Wright,  and  others  is  the 
correct  one,  and  that  zera-hashalom,  "seed  of  peace,"  is  a  noun  which  stands 
in  apposition  to  haggcphen,  "  the  vine."  Keil  thinks  that  the  vine  may  especially 
be  called  "the  seed  of  peace,"  inasmuch  as  it  can  only  prosper  in  days  of  peace, 
its  cultivation  requiring  much  care  and  attention,  which  it  is  impossible  to  bestow 
in  times  of  war  or  adversity. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    245 

Here  we  note  first  of  all  how  both  "  Judah "  and 
"  Israel  " — i.e.,  the  entire  nation,  which  had  previous  to  the 
Exile  been  for  a  time  divided  into  two  kingdoms — are 
now  after  the  partial  restoration  from  Babylon,  included  in 
undivided  unity  in  one  common  destiny,  both  of  wretched 
ness  and  blessedness.  Together  they  are,  during  the  Lo- 
ammi  period — the  time  during  which  God's  face  is  averted 
from  them — "  a  curse,"  for  the  solemn  and  terrible  words 
which  He  spoke  through  Jeremiah  have  been  literally 
fulfilled  in  the  whole  nation  :  "  I  will  give  them  up  to  be 
tossed  to  and  fro  among  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
for  evil ;  to  be  a  reproach  and  a  proverb,  a  taunt  and  a 
curse,  in  all  places  wherein  I  shall  drive  them  "  (Jer.  xxiv.  9, 
xlii.  1 8). 

But,  as  they  have  been  together  in  their  entirety  "  a 
curse,"  or  the  object  of  curse,  i.e.,  so  smitten  of  God  as  to 
serve  the  object  of  curses,  and  "  the  nations  when  impre 
cating  curses  on  their  foes  were  wont  to  wish  them  the 
fate  of  Israel " a — and  not  only  so,  but  as  the  unbelieving 
majority  of  the  nation  had  also  actually  and  actively  in  the 
period  of  their  separation  from  God  and  bitter  hostility  to 
their  Messiah  and  His  gospel  been  a  curse  to  the  nations — 
so  says  Jehovah,  "  will  I  save  you  "  (not  only  from  your 
captivity,  but  from  your  sin ;  not  only  from  your  outward 
enemies  and  oppressors,  but  from  the  evil  of  your  own 
hearts — from  yourselves},  "  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing? 
This  glorious  promise  is  to  be  understood,  not  only 
as  "  equivalent  to  being  so  blessed  as  to  be  used  as  a 
benedictory  formula," 2  but  is  a  revival  and  an  application 
of  the  original  promise  to  Abraham,  "  thou  shalt  be  a  bless 
ing"  as  Pusey  well  observes,  and  reiterates  the  oft-expressed 
purpose  of  God  to  make  saved  and  blessed  Israel  the  source 
and  instrument  of  blessing  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth, 
even  as  we  read  in  Isa.  xix.  24,  "  In  that  day  shall  Israel  be 
.  .  .  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  land"  ;  and  Ezek.  xxxiv. 
26,  "  /  will  make  them  and  the  places  round  about  My  hill  a 
blessing." 

1  C.  H.  H.  Wright.  »  Keil. 


246     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

In  measure  this  has  already  been  the  case,  for  all  the 
great  blessings  which  have  come  to  the  world  have  come 
to  it  through  the  seed  of  Abraham ;  "  for  of  them,"  to 
quote  another,  "  according  to  the  flesh  Christ  came,  Who  is 
over  all  God  blessed  for  ever :  of  them  were  the  apostles 
and  evangelists,  of  them  every  writer  of  God's  Word  ;  of 
them  those  who  carried  the  gospel  throughout  the  whole 
world." x  But,  so  far,  the  blessing  which  has  come  through 
Israel  to  the  world  has  been  only  partial,  and  has  extended 
only  to  individuals ;  but  when  Israel  as  a  nation  is  "  saved 
in  Jehovah  with  an  everlasting  salvation,"  and  their  hearts 
are  set  aflame  with  love  to  the  long-rejected  Messiah  and 
zeal  for  His  cause,  then  "  the  receiving  of  them "  shall 
indeed  be  "  as  life  from  the  dead  "  to  the  whole  world,  and 
the  great  Messianic  blessings  shall  universally  be  spread  by 
them  throughout  the  whole  earth.  In  Abraham  and  his 
seed — which  includes  Christ  and  Israel — shall  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  be  blessed. 

And  it  is  God's  faithfulness  and  the  steadfastness  of 
His  purpose  which  form  the  grounds  for  our  hope  of  His 
certain  fulfilment  of  His  promises.  This  is  brought  out  in 
vers.  14  and  15  :  "For  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  As 
I  thought  to  do  evil  unto  you,  when  your  fathers  provoked  Me 
to  wrath,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  I  repented  not ;  so 
again  have  I  thought  in  these  days  to  do  good  unto  Jerusalem 
and  to  the  house  of  Judah  :  fear  ye  not." 

The  remnant  of  Israel  to  whom  Zechariah  spoke  knew 
from  their  own  experience  that  Jehovah  is  faithful — yes, 
faithful  in  carrying  out  His  threatenings  as  well  as  in  ful 
filling  His  promises  ;  for  when,  after  repeated  warnings,  their 
fathers  continued  in  their  impenitent  provocations  of  Him 
through  their  many  sins,  the  "  evil "  which  He  fore- 
announced  that  He  would  do  unto  them  came.  They 
may,  therefore,  be  assured  that  when  He  announces  to 
them  through  the  prophet  that  His  thoughts  toward  them 
now  are  "  thoughts  of  peace  and  not  of  evil,"  and  that  His 
purpose  "  in  these  days  "  is  "  to  do  good  unto  Jerusalem 

1  Pusey. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    247 

and  to  the  house  of  Judah,"  He  will  not  repent  or  prove 
false  to  His  word.  This  passage  again  reminds  us  of 
Jer.  xxxii. — a  scripture  which,  as  we  observed  before,  is 
in  some  respects  parallel  to  Zech.  vii.  and  viii.,  where 
we  read  (ver.  42):  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah  :  Like  as  I  have 
brought  all  this  great  evil  upon  this  people,  so  will  I  bring 
upon  them  all  the  good  that  I  have  promised  them" 

But  these  great  promises  of  God,  to  be  experimentally 
realised,  must  be  responded  to  by  the  faith  and  obedience 
of  God's  people,  and,  as  has  been  well  said,  "  God's  cove 
nanted  grace  leads  those  truly  blessed  by  it  to  holiness, 
not  to  licentiousness."  Hence  the  exhortation  to  practical 
godliness  which  follows  in  vers.  16  and  17  : 

"  These  are  the  things  (debharim,  literally,  '  words ') 
which  ye  shall  do :  Speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  with  his 
neighbour ;  truth  and  judgment  of  peace  judge  ye  in  your 
gates  :  and  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  hearts  against 
his  neighbour,  and  love  no  false  oath  :  for  all  these  are  the 
things  that  I  hate,  saith  Jehovah " ;  which  is  an  inspired 
repetition  and  application  of  the  preaching  of  the  former 
prophets,  which  Zechariah  had  already  summarised  in  chap, 
vii.  9,  10,  an  exposition  of  which  will  be  found  in  my 
notes  on  those  verses.  I  would  only  here  add  that  the 
mishpat  shalom,  "judgment  of  peace,"  which  they  are 
exhorted  to  judge  "  in  their  gates  "  (the  place  where  justice 
and  judgment  were  wont  to  be  administered,  Deut.  xvi.  18, 
xxi.  19,  etc.),  means  "judgment  which  issues  in  peace,"  or 
"  such  an  administration  of  justice  as  tends  to  promote  peace 
and  establish  concord  between  those  that  are  at  strife."  x 

The  sins  enumerated  in  the  I7th  verse  which  are  con- 

1  Keil.  The  remarks  of  the  Jewish  commentator,  Kimchi,  on  this  expression 
are  as  follows  :  "  If  ye  judge  righteousness  there  will  be  peace  between  the 
parties  in  the  lawsuit ;  according  as  our  Rabbis  have  said  in  a  proverb,  '  He  that 
has  his  coat  taken  from  him  by  the  tribunal,  let  him  sing  and  go  his  way ' — in 
proof  of  which  they  have  adduced  the  verse,  '  And  all  this  people  shall  also  go  to 
their  place  in  peace'  (Ex.  xviii.  23):  'ALL  the  people,'  even  he  that  is  con 
demned  in  judgment.  And  our  Rabbis,  of  blessed  memory,  have  interpreted 
mishpat  shalom  (judgment  of  peace)  of  reconciliation  between  the  litigants,  for 
it  is  said  (in  Sanhedrin,  fol.  6b),  '  What  sort  of  judgment  is  that  in  which 
there  is  peace  ?  It  is  that  of  arbitration.'  " 


248     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZfiCHARIAH 

trary  to  "  truth  and  peace  "  are  emphatically  described  as 
the  very  things  which  God  hates,  ™$y  WK  n^«  !>3  n«,  eth 
kol-elleh  asher  sanethi — as  if  He  meant  to  say,  "  This  is 
the  sum  of  what  I  hate  "  ;  for  they  sum  up  in  brief  the 
breaches  of  both  tables  of  the  law — that  which  sets  forth 
man's  duty  to  God,  and  that  which  sets  forth  his  duty  to 
his  fellow-man. 

And  because  God  hates  these  sins  we,  too,  must  hate 
them,  for  "  religion  consists  in  conformity  to  God's  nature, 
that  we  should  love  what  God  loves  and  hate  what  God 
hates." 

We  now  come  to  the  last  of  the  four  sections  into  which 
the  whole  of  chaps,  vii.  and  viii.  are  divided.  Here  we 
have  the  direct  positive  part  of  the  reply  to  the  original 
question  by  the  deputation  from  Bethel  (chap.  vii.  1—3) 
to  ask  whether  there  was  still  occasion  to  observe  the  fasts 
which  had  been  appointed  to  celebrate  the  anniversaries  of 
the  destruction  of  the  Temple  and  the  desolation  of  the 
land  by  the  Chaldeans  :  "  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  of  hosts 
came  unto  me,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  The  fast 
(or  'fasting ')  of  the  fourth,  and  the  fast  of  the  fifth,  and  the 
fast  of  the  seventh,  and  the  fast  of  the  tenth  (months)  shall 
be  (or  '  become ')  to  the  house  of  Judah  joy  and  gladness,  and 
cheerful  feasts — D^to  D^yio,  moadim  fob  him  (^  good  seasons', 
or  '  holidays  ') ;  therefore  love  truth  and  peace'.'  The  fast  of 
the  ninth  day  of  the  fourth  month  was  instituted  to  cele 
brate  the  taking  of  the  city  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the 
eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah's  reign  ; *  the  fast  of  the  fifth 
month  (the  blackest  day  of  all  in  the  Jewish  calendar) 
commemorates  the  destruction  of  both  the  city  and  the 
Temple,2  and  many  other  calamities  which,  according  to 
Jewish  tradition,  happened  on  this  same  day  (some  of  which 
are  enumerated  in  my  notes  on  chap.  vii.  3) ;  the  fast  of 
the  seventh  month,  as  already  stated  in  the  exposition  of 
chap,  vii.,  was  appointed  for  the  murder  of  Gedaliah  ; 3 
and  the  fast  of  the  tenth  commemorated  the  commence- 

1  Jer.  Hi.  6,  7.  -  Jer.  Hi.  12,  13. 

3  2  Kings  xxv.  25,  26  ;   |cr.  xli.  1-3. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    249 

ment  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  on  the  tenth  day  of  that 
month  in  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah.1 

All  these  days  are  still  observed  as  fasts  by  the  Jewish 
nation  in  all  parts  of  the  earth,  for  it  is  still  the  night  of 
weeping  for  Israel,  and  Zion  still  sits  desolate  and  mourns. 

But  the  long  night  of  weeping  is  to  be  followed  by  a 
morning  of  joy,  when  Jehovah  shall  accomplish  the  "  good  " 
which  He  has  purposed  and  promised  to  Israel  and 
Jerusalem  (vers.  14,  15),  and  then  the  former  troubles 
and  calamities  shall  be  "forgotten"  (Isa.  Ixv.  1 6),  and  the 
very  days  which  commemorate  them  shall  be  turned  into 
"joy  and  gladness"  and  moadim  tobhim — cheerful  feasts 
or  sacred  festivals.  "  Therefore,"  the  prophet  turns  again  to 
the  remnant  whom  he  was  addressing,  "  love  ha-emeth  ve 
ha-shalom — truth  and  peace  " — for  the  promises  of  future 
blessedness  and  glory,  whether  national  in  relation  to  Israel, 
or  spiritual  in  relation  to  the  individual  believer  in  Christ, 
are  intended  in  every  case  to  act  as  incentives  to  holiness 
of  life  and  consecration  to  God's  service  in  the  present ;  and 
though  God's  covenants  and  promises  to  the  nation  are 
unconditional,  and  "  without  repentance,"  or  any  change  of 
mind  as  far  as  He  is  concerned,  and  are  not  made  to 
depend  on  Israel's  goodness  or  righteousness,  yet  righteous 
ness,  truth,  and  love  must  be  blessed  fruit  of  these  promises. 

What  the  consequence  of  Jehovah's  dwelling  in  the 
midst  of  Israel  will  be  to  the  other  nations,  and  how  Israel's 
blessing  will  react  upon  the  whole  earth,  we  see  in  the  last 
four  verses  of  our  chapter. 

"  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  It  shall  yet  come  to  pass  " 
(or,  "  it  shall  yet  be ") — however  unlikely  it  may  have 
appeared  in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  the  people  to 
whom  Zechariah  prophesied,  and  however  "  wonderful  "  or 
impossible  it  may  appear  in  our  eyes — "  that  there  shall 
come  peoples "  (a  collective  and  representative  name  for  all 
peoples),  "and  the  inhabitants  of  many  (or  'great'}  cities : 
and  the  inhabitants  of  one  city  shall  go  to  another,  saying,  Let 
us  go  speedily  (literally,  '  going,  let  us  go ' — Tji/n  naps — or 

2  Kings  xxv.  I  ;  Jer.  xxxix.  I  ;  Ezek.  xxiv.  i,  2. 


250     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

'  let  us  go  on  and  on/  i.e.,  '  perseveringly  until  we  attain  ' 
the  blessed  goal) l  to  entreat  the  favour  (literally,  to 
'  entreat  the  face ')  of  Jehovah?  and  to  seek  Jehovah  " — to 
which  the  ready  and  glad  response  of  those  invited  will  be, 
"  /  will  go  also — and  many  peoples  and  strong  nations  shall 
come  to  seek  Jehovah  of  hosts  in  Jerusalem,  and  to  entreat  the 
face  of  Jehovah" — all  which  is  but  an  iteration  by  the 
central  figure  in  the  group  of  post-exilic  prophets  of  the 
glorious  announcements  concerning  "  the  latter  days  "  made 
by  the  former  prophets.  Thus,  for  instance,  we  read  both 
in  Isaiah  and  in  Micah,  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the 
latter  days,  that  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be 
established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted 
above  the  hills  ;  and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it.  And  many 
peoples  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the 
mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob  ;  and 
He  will  teach  us  of  His  ways,  and  zve  will  walk  in  His  paths  : 
for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  word  of  the 
Lord  from  Jerusalem"  (Isa.  ii.  2,  3,  R.V.). 

The  allegorising  commentators,  according  to  whom 
"  the  literal  fulfilment  of  such  passages  is  a  sheer  impossi 
bility  " 3 — as  if  it  had  not  been  foretold  in  this  very 
scripture  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  great  and  glorious 
things  which  are  here  prophesied  would  appear  too 
"  wonderful "  and  impossible  in  the  eyes  of  men — would 
have  us  believe  that  what  is  predicted  by  Isaiah,  and 
Micah,  and  Zechariah  (indeed,  by  all  the  prophets)  in 

1  Pusey  wrongly  applies  this,  as  all  the  other  great  promises  in  this  chapter, 
to  the  present  ;  yet  there  is  some  truth  in  his  observation  that  "  the  words  seem 
to  speak  of  that  which  is  a  special  gift  of  the  gospel,  namely,  continued  pro 
gress,  '  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind  and  reaching  forth  unto  those 
things  which  are  before,  to  press  forward  toward  the  mark  of  the  prize  of  the  high 
calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.'  Let  us  go  on  and  on;  whence  it  is  a  Christian 
proverb,  Non  progredi  est  regredi — Not  to  go  on  is  to  go  back.  Augustine 
observed,  '  The  whole  life  of  a  good  Christian  is  a  holy  longing  to  make  pro 
gress  ' ;  and  again,  '  The  one  perfection  of  man  is  to  have  found  that  he  is  not 
perfect.',  '  If  thou  sayest  it  sufficeth,  thou  art  lost.'  Nolle  proficere  deficere  est — 
To  be  unwilling  to  increase  is  to  decrease." — St.  Bernard,  quoted  by  Pusey. 

'  See  footnote  on  this  phrase  in  the  exposition  of  chap.  vii.  p.  213. 

3  C.  If.  H.  Wright. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    251 

reference  to  the  universal  spread  of  the  knowledge  of 
Jehovah  through  the  instrumentality  of  Israel,  has  already 
been  fulfilled,  or  is  now  exhaustively  fulfilling  itself  in  this 
gospel  dispensation. 

Thus  one  of  them,  commenting  on  these  verses,  writes : 
"  Zechariah  describes  vividly  the  eagerness  and  mutual 
impulse  with  which  not  only  many,  but  mighty  nations 
should  throng  to  the  gospel,  and  every  fresh  conversion 
should  win  others  also,  till  the  great  tide  should  sweep 
through  the  world." 

"  The  inhabitants  of  one  city  shall  go  to  another.  It  is 
one  unresting  extension  of  the  faith,  the  restlessness  of 
faith  and  love.  '  They  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  their  own 
salvation,  careless  about  the  salvation  of  others ;  they  shall 
employ  all  labour  and  industry,  with  wondrous  love,  to 
provide  for  the  salvation  of  others  as  if  it  were  their  own.' 
It  is  a  marvellous  stirring  of  minds.  Missionary  efforts,  so 
familiar  with  us  as  to  be  a  household  word,  were  unknown 
then.  The  time  was  not  yet  come.  Before  the  faith  in 
Christ  came,  the  Jewish  people  were  not  to  be  the  converters 
of  mankind.  They  were  to  await  Him,  the  Redeemer  of 
the  world,  through  Whom  and  to  Whom  they  were  to  be 
first  converted,  and  then  the  world  through  those  who  were 
of  them.  This  mutual  conversion  was  absolutely  unknown. 
The  prophet  predicts  certainly  that  it  would  be,  and  in 
God's  time  it  was.  '  From  you,'  St.  Paul  writes  to  a  small 
colony  in  Greece,  '  sounded  out  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  not 
only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  but  also  in  every  place 
your  faith  to  God  ward  is  spread  abroad.  Your  faith'  he 
writes  to  the  heathen  capital  of  the  world,  '  is  spoken  of 
throughout  the  whole  world'  Within  eighty  years  after  our 
Lord's  ascension  the  Roman  governor  of  Bithynia  reported, 
on  occasion  of  the  then  persecution,  that  it  spread  as  a 
contagion.  '  The  contagion  of  that  superstition  traversed  not 
cities  only,  but  villages  and  scattered  houses  too.'  Before 
the  persecution  the  temples  had  been  desolated,  the  solemn 
rites  long  intermitted,  the  sacrificed  animals  had  very 
rarely  found  a  purchaser.  An  impostor  of  the  same  date 


252     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

says  :  '  Pontus  is  full  of  atheists  and  Christians.'  '  There  is  no 
one  race  of  men,'  it  was  said  before  the  middle  of  the  second 
century,  '  whether  barbarians,  or  Greeks,  or  by  whatsoever 
name  called,  whether  of  those  wandering,  homeless  tribes 
who  live  in  waggons,  or  those  pastoral  people  who  dwell  in 
tents,  in  which  there  are  not  prayers  and  eucharists  to  the 
Father  and  Creator  of  all  things,  through  the  name  of  the 
crucified  Jesus.'  '  The  word  of  our  teacher,'  said  another, 
'  abode  not  in  Judaea  alone,  as  philosophy  in  Greece  ;  but  was 
poured  out  throughout  the  whole  world,  persuading  Greeks 
and  barbarians  in  their  several  nations  and  villages  and 
every  city — whole  houses  and  each  hearer  individually — 
and  having  brought  over  to  the  truth  no  few  even  of  the 
very  philosophers  ;  and  if  any  ordinary  magistrate  forbid 
the  Greek  philosophy,  forthwith  it  vanishes,  but  our  teaching 
forthwith,  at  its  first  announcement,  kings  and  emperors  and 
subordinate  rulers  and  governors,  with  all  their  mercenaries 
and  countless  multitudes,  forbid,  and  war  against  us  and 
try  to  extirpate,  but  it  rather  flourishes.' " l 

That  there  is  a  measure  of  truth  in  all  this  no  one  will 
gainsay,  nor  can  any  one  deny  the  fact  of  the  marvellous, 
rapid  spread  of  the  gospel  in  the  first  two  or  three 
Christian  centuries,  through  those  Jewish  apostles  and 
messengers  whose  hearts  were  all  aflame  with  love  and  zeal 
for  their  all-glorious  Redeemer,  and  through  their  first  con 
verts  from  among  the  Gentiles.  But  what  about  the  subse 
quent  history  of  the  professing  Church  ?  Has  it  continued  in 
its  first  love  ?  Has  it  "  gone  on  and  on  "  in  faith  and  purity, 
and  in  zeal  for  Christ's  cause  and  the  salvation  of  men  ? 
Alas !  instead  of  converting  the  world,  the  Gentile  Church 
became  more  and  more  merged  into  the  world,  and  their 
candlesticks  of  corporate  testimony  were  one  by  one 
removed  from  the  earth.  Not  as  if  the  Word  of  God  has 
failed  in  that  whereto  it  was  sent :  a  people  for  His  Name 
from  among  the  Gentiles — a  multitude  which  no  man  can 
number,  out  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  tongues— 

1  Pusey.     The    quotations    are   from    Justin    Martyr,    Trypho,    Clement   of 
Alexandria,  and  Tertullian. 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    253 

have  been,  and  are^being,  gathered  into  the  fold  of  the  One 
Great  Shepherd.  But  this  dispensation,  according  to  the 
predictions  of  Christ  and  His  apostles,  instead  of  ending  in 
the  universal  knowledge  of  God,  and  in  peace  and  righteous 
ness  among  the  nations,  is  to  end  in  almost  universal 
apostasy  and  failure,  and  in  the  greatest  conflict  among  the 
nations  that  the  world  has  yet  known. 

Beside  this,  what  is  here  predicted  is  something  which, 
as  we  have  seen,  is  to  take  place  subsequent  to  the  restora 
tion  and  national  conversion  of  Israel.  Has  that  yet  taken 
place  ?  No ;  as  we  observed  in  'the  notes  on  chap,  ii.,  it  is 
only  ignorance  of  God's  plan  and  self-delusion  which  can 
boast  of  the  gradual  conversion  of  the  world,  and  speak  of 
"  Christian  nations  "  in  this  present  dispensation.  But  when 
Jehovah  will  have  mercy  upon  Jacob,  and  will  yet  choose 
Israel  again  and  set  them  in  their  own  land — when,  after 
the  long  centuries  of  darkness  and  unbelief  the  eyes  of  the 
blind  shall  be  opened  and  Israel  nationally  is  converted, 
and  the  heart  of  each  of  them  is  fired  with  that  love  and 
zeal  which  burned  in  the  heart  of  Paul  after  the  Lord 
revealed  Himself  to  him,  saying :  "  /  am  Jesus  whom  thou 
persecutest" — then  this  prediction  of  Zechariah  shall  be 
fulfilled,  and  "  many  peoples  and  strong  nations  shall  come 
and  seek  Jehovah  of  hosts  in  Jerusalem,  and  to  entreat  the 
face  of  Jehovah  "  ;  and  the  still  more  ancient  promise  shall 
be  realised  :  "  As  truly  as  I  live,  saith  Jehovah,  all  the  earth 
shall  be  filled  with  tJie  glory  of  Jehovah"  "  for  the  earth 
3  :|  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah,  as  the  waters 

•  cover  the  sea." x 

All  this  is  confirmed  and  brought  to  a  climax  in  the  last 
1  verse  :  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  In  those  days  it  shall 
r  \come  to  pass  that  ten  men  out  of  all  the  languages  of  the 

-  £  nations  sfiall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is  a  Jew, 
>  .  say 'ing,  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we  have  Iteard  that  Jehovah 

is  with  you." 

Ten  is  used  in  Scripture  for  an    indefinite    number;2 

1  Num.  xiv.  21  ;  Isa.  xi.  9. 

2  Gen.  xxxi.  7  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  26 ;  Num.  xiv.  22  ;  i  Sam.  i.  8. 


254     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

here  it  stands  for  "  a  great  and  complete  multitude."  The 
unusual  Hebrew  phrase,  mikol  leshonoth  haggoyim — "  of  all 
the  languages  of  the  nations" — is  an  echo  of  Isa.  Ixvi.  18, 
where  we  read  that  "  all  nations  and  tongues "  (or 
"  languages  " — haggoyim  vehallesJionoth)  shall  be  gathered  to 
see  God's  glory  in  Jerusalem.  They  shall  lay  hold  on  the 
khenaph,  which  is  the  corner  of  the  long  flowing  garment 
worn  in  the  East.  Among  the  Jews,  to  each  of  the  four 
kenaphayim  of  the  outer  garment  of  white,  the  rpiPif  (tsitsitJi, 
"  fringes,"  or  tassels  (of  blue)  were  attached ;  and  some 
writers  have  supposed  that  this  is  what  is  referred  to,  since 
it  was  the  distinctly  visible  sign  of  "  a  man,  a  Jew."  It  is 
spoken  of  as  being  laid  (or  caught)  hold  of,  first  with  a  view 
to  detain  the  Jew,  so  as  to  beg  his  permission  to  accompany 
him.  But  it  has  the  sense  of  keeping  firm  hold,  expressive 
of  the  earnest  determination  of  the  Gentile  seekers  of 
Jehovah  to  accompany  the  Jew,  who  is  himself  represented 
as  travelling  towards  Zion,  with  his  face  turned  thither 
ward.  Like  Ruth,  the  Moabitess,  to  her  Jewish  mother-in- 
law,  so  the  Gentile  converts  to  the  God  of  Israel  shall  say : 
"  Entreat  us  not  to  leave  Thee,  or  to  return  from  following 
after  Thee :  for  whither  Thou  goest  we  will  go :  .  .  .  Thy 
people  shalt  be  our  people,  and  Thy  God  our  God"  "  We  will 
go  with  you,  for  we  have  heard  that  Jehovah  is  with  you." 

It  is  because  the  Jew  shall  then  not  only  "  believe  in 
one  God  "  (which  is  their  boast  now),  but  shall  be  so  one 
with  God  that  for  a  Gentile  convert  to  call  himself  by  the 
name  of  Jacob  will  be  equivalent  to  saying,  "  I  am  the 
Lord's  "  ;  and  to  surname  himself  "  by  the  name  of  Israel," 
\equal  to  "  subscribing  with  his  hand  unto  Jehovah " 
flsa.  xliv.  1  —  5).  It  is  because  the  glorious  hope  and 
pr()fnise  contained  in  the  Name  "  Immanuel "  shall  then  be 
fulfilled  in  a  literal  and  personal  sense  to  Israel  nationally, 
and  Jehovah  Himself,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  in  the 
Person  df  their  Messiah  Jesus,  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
them  ;  an4  because,  finally,  Qodesh  /'  Yehovah — "  Holiness 
(or  '  holy  ';  unto  Jehovah " — shall  then  be  written  upon 
their  foreheads.  vea>  upon  all  that  they  possess,  that  the 


THE  POSITIVE  PART  OF  THE  ANSWER    255 

Gentiles  shall  honour  and  reverence  them  "  as  the  priests  of 
Jehovah,  the  ministers  of  our  God"  (Isa.  Ixi.  10),  and 
cleave  unto  them  as  the  appointed  messengers  of  salvation 
and  instruments  of  blessing,  saying,  "  We  will  go  with  you, 
for  we  have  heard  that  Jehovah  is  with  you." 

A  pledge  and  prophecy  of  it  we  have  in  the  history  of 
the  gospel  in  this  dispensation,  for  it  is  a  remarkable  and 
wonderful  fact  that  "  the  religion  introduced  by  a  Jew,  the 
religion  which  consists  of  faith  in  the  person  of  One  who 
was  indeed  a  Jew — namely,  our  blessed  Lord — is  that 
which  has  been  embraced  "  by  multitudes  from  among  the 
Gentiles.  Those  are,  therefore,  not  far  wrong  who  have 
interpreted  the  words  "  a  man,  a  Jew,"  of  Christ ;  for 
although,  as  the  whole  context  shows,  it  is  not  primarily 
and  directly  of  the  Messiah,  but  of  the  Jews  in  the  days  of 
their  future  blessing,  that  this  prophecy  is  spoken  ;  yet,  as 
we  have  seen,  it  is  only  when  Israel  shall  be  the  Messianic 
people  and  the  representatives  of  Christ  among  the  nations, 
Who  will  then  be  the  King  of  the  Jews,  that  this  prophecy 
will  be  fulfilled.  In  this  connection  it  is  interesting  to 
observe  that  even  the  Jews  saw  a  reference  in  this  scripture 
to  the  Messiah.  Thus  in  an  ancient  Midrash  we  read : 
"  All  nations  shall  come,  falling  on  their  faces  before  the 
Messiah,  and  the  Israelites  saying,  Grant  that  we  may  be 
Thy  servants,  and  of  Israel.  For,  as  relates  to  the  doctrine 
and  the  knowledge  of  the  law,  the  Gentiles  shall  be  their 
servants,  according  as  it  is  written  :  '  In  those  days  it  shall 
come  to  pass  that  ten  men  shall  take  hold  out  of  all  the 
languages  of  the  nations,  shall  even  take  hold  of  the  skirts 
of  him  that  is  a  Jew,  saying,  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we 
have  heard  that  God  is  with  you.' "  * 

1  Pesikta  Rabhathai,  in  Yaklut  Shimoni. 


ie  ; 

)f 

•• 


PART     II 

The  Prophecies 


CHAPTER    XIII 

INTRODUCTION  TO   THE   SECOND 
PART   OF  ZECHARIAH 

AN  EXAMINATION  OF   THE   MODERN   CRITICISM  IN 
REFERENCE  TO   THE   LAST   SIX   CHAPTERS 


CHAPTER    XIII 

THE  aim  which  we  set  before  us  in  these  "Notes"  on 
Zechariah  was  by  God's  help  to  make  this  precious 
portion  of  Old  Testament   revelation    intelligible, 
and  spiritually  profitable,  to  the  ordinary  intelligent  English 
reader,  and  in  doing  so  to  avoid  as  much  as  possible  minute 
critical  points,  and  lengthy  discussions  of  the  questions  of 
dates  and  authorship. 

We  might,  therefore,  have  accepted  the  contention  of  the 
more  "  moderate "  of  the  modern  critical  writers,  that  the 
contents  and  "  religious  "  or  spiritual  value  of  these  sacred 
oracles  are  independent  of  the  question  as  to  whether  they 
were,  or  were  not,  actually  composed  by  the  person,  or 
persons,  and  at  the  time  "  traditionally  "  attached  to  them 
— and  have  proceeded  at  once  to  the  exposition  of  chap.  ix. 
But  this  contention  is  only  partially  true.  The  ethical  and 
spiritual  character  of  a  writing  is  not  altogether  indepen 
dent  of  its  authorship  and  the  circumstances  in  which  it 
originated ;  and  then,  too,  as  far  as  these  chapters  are 
concerned,  it  is  not  a  question  merely  as  to  what  "  religious  " 
value  we  can  find  in  them  for  ourselves,  or  for  the  pro 
fessed  people  of  God  at  the  present  day.  The  true  believer 
and  disciple  is  anxious  above  all  to  understand  the  meaning 
of  the  divine  oracles,  which  holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they 
were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  we  are  concerned 
here  not  only  with  the  application,  but  with  the  interpreta 
tion  of  these  chapters.  Both  Jews  and  Christians  have 
always  believed  that  they  contain  fore-announcements  of 
great  and  solemn  events,  and  that  we  have  in  them  divine 
forecasts  of  things  which  were  to  transpire  at  a  time,  or 
times,  which  from  the  prophets'  then  point  of  view,  at  any 

rate,  are  contemplated  as  future. 

361 


262     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Now  in  order  rightly  to  understand  or  explain  the 
prophetic  element  in  these  chapters,  and  to  know  whether 
these  forecasts  have  already  been  fulfilled  or  not,  much  will 
depend  on  the  question  of  the  date  of  their  origin.  It 
makes  all  the  difference,  for  instance,  whether  chaps, 
xii.— xiv.  were  composed  by  an  unknown  contemporary  of 
Jeremiah,  whose  prophecies  of  a  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and 
"  anticipations "  of  God's  manifest  interposition  on  behalf 
of  His  people  in  the  hour  of  their  greatest  extremity  (which, 
however,  were  falsified  by  the  events),  refer  to  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem  and  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  by  the 
Chaldeans,  or  whether  the  writer  is  the  inspired  post-exilic 
prophet  under  whose  name  these  chapters  stand,  who  not 
only  lived  after  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  but  witnessed 
the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  after  the  partial  restoration 
from  Babylon,  and  who  therefore  must  speak  of  another 
Temple  and  a  yet  future  siege. 

Now,  while  Zechariah's  authorship  of  the  first  eight 
chapters  (with  which  I  have  already  dealt  so  far)  is  uni 
versally  acknowledged,  strong  objections  have  been  raised 
in  modern  times  against  the  assumed  authorship  and  date 
of  the  last  six  chapters. 

The  Spirit  of  the  Early  English  Criticism 

On  examining  the  great  amount  of  criticism  on  this 
subject,  we  find  that  it  divides  itself  into  two  separate 
streams,  which  are  impelled  by  two  different  motives. 

The  earliest  critics  of  the  traditional  authorship  of  these 
chapters  were  learned  English  divines,  men  who  believed  in 
the  plenary  inspiration  of  Holy  Scripture,  whose  actuating 
motive  was  to  justify  the  inerrancy  of  the  citation  in 
Matt,  xxvii.  9,  10,  which  ascribes  to  Jeremiah  a  prophecy 
found  in  Zech.  xi.  Thus  Joseph  Mede  *  (the  very  first  who 
sought  to  establish  a  pre-exilic  authorship  of  these  chapters) 
says,  in  his  note  on  the  above  passage  in  Matthew :  "  It 

1  Joseph  Mede,  born  in  1586  at  Borden,  Essex,  author  of  the  Cla-vis  Apoca- 
liptica;  died  in  1638. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    263 

would  seem  the  Evangelist  would  inform  us  that  those 
latter  chapters  ascribed  to  Zachary  .  .  .  are  indeed  the 
prophecies  of  Jeremy,  and  that  the  Jews  had  not  rightly 
attributed  them :  .  .  .  there  is  no  scripture  saith  they  are 
Zachary's,  but  there  is  a  scripture  saith  they  are  Jeremy's, 
as  this  of  the  Evangelist."  And  proceeding  from  this 
point  of  view,  he  discovered,  as  he  thought,  internal  proof 
that  these  chapters  belonged  not  to  Zechariah's,  but  to 
Jeremiah's  time.  He  was  followed  by  Hammond,  Kidder, 
Newcome,  etc.1 

We  shall  see  when  we  come  (D.V.)  to  the  exposition  of 
chap.  xi.  as  to  whether  there  is  any  other  possible  explana 
tion  of  the  occurrence  of  Jeremiah's  name  in  that  passage 
in  Matthew ;  meanwhile,  without  entering  more  fully  into 
this  point  here,  we  would  adopt  the  words  of  another 
English  Biblical  scholar,2  and  say : 

"  Is  it  not  possible,  nay,  is  it  not  much  more  probable, 
that  the  word  lepe/uov  (Jeremiah)  may  be  written  by 
mistake  by  some  transcribers  of  Matthew's  Gospel,  than 
that  those  of  the  Jewish  Church,  who  settled  the  canon  of 
scripture,  should  have  been  so  grossly  ignorant  of  the  right 
author  of  these  chapters  as  to  place  them  under  a  wrong 
name?  It  is  not,  I  think,  pretended  that  these  chapters 
have  been  found  in  any  copy  of  the  Old  Testament  other 
wise  placed  than  as  they  now  stand.  But  in  the  New 
Testament  there  are  not  wanting  authorities  for  omitting 
the  word  lepe/juov  (Jeremiah).  Nor  is  it  impossible  to 
account  plausibly  for  the  wrong  insertion  of  Jeremiah 
(Matt,  xxvii.  9)  by  observing  that  exactly  the  same  words 
occur  in  Matt.  ii.  1 7,  where  we  read  Tore  eir\r}pwOtj  ro 
prfOev  VTTO  (in  some  copies  Sia — see  Wetstein)  lepepiov  TOV 

1  Archbishop  William  Newcome  on  the  Twelve  Minor  Prophets.     The  spirit 
of  these  early  English  critics  may  be  judged  from  the  following  words.     After 
stating  his  reasons  for  accepting  Mede's  riew  that  chaps,  ix.-xi.  were  written  by 
Jeremiah,  Newcome  says  :  "  But  whoever  wrote  them,  their  divine  authority  is 
established  by  the  two  quotations  from  them  in  the  New  Testament."     How 
different  this  from  modern  criticism,  which  takes  no  account  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  in  this  respect,  nor  even  of  the  direct  testimony  of  Christ ! 

2  Dr.    Benjamin  Blayney,   author  of  Dissertation  on  the  Seventy    Weeks  of 
Daniel,  etc. ;  died  in  1801. 


264     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

7rpo<f)r)Tov,  \eyovTos  (Then  was  fulfilled  what  was  spoken  by 
Jeremiah  the  prophet,  saying).  Now  supposing  a  transcriber 
to  have  had  in  his  copy  either  Sia  rov  Trpo^rov  (through 
the  prophet)  only,  or  Sia  Za%apiov  TOV  Trpofarov  (through 
Zechariah  the  prophet),  yet  carrying  in  his  mind  what  he 
had  written  a  little  before,  he  might  inadvertently  and 
without  intention  have  written  the  same  over  again,  as  will 
easily  be  granted  by  those  who  are  at  all  used  to  tran 
scribe." 


The  Rationalistic  Criticism  which  reduces  Prophecy  to 
Human  Divination 

The  other  stream  of  criticism  directed  against  the  date 
and  authorship  of  these  chapters  rises  from  a  different 
source,  and  is  impelled  by  the  same  motive  which,  alas, 
underlies  the  whole  of  the  so-called  "  modern  criticism." 
There  are,  no  doubt,  exceptions ;  but  reading  the  many, 
and  for  the  most  part  conflicting  opinions  of  modern  writers 
on  this  question,  one  is  struck  with  the  truth  of  Keil's 
remarks,  that  the  objections  which  modern  critics  offer  to 
the  unity  of  the  book  (and  the  same  may  be  said  also  of 
much  of  their  criticism  of  other  books  of  the  Bible)  do  not 
arise  from  the  nature  of  these  scriptures,  but  "  partly  from 
the  dogmatic  assumption  of  the  rationalistic  and  naturalistic 
critics  that  the  Biblical  prophecies  are  nothing  more  than 
the  productions  of  natural  divination  ;  and  partly  from  the 
inability  of  critics,  in  consequence  of  this  assumption,  to 
penetrate  into  the  depths  of  the  divine  revelation,  and  to 
grasp  either  the  substance  or  form  of  their  historical 
development  so  as  to  appreciate  it  fully."  l 

In  illustration  of  these  remarks  of  Keil,  it  may  not  be 
out  of  place  to  quote  a  striking  instance  of  the  elimination 
of  any  reference  to  a  distant  future,  and,  indeed,  of  any 
supernatural  element  from  the  prophetic  scriptures  on  the 
part  of  modern  critics.  Before  me  lies  the  last  edition  of 
what  is  regarded  by  many  as  a.  standard  work  on  the 

1  Keil,  in  the  Introduction  to  his  Commentary  on  Zechariah. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN   CRITICISM    265 

Literature  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  author  (Canon 
Driver)  is  esteemed  as  one  of  the  more  "  moderate  "  of  this 
school.  Like  many  others,  he  divides  chaps,  xii.— xiv.  from 
chaps,  ix.— xi.,  but  he  follows  those  of  the  German  rational 
istic  school,  who  ascribe  a  post-exilic  origin  to  the  second 
half  of  Zechariah,  though  he  denies  Zechariah's  authorship. 
These  are  his  words  on  the  last  three  chapters : 

"  As  regards  the  occasion  of  the  prophecy  it  is  impossible 
to  do  more  than  speculate.  It  is  conceivable  that  in  the 
post-exilic  period  where  our  history  is  a  blank  (B.C.  518— 
458;  432-300)  the  family  of  David  assumed  importance 
in  Jerusalem,  and  supplied  some  of  the  leading  judges  and 
administrators,  and  that  they  had  been  implicated  with  the 
people  of  the  capital  in  some  deed  of  blood  (xii.  10—14), 
on  the  ground  of  which  the  prophet  depicts  Jehovah's 
appearance  in  judgment.  In  the  heathen  invaders  of  xii.- 
xiv.  he  perhaps  has  not  in  view  any  actual  expected  foe, 
but  pictures  an  imaginary  assault  of  nations,  like  Ezekiel 
(c.  38—39),  from  which  he  represents  Jerusalem,  though  not 
without  severe  losses,  as  delivered.  In  other  features  the 
prophecy  appears  to  be  one  of  those  (cf.  Isa.  xxiv.— xxvii.) 
in  which  not  merely  the  figurative,  but  the  imaginative, 
element  is  larger  than  is  generally  the  case,  especially  in 
the  pre-exilic  prophets.  But  even  when  allowance  has  been 
made  for  this,  many  details  in  the  prophecy  remain  per 
plexing,  and  probably  no  entirely  satisfactory  explanation 
of  it  is  now  attainable."  The  italics  are  Canon  Driver's. 

We  refrain  from  characterising  the  remarks  which  ascribe 
the  origin  of  some  of  the  sublimest  prophecies  in  the  Old 
Testament  in  reference  to  the  last  things  to  the  exercise 
of  the  "  imaginative "  faculty  of  the  writers,  but  let  us,  for 
lack  of  space,  look  at  one  point  only.  The  first  reference, 
which  is  so  easily  disposed  of  with  a  stroke  of  the  pen,  is 
chap.  xii.  10-14.  Now  this  passage  begins  with  the  words  : 
"  And  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  ; 
and  they  shall  look  unto  Me  Whom  they  have  pierced :  and  they 
shall  mourn  for  him  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and 


266     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

tJiey  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  ttiat  is  in  bitterness 
for  his  first-born " — and  proceeds  to  describe  an  intense 
universal  mourning  throughout  "  the  whole  land,"  when 
every  tribe  shall  mourn  apart,  and  "  their  wives  apart." 

Even  Jews  believed  that  this  is  a  prophecy  of  solemn 
events  in  the  future — though,  on  grounds  which  we  cannot 
stop  here  to  indicate,  they  wrongly  applied  ver.  10  to  a 
"Messiah  ben  Joseph,"  who,  according  to  them,  .was  to 
precede  the  Messiah  ben  David. 

Certainly  the  remarkable  correspondence  in  this  case, 
between  the  prediction  and  that  part  of  it  which  has  already 
been  fulfilled  in  the  Gospel  narrative,  is  one  of  the  most 
striking  proofs  of  the  divine  inspiration  of  the  prophecy,  as 
well  as  of  the  Messiahship  of  our  Lord  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
But  for  Canon  Driver  and  the  school  which  he  represents, 
New  Testament  history  is  evidently  non-existent,  or,  if  it 
exists,  it  has  no  relation  whatever  to  Old  Testament  pro 
phecy  ;  and  rather  than  admit  the  possibility  of  a  divine 
fore-announcement  in  reference  to  a  distant  future,  this 
sublime  scripture  is  made  to  refer  to  "  some  deed  of  blood  " 
in  which  the  leaders  and  the  people  were  implicated  some 
time  before  these  chapters  were  zvritten,  which,  according  to 
him,  was  some  time  between  518  and  300  B.C. — of  which 
"  deed  of  blood "  which  could  occasion  such  deep  and 
universal  mourning,  history  knows  nothing  ! 

Now,  to  quote  another  author : 

"  The  human  authorship  of  any  books  of  Holy  Scripture 
— and  so  of  these  chapters  of  Zechariah — is,  in  itself,  a 
matter  which  does  not  concern  the  soul.  It  is  an  untrue 
imputation  that  the  date  of  books  of  the  Bible  is  converted 
into  matter  of  faith.  In  this  case  Jesus  has  not  set  His 
seal  upon  it ;  God  the  Holy  Ghost  has  not  declared  it. 
But,  as  in  other  cases,  what  lay  as  the  foundation  of  the 
theory  was  the  unbelief  that  God,  in  the  way  above  nature, 
when  it  seemed  good  to  Him,  revealed  a  certain  future  to 
His  creature  man.  It  is  the  postulate  (or  axiom,  as  appears 
to  these  critics),  that  there  is  no  superhuman  prophecy, 
which  gives  rise  to  their  eagerness  to  place  these  and  other 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    267 

prophetic  books,  and  portions  of  books,  where  they  can  say 
to  themselves  that  they  do  not  involve  such  prophecy.  To 
believers  it  has,  obviously,  no  religious  interest  at  what  time 
it  pleased  Almighty  God  to  send  any  of  His  servants  the 
prophets.  Not  the  dates  assigned  by  any  of  these  self- 
devouring  theories,  but  the  grounds  alleged  in  support  of 
those  dates,  as  implying  unbelief  of  God's  revelation  of 
Himself,  make  the  question  one  of  religious  interest,  namely, 
to  show  that  these  theories  are  as  unsubstantial  as  their 
assumed  base  is  baseless." l 

That  it  is  not  unjust  to  say  that  to  most  of  these  critics 
either  prophecy  in  the  Christian  sense  of  the  term  does  not 
exist ;  or,  to  quote  one  of  them,  that  "  all  definite  prophecy 
relates  to  an  immediate  future  "  and  has  reference  to  events 
which,  as  men  imbued  with  the  ethical  principles  which 
determine  God's  dealings  with  men  and  nations,  and  as 
careful  observers  of  the  signs  of  the  times,  the  prophets 
could  well  conjecture,  or  "  anticipate,"  as  likely  to  come  to 
pass — the  following  quotation  from  one  of  the  chief  fathers 
of  the  modern  criticism  shows  : 

"  That  which  is  most  peculiar  in  this  prophet "  (writes 
Ewald,  of  the  supposed  unknown  author  of  the  last  six 
chapters  of  Zechariah)  "  is  the  uncommon  high  and  pious 
hope  of  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah,  notwith 
standing  all  visible  greatest  dangers  and  threatenings.  At 
a  time  when  Jeremiah,  in  the  walls  of  the  capital,  already 
despairs  of  any  possibility  of  a  successful  resistance  to  the 
Chaldees  and  exhorts  to  tranquillity,  this  prophet  still  looks 
all  these  dangers  straight  in  the  face  with  swelling  spirit  and 
divine  confidence ;  holds,  with  unbowed  spirit,  firm  to  the 
like  promises  of  older  prophets,  as  Isa.  xxix. ;  and  antici 
pates  that,  from  that  very  moment  when  the  blind  fury  of 
the  destroyers  would  discharge  itself  on  the  sanctuary,  a 
wondrous  mtght  would  crush  them  in  pieces,  and  that  this 
must  be  the  beginning  of  the  Messianic  weal  within  and 
without." 2 

1  Pusey. 

2  Professor  H.  Ewald,  Die  Propheten  des  Alten  Bundcs. 


268     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Chap.  xiv.  is,  according  to  Ewald,  a  modification  of  the 
earlier  "  anticipations  "  of  this  prophet. 

"  This  piece,"  he  says,  "  cannot  have  been  written  till 
somewhat  later,  when  facts  made  it  more  and  more  improb 
able  that  Jerusalem  would  not  anyhow  be  conquered,  and 
treated  as  a  conquered  city,  by  coarse  foes.  Yet  then,  too, 
this  prophet  could  not  part  with  the  anticipations  of  older 
prophets,  and  those  which  he  had  himself  at  an  earlier  time 
expressed  so  boldly,  amid  the  most  visible  danger,  he  holds 
firm  to  the  old  anticipation  (in  remembrance  of)  the  great 
deliverance  of  Jerusalem  in  Sennacherib's  time  (Isa.  xxxvii.), 
which  appeared  to  justify  the  most  fanatic  hopes  for  the 
future  (comp.  Ps.  lix.).  And  so  now  the  prospect  moulds 
itself  to  him  thus,  as  if  Jerusalem  must  indeed  actually 
endure  the  horrors  of  the  conquest,  but  that  then,  when  the 
work  of  the  conquerors  was  half-completed,  the  great  deliver 
ance  already  suggested  in  that  former  piece  would  come, 
and  so  the  sanctuary  would  notwithstanding  be  wonderfully 
preserved,  the  better  Messianic  time  would  notwithstanding 
still  so  come." 

Principal  George  Adam  Smith,  to  whose  work,  The 
Book  of  the  Twelve  Prophets,  we  shall  have  occasion  to  return 
presently,  and  who,  like  Canon  Driver,  follows  those  German 
critics  who  ascribe  a  post-exilic  origin  to  these  chapters, 
though  denying  Zechariah's  authorship,  after  mentioning 
some  grounds  for  a  later  date,  says : 

"  But  though  many  critics  judged  these  grounds  to  be 
sufficient  to  prove  the  post-exilic  origin  of  Zech.  ix.— xiv., 
they  differed  as  to  the  author  and  exact  date  of  these 
chapters.  Conservatives,  like  Hengstenberg,  Delitzsch,  Keil, 
Kohler,  and  Pusey,  used  the  evidence  to  prove  the  author 
ship  of  Zechariah  himself  after  516,  and  interpreted  the 
references  to  the  Greek  period  as  pure  prediction.  .  .  .  But 
on  the  same  grounds  Eichhorn  saw  in  the  chapters  not  a 
prediction,  but  a  reflection,  of  the  Greek  period.  He  as 
signed  chaps,  ix.  and  x.  to  an  author  of  the  time  of  Alexander 
the  Great ;  xi.-xiii.  6  he  placed  a  little  later,  and  brought 
down  xiii.  7-xiv.  to  the  Maccabeean  period." 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    269 

But  it  is  a  sad  fact  that  the  grounds,  when  closely 
examined,  on  which  Eichhorn  and  the  others,  who,  ad 
mitting  a  post-exilic  origin  of  these  chapters,  yet  deny 
that  they  were  written  by  Zechariah,  are  neither  "  the 
geographical  references "  nor  the  historical  or  philological 
indications  in  the  scripture  in  question,  but  the  underlying 
presupposition  on  the  part  of  these  critics  that  "  pure  pre 
diction  "  is  an  impossibility,  and  the  attempt  to  eliminate 
or  explain  away  the  supernatural  element  in  the  prophetic 
scriptures.  And  since,  as  an  instance,  there  is  too 
marked  and  striking  a  resemblance  between  the  historic 
events  connected  with  the  march  and  conquest  of  Alexander 
the  Great  through  Syria,  Phoenicia,  and  Palestine,  with  the 
description  in  chaps,  ix.  and  x.,  they  cannot  be  prophetic  of 
these  events  (for  that  would  be  admitting  the  possibility  of 
"  pure  prediction  "),  but  must  be  "  a  reflection,"  or,  in  other 
words,  a  description  of  the  events  after  they  had  taken 
place. 

But  to  come  back  to  Ewald  and  those  who  ascribe  a 
pre-exilic  origin  to  the  second  part  of  Zechariah,  it  must  be 
pointed  out  that  the  prophecy,  had  it  preceded 'the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans,  could  not  have  been  earlier 
than  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  since  the  mourning  for  the 
death  of  Josiah  is  spoken  of  as  a  proverbial  sorrow  of  the 
past.  But  in  that  case  the  prophecy  which  "  anticipates  "  a 
miraculous  interposition  of  God  for  the  deliverance  of 
Jerusalem  would  have  been  in  direct  contradiction  to 
Jeremiah,  "  who  for  thirty-nine  years  in  one  unbroken  dirge 
predicted  the  evil "  which  should  come  upon  the  city ;  and 
the  inventive  prophet  would  have  been  "  one  of  the  false 
prophets  who  contradicted  Jeremiah,  who  encouraged 
Zedekiah  in  his  perjury,  the  punishment  whereof  Ezekiel 
solemnly  denounced,  prophesying  his  captivity  in  Babylon 
as  its  penalty ;  he  would  have  been  a  political  fanatic,  one 
of  those  who  by  encouraging  rebellion  against  Nebuchad 
nezzar  brought  on  the  destruction  of  the  city,  and  in  the 
name  of  God  told  lies  against  God. 

"  It  is  such  an  intense  paradox  that  the  writing  of  one 


270     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

convicted  by  the  event  of  uttering  falsehood  in  the  name 
of  God,  incorrigible  even  in  the  thickening  tokens  of  God's 
displeasure,  should  have  been  inserted  among  the  Hebrew 
prophets,  in  times  not  far  removed  from  those  whose  events 
convicted  him,  that  one  wonders  that  any  one  should  have 
invented  it.  Great  indeed  is  the  credulity  of  the 
incredulous  ! " l 


The  Uncertainties  and  conflicting  "  Results  " 
of  Rationalistic  Criticism 

But  though  the  preponderating  weight  of  modern  critical 
opinion  since  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  is 
that  these  chapters  belong  to  a  period  before  the  Captivity 
(chaps,  ix.— xi.,  somewhere  in  the  reigns  of  Uzziah,  Jotham, 
Ahaz,  or  Hezekiah,  and  chaps,  xii.— xiv.,  because  of  the 
mention  of  the  mourning  for  that  king  as  an  event  of  the 
past  in  chap,  xii.,  after  the  death  of  Josiah 2),  yet  over 
against  them  stands  another  group  of  critics  of  equal 
repute,  who  transfer  these  chapters  to  late  post-exilic,  post- 
Zecharian  days. 

We  have  already  referred  to  Eichhorn,  who,  "  after  long 
vacillation,"  assigned  these  chapters  (which,  according  to 
him,  are  made  up  of  different  fragments)  to  different  epochs 
of  the  Greek -Maccabaean  period  (332  B.C.  to  161  B.C.). 
And  to  him  must  be  added  H.  E.  G.  Paulus,  Bottcher, 
Vatke,  Bernard  Stade,  and  others. 

Principal  George  Adam  Smith  is  so  sure  of  the  correct 
ness  of  Stade's  theory,  who  assigns  "  between  300  and 
280  B.C."  as  the  date  of  these  chapters,  that  he  has  carried 
it  out  even  in  his  arrangement  of  the  order  of  the  books. 
In  his  Book  of  the  Twelve  Prophets  he  places  Malachi 
after  the  first  part  of  Zechariah  (chaps,  i.— viii.) ;  then  Joel, 

1  Pusey. 

2  Some  have  not  been  satisfied  with  merely  two  unknown  writers  for  these 
six  chapters.     One  B.  G.  Fliigge,  in  a  work  published  in   Gottingen  in  1818, 
entitled,    Die    Weissagungen    welche    die   Schriften   des    Propheten    Zacharias 
bcigebogen  sind,  not  only  referred  these  chapters  to  pre-exilic  days,  but  split  them 
up  into  nine  fragments,  of  different  dates. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    271 

for  whose  assignment  to  so  late  a  date  there  is  no  justifica 
tion  in  fact,  and  is  only  part  of  the  newest  destructive 
critical  theories  of  the  Pentateuch,  to  the  baselessness  of 
which  (if  the  generally  accepted  older  date  be  admitted) 
Joel's  prophecy  testifies.  Then,  after  Malachi  and  Joel,  as 
a  section  by  itself,  he  places  Zech.  ix.-xiv.1 

But  there  is  truth  in  the  remark  that  "  Criticism  which 
reels  to  and  fro  in  a  period  of  nearly  500  years,  from  the 
earliest  of  the  prophets  to  a  period  a  century  after  Malachi, 
and  this  on  historical  and  philological  grounds,  certainly 
has  come  to  no  definite  basis,  either  as  to  history  or 
philology.  Rather,  it  has  enslaved  both  to  preconceived 
opinions  ;  and  at  last,  as  late  a  result  as  any  has  been,  after 
this  weary  round,  to  go  back  to  where  it  started  from,  and 
to  suppose  these  chapters  to  have  been  written  by  the 
prophet  whose  name  they  bear."  '2 

1  In  the  large  edition  of  Die  Heilige  Schrift  des  Alien  Testaments  (the  New 
Critical  German  Translation  of  the  Old  Testament),  by  Kautzsch  and  others,  in 
the  notes  and  appendices  to  which  are  embodied  all  the  "results  "of  German 
scholarship  and  criticism  of  the  nineteenth  century,  I  read  the  following  note  to 
Zech.  ix.-xiv.  : 

"In  Betreff  dieser  sechs  Kapitel  die  wegen  ihre  Stellung  hinter  den 
Weissagungen  Sacharyas  schon  frlihzeitig  diesem  Propheten  zugeschrieben  worden 
sind,  ist  noch  immer  streitig,  ob  wenigstens  ein  vorexilischer  Kem  (und  zwar 
fur  kap.  ix.-xi.  aus  dem  8  Jahrhundert,  fur  xii.-xiv.  aus  dem  Ende  des  ^ 
Jahrhundert).  Auzunehmen,  oder  ob  das  Ganze  erst  aus  der  spatern  nach 
exilischen  Zeit  (dem  4  oder  gar  3  Jahrhundert)  herzuleiten  sei — namely,  '  In 
reference  to  these  six  chapters,  which,  on  account  of  their  position  after  the 
prophecies  of  Zechariah,  were  already  in  early  times  ascribed  to  this  prophet,  it 
is  still  a  matter  of  dispute  if  we  are  to  regard  them  as  containing  at  least  a  pre- 
exilic  kernel  (or  foundation — namely,  for  chapters  ix.-xi.  from  the  eighth 
century,  and  for  chapters  xii.-xiv.  from  the  end  of  the  seventh  century,  B.C.),  or 
if  the  whole  is  to  be  referred  to  the  later  post-exilic  time  (namely,  the  fourth  or 
even  the  third  century  B.C.).'" 

2  Pusey.     In  the  last  sentences  he  has,  no  doubt,  the  case  of  De  Wette  in  his 
mind,  who,  after  advocating  a  pre-exilic  origin  of  these  chapters  in  the  first  three 
editions  of  his  Einleitung  ins  Alte  Testament,  changed  his  mind  in  the  4th 
edition. 

Stahelin,  in  his  Einleitung  in  die  Kanonischc  Biicher  des  Alten  Testaments, 
says:  "  De  Wette  often  assured  me  orally,  that  since  he  felt  himself  compelled 
to  admit  that  this  portion  evinces  acquaintance  with  the  latest  prophets,  he  could 
not  deny  it  to  be  Zechariah's."  De  Wette's  characterisation  of  these  chapters 
was  that  they  are  "prophecies  of  fanatic  contents,  which  deny  all  historical 
explanation. " 


272     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

It  is  obvious  that  there  must  be  some  mistake  either  in 
the  tests  applied  or  in  their  application,  which  admits  of  a 
variation  of  at  least  450  years  from  somewhere  in  the  reign 
of  Uzziah  (say  770  B.C.)  to  later  than  330  B.C.] 

The  Arguments  against  the  Unity  of  Zechariah 
examined 

But  now  let  us  very  briefly  examine  the  arguments 
against  the  unity  of  the  Book  of  Zechariah.  They  are 
summarised  by  Professor  von  Orelli  of  Basel,  one  of  the 
"  moderate  "  of  the  modern  school,1  whose  own  conclusion 
in  the  end  is  that  "  chaps,  ix.-xi.  is  a  prophecy  of  a  later 
contemporary  of  Hosea,"  and  chaps,  xii.-xiv.  are  "  by  an 
unnamed  prophet  at  Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah." 
The  critical  grounds  are  these : 

(a)  "  The  great  diversity  of  literary  form  and  manner 
existing  generally  between  Parts  I.  and  II.  In  Part  II. 
are  wanting  those  careful  headings  with  indications  of 
author  and  date  which  are  found  in  Zechariah  I.  and 
Haggai.  The  style  in  Parts  I.  and  II.  is  very  different, 
both  as  relates  to  the  phraseology  in  particular  and  the 
tenour  of  discourse  generally.  .  .  .  The  peculiar  expres 
sions  of  Part  I.  are  not  found  in  Part  II.,  and  conversely. 
The  different  tenour  of  the  whole  is  of  still  greater  import 
ance.  To  put  it  in  brief,  the  first  part  on  the  whole  offers 
a  somewhat  awkward  prosaic  style ;  whereas  in  the  second, 
where  there  are  no  visions,  exhibits  in  the  discourses  a 
spirit  and  a  fire  of  enthusiasm  such  as  one  meets  with 
elsewhere  only  in  the  early  prophetic  writings,  but  there  all 
the  oftener." 

Now,  in  reference  to  the  arguments  based  on  supposed 
differences  of  literary  form  and  style,  which  play  such  an 
important  part  in  modern  criticism,  which  is  directed  not 
only  against  these  chapters,  but  against  almost  all  the 
books  of  the  Bible,  it  is  sufficient  to  repeat  a  truism  which 

1  In  his  Introduction  to  Zechariah  in  his   Commentary  on  the  Twelve  Minor 
Prophets. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    273 

has  been  often  stated,  that  diversity  of  subject  is  sufficient 
to  account  for  differences  of  form  and  style  where  such  exist. 
Headings  and  indications  of  authorship  and  date  were 
necessary  as  introducing  the  series  of  visions  at  the 
beginning  of  the  prophet's  ministry,  and  to  the  address 
which  formed  the  reply  to  the  deputation  from  Bethel 
(chaps,  vii.,  viii.)  ;  but  no  argument  can  be  based  on  their 
absence  from  the  oracles  in  the  second  part. 

Some  of  the  other  prophets,  too,  use  headings  and 
attach  dates  to  some  of  their  utterances,  and  omit  them  in 
others.1  Introductory  formulas  are,  for  instance,  "  made 
use  of  by  Hosea  in  the  first  five  chapters  of  his  book, 
which  are  completely  wanting  in  the  last  nine  chapters, 
and  yet  no  doubt  is  entertained  of  the  integrity  of  that 
book.  The  style,  moreover,  of  that  prophet  is  very 
different  in  chaps,  i.-iii.  from  what  it  is  in  chaps,  iv.-xiv. ; 
and  the  style  of  Ezek.  iv.,  v.,  is  totally  different  from  that 
of  chaps,  vi.,  vii.,  or  of  xxvii.,  xxviii."  * 

But  even  those  critics  who  agree  in  denying  the  unity 
of  Zechariah  do  not  agree  among  themselves  on  the  points 
of  style.  Thus,  Rosenmuller  speaks  of  the  first  eight 
chapters  as  being  "  prosaic,  feeble,  poor,"  and  of  the  last 
six  chapters  as  "  poetic,  weighty,  concise,  glowing  "  ;  while 
Bottcher,  on  the  other  hand,  speaks  of  the  "  lifeless  language  " 
of  the  last  chapters,  and  compares  them  with  the  "  amaz 
ingly  fresh "  style  of  the  Psalms  attributed  to  the  time  of 
the  Maccabees. 

The  argument  from  style,  however,  to  quote  from  W. 
H.  Lowe's  Hebrew  Student's  Commentary,  must  always 
remain  a  doubtful  one.  Pusey  has  given  an  instance  of 
the  precarious  nature  of  such  arguments  in  the  following : 
"  An  acute  German  critic  imagined  to  have  proved  from 
their  style  that  the  Laws  of  Plato  were  not  the  work  of 
Plato;  and  yet  Jowett  (trans.,  Plato,  Dialog,  iv.  p.  i)  has 
shown  their  genuineness  by  twenty  citations  in  Aristotle 
(who  must  have  been  intimate  with  Plato  for  some 

1  Isa.  i.  i,  vi.  I  ;  Ezek.  i.  1-3,  viii.  i,  2,  xl.  I,  2. 

2  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 
18 


274     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

seventeen  years),  by  allusions  of  Isocrates  (writing  a  year 
after  Plato's  death),  by  references  of  the  comic  poet  Alexis 
(a  younger  contemporary),  besides  the  unanimous  voice  of 
later  antiquity. 

"  But  it  would  not  at  all  be  surprising,  as  Keil,  Stahelin, 
and  others  have  observed,  to  find  that  the  style  of  Zechariah 
varies  in  chaps,  i.-viii.  from  that  in  chaps,  ix.-xiv.,  as  the 
subject-matter  treated  of  in  the  two  portions  is  radically 
different.  '  In  the  former  portion  the  prophet  had  to  narrate 
a  series  of  visions  seen  by  him  in  one  night,  and  to  record 
divers  exhortations  of  a  practical  kind  suggested  by  the 
inquiry  of  the  deputation  from  Bethel ;  in  the  second 
portion  he  speaks  of  the  distant  future.  In  the  former  he 
might  be  expected  to  write  in  simple  prose ;  in  the  latter 
he  might  at  times  rise  to  lofty  heights  of  poetry. 

" '  Moreover,  and  this  must  not  be  forgotten,  it  is 
exceedingly  probable  that  the  second  portion  was  composed 
many  years  after  the  first — long  after  the  Temple  had  been 
completed — and  matters  had  assumed  a  kind  of  normal 
condition  as  regards  the  Jewish  colony,  and  also  at  a  time 
when  the  realization  of  the  bright  hope  of  attaining  their 
national  independence  seemed  to  be  as  far  off  as  ever.' " l 

"  That  Gentle  Lover  of  Peace" 

Principal  George  Adam  Smith  finds  a  great  argument 
against  Zechariah's  authorship  of  the  last  six  chapters  in 
the  fact  that  "  the  peace,  and  the  love  of  peace,  in  which 
Zechariah  wrote,  has  disappeared.  Nearly  everything  in 
the  last  part  breathes  of  war,  actual  or  imminent.  The 
heathen  are  spoken  of  with  a  ferocity  which  finds  few 
parallels  in  the  Old  Testament.  There  is  revelling  in  their 
blood,  of  which  the  student  of  the  authentic  prophecies  of 
Zechariah  will  at  once  perceive  that  gentle  lover  of  peace 
could  not  have  been  capable." 

We  confess  that  we  fail  to  "  perceive  "  the  truth  of  this 
statement,  or  to  find  any  "  ferocity,"  or  "  a  revelling  in  the 
1  C.  H.  II.  Wright. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    275 

blood  of  the  heathen,"  on  the  part  of  the  writer  of  these 
chapters. 

What  is  true  is  that  the  prophet,  who  already  in  the  First 
Part  was  commissioned  to  announce  God's  "  great  fury " 
against  the  nations  who  oppressed  Israel,  and  already  there 
foretells  the  overthrow  of  Gentile  world-power,  does  in  the 
last  chapters,  when  he  comes  to  prophesy  more  particularly 
of  the  last  days,  and  of  the  solemn  events  which  are  to 
usher  in  the  day  when  Jehovah  shall  at  last  be  "  King  over 
all  the  eartli"  set  forth  in  realistic  language  the  final  great 
conflict,  and  the  terrible  judgments  which  are  to  come,  not 
only  on  "  the  heathen,"  but  on  Israel  also. 

It  might  be  true  that,  according  to  his  natural  disposition, 
Zechariah,  "  that  gentle  lover  of  peace,"  might  not  find  it 
a  congenial  task  to  prophesy  of  war  and  judgment,  or  to 
describe  the  destruction  of  the  enemies  of  God  and  of  His 
people ;  but  other  "  gentle  lovers  of  peace  "  among  Israel's 
inspired  prophets  also  had  to  utter  some  terribly  heavy 
things  against  the  ungodly  in  Israel  and  the  nations  who 
forget  God,  when  compelled  so  to  do  by  the  hand  and  the 
Spirit  of  God.  There  was  no  gentler  man  nor  greater  lover 
of  peace  than  Jeremiah,  and  when  he  had  to  announce  im 
pending  calamities  and  judgments  he  shrank  from  his  task 
and  did  it  with  a  broken  heart ;  but  Jehovah's  word  came 
to  him  saying,  "  Behold,  I  have  put  My  words  in  thy  mouth  : 
see,  I  have  set  thee  over  the  nations  and  over  the  kingdoms, 
to  pluck  up  and  to  break  down,  and  to  destroy  and  to  over 
throw  ;  to  build  and  to  plant"  He  who  was  the  embodiment 
of  gentleness  and  love,  and  loved  to  reveal  the  Father's 
heart,  had  yet  to  warn  men  of  the  place  of  doom — "  where 
the  worm  dieth  not,  and  where  the  fire  is  not  quenched." 

But  let  us  turn  briefly  to  the  other  arguments  against 
the  unity  of  Zechariah,  as  summarised  by  Von  Orelli.  We 
pass  over  the  statement  under  the  heading  (b],  namely,  that 
"  the  circle  of  thought  is  quite  different  in  the  two  parts  of  the 
book"  for,  as  he  himself  observes,  "  this  cannot  be  conclusive 
against  the  unity  of  the  author,  as,  e.g.,  we  cannot  demand 
that  Zechariah,  in  his  later  discourses,  should  use  again  the 


276     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

entire  angelology  of  the  visionary  part :  the  figure  of  Satan, 

the  seven  eyes  of  God,"  etc. 

(c)  "  A   much  more  important  point  is  that  the  outward, 

historical,  and  political  situation  presupposed  in  chaps,  ix—xiv. 

is  not  that  of  the  age  of  Zerubbabel"      But  is  that  so  really  ? 

Let  me  put  over  against   this  statement,  one  by  another 

German  commentator,  who  was  certainly  not  less  scholarly 

nor  less  painstaking  than  those  against  whom  he  contends. 

"  The  current  opinion  of  these   critics,  that   the  chapters  in 
question   date  from   the   time    before   the    Captivity"    writes 

Professor  Keil,  "  is  completely  overthrown  by  the  circumstance 
that  even  in  these  oracles  the  condition  of  the  covenant  nation 
AFTER  THE  CAPTIVITY  forms  the  historical  ground  and 
starting-point  for  the  proclamation  of  the  picture  of  the 
future  development  of  the  Kingdom  of  God"  which  state 
ment  he  proceeds  to  prove  (to  my  mind  satisfactorily)  by 
a  number  of  references  in  these  chapters.  And  that  the 
historic  foreground  and  starting-point  of  these  chapters  are 
not  only  post-exilic,  but  might  very  well  fit  in  with  the  time 
of  Zerubbabel,  is  also  shown  by  Hengstenberg,  Stahelin, 
Havernick,  Koehler,  Kliefoth,  Lange,  Bredenkamp,  and  other 
prominent  Bible  scholars  and  commentators. 

To  show  that  the  critics  themselves  are  far  from  sure 
of  "the  historic  and  political  situation  presupposed  in  chaps, 
ix.— xiv.,"  we  might  point  again  to  the  group  which  includes 
Eichhorn,  H.  E.  G.  Paulus,  Vatke,  B.  Stade,  etc.,  and  their 
English  exponents — Driver,  George  Adam  Smith,  etc.,  who, 
though  denying  Zechariah's  authorship,  yet  ascribe  a  post- 
exilic  origin  for  these  chapters,  some  of  tJiem  as  late,  or  even 
later,  than  joo  B.C.,  which  guesses  are  also  based  chiefly 
on  the  supposed  "  historical  and  political  situation  "  which 
they  discover  in  these  chapters. 

Misconceptions  and  Misinterpretations 

It  can  be  shown,  however,  that  many  of  the  supposed 
"  results  "  and  conclusions  of  modern  critics  are  based,  not 
only  on  misconceptions  as  to  the  "  outward,  historical,  and 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    277 

political  situation  presupposed  "  in  the  scriptures  with  which 
they  deal,  but  on  misunderstandings  and  misinterpretations 
of  the  text. 

This  will  appear  more  clearly  when  we  come  to  the 
exposition  of  these  chapters  ;  but  an  illustration  of  this  fact 
is  found  in  the  summarised  arguments  against  the  unity  of 
Zechariah  given  by  Von  Orelli  under  the  last  two  headings 
of  (d]  and  (e\  We  will  quote  them  one  by  one,  and  very 
briefly  examine  them.  The  italics  in  all  cases  are,  of 
course,  ours. 

(i.)  "  As  relates  to  the  circumstances  of  Israel  in  chaps. 
ix.—xi.,  chap.  ix.  is  of  the  nation  as  found  in  foreign  lands 
(ix.  1 1)  ;  but  a  more  general  exile  is  still  to  come  (x.  2—9)." 

We  confess  we  cannot  see  how,  supposing  this  is  admitted, 
it  would  go  to  prove  a  pre-exilic  origin  of  these  two  chapters, 
but  we  may  quote  words  written  by  an  English  divine  already 
before  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.  "  It  is  urged" 
says  Benjamin  Blayney,  "  that  many  things  are  mentioned 
in  these  chapters  which  by  no  means  correspond  with 
Zechariah's  time,  as  when  events  are  foretold  which  had 
actually  taken  place.  But  it  may  be  questioned  whether 
those  subjects  of  prophecy  have  been  rightly  understood, 
and  whether  that  which  has  been  construed  as  having  a 
reference  to  past  transactions  may  not  in  reality  terminate 
n  others  of  a  later  period,  and  some  perhaps  which  are  yet 
o  come." 

Taking  it  for  granted,  as  we  do,  that  it  is  possible  for  an 

nspired  prophet,  speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  utter 

hings  not  only  in  reference  to  an  immediate,  but  also  of  a 

distant  future,  the  references  quoted  from  chaps,  ix.  and  x. 

as  relates  to  the  circumstances  of  Israel,"  answer  exactly 

to    the    facts  as  contemplated    from   the   starting-point  of 

Zechariah's  time ;  for  the  actual  conditions  were  these :  A 

remnant  had  returned  after  the  seventy  years'  Captivity,  but 

many  of  Zion's  children — indeed  by  far  the  majority — were 

"  prisoners  of  hope  "  (ix.  I  2)  in   the  hands  of  the  Gentiles. 

In  the  end,  all  the  dispersed,  wherever  they  may  be  found 

— whether  in  the  lands  "  of  the  rising  of  the  sun,"  or  in  those 


278     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  of  the  going  down  of  the  sun  "  (viii.  7,  8) — will  be  gathered  ; 
but  that  Zechariah  foresaw  a  second  stage  in  the  dispersion, 
a  more  universal  scattering  before  the  final  and  universal 
gathering,  we  have  already  seen  in  the  exposition  of  vers. 
i  o  and  1 1  of  chap,  ii.,  and  of  vers.  7  and  8  of  chap.  viii. 

(ii.)  "  The  Temple  in  Jerusalem  was  still  standing  (xi. 
13)."  Why  not?  Did  not  Zechariah  early  in  his  ministry 
see  the  completion  of  the  building  of  a  temple  in  Jerusalem 
after  the  partial  restoration  ?  And  here  again,  supposing 
the  difficult  prophecy  in  chap.  xi.  refers  (as,  in  the  light  of 
its  striking  and  manifest  fulfilment  in  Christ,  it  assuredly 
does)  to  a  more  distant  future  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  prophet,  when  a  temple  would  exist  in  Jerusalem  ? 

(iii.)  "  Nay,  even  Ephraim  has  not  gone  into  exile,  .  .  . 
but  is  presupposed  as  a  still  existing  power  (ix.  10-13,  x. 
6,  xi.  7-14)" 

Now,  this  would  be  a  very  serious  argument  against 
the  post-exilic  date  of  these  chapters  if  the  statement  were 
true ;  but  here  also  the  conclusion  is  not  justified  by  r 
proper  understanding  of  the  references  given.  It  is  based 
on  the  mention  of  "  Ephraim  "  or  "  the  house  of  Joseph," 
which  are  used  as  designations  of  "  Israel "  (xi.  14)  in  the 
narrower  sense — namely,  for  those  who  during  the  long 
schism  belonged  to  the  northern  kingdom  in  contrast  to 
"  Judah,"  or  "  the  house  of  Judah,"  or  "  Jerusalem,"  which 
stand,  when  thus  contrasted,  for  the  southern  kingdom. 
But  if  the  mention  of  Ephraim,  or  "  Israel,"  together  with 
"  Judah "  and  "  Jerusalem,"  is  to  be  taken  as  a  proof  that 
"  Ephraim  had  not  gone  into  exile "  when  these  chapters 
were  written,  then  on  the  same  ground  we  might  conclude 
that  the  northern  kingdom  still  existed  when  chaps,  vii.  and 
viii.  were  written  ;  and  not  only  chaps,  vii.  and  viii,,  but 
even  the  vision  of  the  Horns  and  Carpenters  in  chap,  i.,  for 
there  also  we  read  of  the  "  house  of  Judah  and  the  house  of 
Israel"  (viii.  13),  and  of  "Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem" 
(i.  1 9,  ii.  2) ;  and  yet  it  is  universally  admitted,  even  by 
the  critics,  that  chaps,  vii.  and  viii.,  as  well  as  the  visions, 
were  written  by  Zechariah  long  after  the  overthrow — not 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    279 

only  of  Ephraim  or    the   northern    kingdom,  but  even  of 
"  Judah." 

But  in  truth  these  full  designations,  "  house  of  Judah 
and  house  of  Joseph,"  or  "  Judah  and  Ephraim,"  or  "  Judah, 
Israel,  and  Jerusalem,"  are  used  by  the  prophet  as  all- 
inclusive  terms,  for  the  whole  people,  after  both  kingdoms 
had  been  overthrown,  and  the  schism  which  had  existed  so 
long  had  ceased  with  the  Captivity.  "  The  entire  nation,"  as 
I  wrote  in  my  note  on  chap.  viii.  13,  "which  had  previous 
to  the  Exile  been  divided  for  a  time  into  two  kingdoms, 
are  now,  after  the  partial  restoration  from  Babylon,  included 
in  both  parts  of  the  book,  in  undivided  unity  in  one  common 
destiny."  Together  they  are,  during  the  Lo-ammi  period, 
"  scattered  "  and  "  a  curse  among  the  nations,"  and  together 
(the  prophet  foretells)  Jehovah  shall  "  redeem  "  and  gather 
them,  "  so  that  they  shall  be  a  blessing." 

(iv.)  The  last  of  the  internal  grounds  against  the  unity 
of  Zechariah  advanced  by  the  critics,  as  summarised  by 
Von  Orelli,  is  that  "  the  chief  moral  and  religious  faults 
presupposed  in  Part  II.  are  pre-exilic.  This  part  still 
contends  chiefly  against  idolatry  (x.  2),  and  regards  the 
extirpation  of  false  prophets  as  still  future  ;  their  number 
must  still  have  been  great  at  the  time  when  Zechariah  xiii. 
2-6  was  written." 

In  reference  to  idolatry,  let  me  quote  the  words  of 
another  writer : 

"  Idolatry  certainly  was  not  the  prevailing  national  sin 
after  God  had  taught  the  people  through  the  Captivity.  It 
is  commonly  taken  for  granted  that  there  was  none.  But 
where  is  the  proof?  Malachi  would  hardly  have  laid  the 
stress  on  marrying  the  daughters  of  a  strange  god,  had  there 
been  no  danger  that  the  marriage  would  lead  to  idolatry. 
Nehemiah  speaks  of  the  sin  into  which  Solomon  was 
seduced  by  '  outlandish  women,'  as  likely  to  occur  through 
the  heathen  marriages  ;  but  idolatry  was  that  sin.  Half  of 
the  children  could  only  speak  the  language  of  their  mothers. 
It  were  strange  if  they  had  not  imbibed  their  mothers' 
idolatry  too.  In  a  battle  in  the  Maccabee  war  it  is  related, 


280     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

'  Under  the  coats  of  every  one  that  was  slain  they  found 
things  consecrated  to  the  idols  of  the  Jamnites,  which  is 
forbidden  the  Jews  by  their  law '  (2  Mace.  xii.  40). 

"  The  Teraphim  were,  moreover,  an  unlawful  and  for 
bidden  means  of  attempting  to  know  the  future — not  any 
coarse  form  of  idolatry ;  much  as  the  people  now,  who, 
more  or  less,  earnestly  have  their  fortunes  told,  would  be 
surprised  at  being  called  idolaters."  l 

But  it  is  very  probable  that  Zechariah  is  speaking  in 
chaps,  x.  2,  xiii.  2,  etc.,  of  the  sin  which  brought  on  the 
Captivity,  and  not  of  it  as  existing  in  his  own  day.  The 
prediction  repeated  from  one  of  the  former  prophets,  that 
God  will  cut  off  the  very  names  and  memory  of  idols  from 
restored  and  converted  Israel  of  the  future,  does  not  neces 
sarily  imply  that  they  existed  when  the  prophet  wrote. 
And  as  to  false  prophets,  they  continued  to  exist  after  the 
Captivity — such,  for  instance,  were  Shemaiah,  who  "pro 
phesied"  against  Nehemiah,  and  the  prophetess  Noadiah, 
and  "  the  rest  of  the  prophets  "  of  whom  we  read  in  Neh. 
vi.  12-14.  But  here  again  it  is  overlooked  that  it  is  the 
distant  future  of  Israel's  final  deliverance  and  cleansing 
which  is  before  the  prophet's  range  of  vision,  though  it  is 
linked  to  promises  which  have  for  their  starting-point  the 
more  immediate  future.  There  were  false  prophets  at  the 
time  of  the  Lord's  first  advent,  and  He  Himself  warns  His 
disciples  against  "  false  prophets  "  who  would  appear  in  the 
professing  Church  "  in  sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  are 
ravening  wolves,"  and  predicts  that  before  the  time  of  the 
end  "  many  false  prophets  would  arise  and  deceive  many  " 
(Matt.  vii.  15,  xxiv.  1 1-24,  etc.). 

Internal  Marks  of  the  Unity  of  Zechariah 

We  must  draw  this  already  lengthy  disquisition  to  a  close. 
We  think  we  have  shown  that  the  objections  raised  by  modern 
critics  against  the  unity  of  Zechariah  have  no  sufficient  basis 
in  fact. 

1  Pusey. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM    281 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  strong  reasons,  even  apart 
from  "  tradition  "  (which  in  this  case  includes  the  testimony 
of  the  compilers  of  the  Old  Testament  Prophetic  Canon 
•  ;  centuries  before  Christ,  and  of  the  Talmud) — which  has 
t  ;|  always  ascribed  this  scripture  to  Zechariah — to  believe  that 
it  was  the  same  human  pen  which  committed  to  writing  the 
series  of  visions  in  chaps,  i.— vi.  and  the  address  to  the 
deputation  from  Bethel  in  chaps,  vii.,  viii.,  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  used  also  to  write  the  last  six  chapters.  The  internal 
proofs  of  the  integrity  of  the  whole  book  have  been  thus 
summarised  by  another  writer,  of  which,  for  the  sake  of 
conciseness,  I  gladly  avail  myself: 

"(i)  Both  portions  exhibit  an  extensive  acquaintance 
with  the  writings  of  the  later  prophets. 

"  (2)  They  both  exhibit  also  an  extensive  acquaintance 
with  the  earlier  books,  thus:  In  chap.  i.  4—6,  chap.  vii.  12, 
reference  is  made  to  '  the  former  prophets '  generally.1 

"(3)  In  both  divisions  there  are  similar  if  not  identical 
expressions  to  represent  the  whole  people,  such  as  '  the 
house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah '  (viii.  1 3),  '  the 
house  of  Judah  and  the  house  of  Joseph '  (x.  6). 

"(4)  Chap.  xi.  I  i  is  very  similar  to  ii.  9—11,  and  the 
promise  x.  i  to  that  of  viii.  12.  In  both  portions 
Jerusalem  is  bid  rejoice  (ii.  10,  ix.  9),  and  in  both  the 
only  King  of  Israel  mentioned  is  the  Messiah. 

"(5)   In  both  portions  there  are  promises  of  the  bring- 

1  Chap.  ii.  12  (E.V.  8)  recalls  the  thought,  though  not  the  phraseology,  of 
Ps.  xvii.  8  ;  chap.  iii.  8,  vi.  12,  alludes  to  Isa.  iv.  2,  as  well  as  to  Jer.  xxiii.  5 
and  xxxiii.  15  ;  chap.  iii.  10  is  from  Mic.  iv.  4;  chap.  vi.  13  evidently  refers  to 
Ps.  ex.  4;  chap.  viii.  8  recalls  Hos.  ii.  21  (E.V.  19);  chap.  viii.  20-22  in 
substance  may  be  compared  with  Mic.  iv.  I,  2,  Isa.  ii.  2,  3.  And  in  the  Second 
Part,  chap.  ix.  1-8  bears  some  resemblance  to  Amos  i.  3,  ii.  6  ;  chap.  ix.  IO 
(first  half)  is  borrowed  from  Mic.  v.  10,  and  (second  half)  from  Ps.  Ixxii.  8 ; 
chap.  xiii.  2  is  a  quotation  from  Hos.  ii.  17  or  Mic.  v.  12,  13  (comp.  Isa.  ii.  18, 
;  20) ;  and  ver.  9  from  Hos.  ii.  20  (E.V.  23) ;  compare  also  chap.  ix.  16  with  Isa. 
xi.  12;  chap.  x.  12  with  Mic.  iv.  5;  chap.  x.  10-12  with  Isa.  xi.  15,  xiv.  25, 
x.  24-27,  xxx.  31,  etc.  ;  chap.  xii.  8  with  Joel  iv.  10;  chap.  xii.  IO  with  Joel  iii. 
i,  2;  chap.  xiv.  3  with  Isa.  xxxiv.  1-4;  chap.  xiv.  6,  7  with  Amos  v.  18-20; 
Joel  iv.  (E.V.  iii.)  15;  Isa.  xxx.  26;  chap.  xiv.  8  with  Isa.  xi.  9,  ii.  3,  Mic. 
iv.  2;  chap.  xiv.  n  with  Amos  ix.  13-15;  chap.  xiv.  20  with  Isa.  xxiii.  18; 
chap.  xiv.  21  with  Isa.  iv.  3,  xxxv.  8,  Joel  iv.  (E.V.  iii.)  17,  etc. 


282     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

ing  back  of  the  exiles  (comp.  ii.  6-13,  viii.  6-8,  with  ix.  1 1, 
12  and  x.  10-12). 

"  (6)  In  both  there  is  the  habit  of  dwelling  on  the  same 
thought  or  word  (e.g.,  ii.  10,  II,  vi.  10,  vi.  12,  13,  viii. 
4,  5,  viii.  23,  xi.  7,  xiv.  10,  xiv.  4,  xiv.  5).  In  both 
the  whole  and  its  part  are  mentioned  together  for  emphasis, 
as  v.  4,  x.  4 ;  and  in  xii.  1 2  we  have  '  every  family  apart,' 
and  then  in  ver.  I  3,  the  specification.  In  both  parts  we 
have  the  unusual  number  of  five  sections  to  a  verse,  e.g., 
vi.  13,  ix.  5-7. 

"  (7)  Both  divisions  are  written  in  Hebrew  free  from 
Aramaisms.  In  both  the  expressions  me'dbker  umishabh 
occurs  (vii.  14,  ix.  8),  an  expression  which  occurs  elsewhere 
only  in  Ezek.  xxxv.  7. 

"  (8)  The  highly  poetic  language  and  deep  prophetic 
insight  of  chaps,  ix.-xiv.  we  consider  as  an  additional 
argument  in  favour  of  the  unity  of  authorship  of  the  whole 
book.  For  the  man  to  whom  in  his  youth  such  mystic 
visions  as  those  of  chaps,  i.-vi.  were  vouchsafed,  is  just 
such  an  one  to  whom  we  should  not  be  surprised  to  find 
that  in  his  later  years  such  profound  revelations  as  those 
contained  in  chaps,  ix.— xiv.  were  revealed,  and  who  from 
his  poetic  and  imaginative  temperament  would  be  likely  to 
find  suitable  poetic  language  and  metaphors  wherewith  to 
clothe  them  when  revealed  to  him. 

"  The  internal  evidence  being  favourable  to  the  hypo 
thesis  of  the  post-exilian  origin  of  chaps,  ix.— xiv.,  as  well 
as  of  chaps,  i.-viii.,  and  to  that  of  unity  of  authorship, 
rather  than  adverse  to  it,  and  there  being  no  positive 
external  evidence  to  the  contrary,  we  conclude  that  it  is 
probable  that  the  whole  of  the  so-called  Book  of  Zechariah 
is  the  work  of  Zechariah,  grandson  of  Iddo."  x 

1  \V.  H.  Lowe,  M.A.,  "Hebrew  Studenfs  Commentary." 


CHAPTER    XIV 

THE  GENTILE  WORLD-CONQUEROR 
AND  ISRAEL'S  PRINCE  OF  PEACE 

(CHAPTER  ix) 


283 


The  burden  of  the  word  of  Jehovah  upon  the  land  of  Hadrach,  and  Damascus 
shall  be  its  resting-place  (for  the  eye  of  man  and  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  is 
toward  Jehovah);  and  Hamath,  also,  which  bordereth  thereon;  Tyre  and 
Sidon,  because  they  are  very  wise.  And  Tyre  did  build  herself  a  stronghold,  and 
heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  fine  gold  as  the  mire  of  the  streets.  Behold, 
the  Lord  will  dispossess  her,  and  He  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea ;  and  she 
shall  be  devoured  with  fire.  Ashkelon  shall  see  it,  and  fear  ;  Gaza  also,  and  shall 
be  sore  pained  ;  and  Ekron,  for  her  expectation  shall  be  put  to  shame  :  and  the 
king  shall  perish  from  Gaza,  and  Ashkelon  shall  not  be  inhabited.  And  a 
bastard  shall  dwell  in  Ashdod,  and  I  will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines. 
And  I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth,  and  his  abominations  from 
between  his  teeth,  and  he  also  shall  be  a  remnant  for  our  God  :  and  he  shall  be  as 
a  chieftain  in  Judah,  and  Ekron  as  a  Jebusite.  And  I  will  encamp  about  My 
house  against  the  army,  that  none  pass  through  or  return  ;  and  no  oppressor 
shall  pass  through  them  any  more  :  for  now  have  I  seen  with  Mine  eyes.  Rejoice 
greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion  ;  shout,  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem  :  behold,  thy  king 
cometh  unto  thee  :  He  is  just,  having  salvation  ;  lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass, 
even  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass.  And  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraini, 
and  the  horse  from  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  battle-bow  shall  be  cut  oft";  and  He  shall 
speak  peace  unto  the  nations,  and  His  dominion  shall  be  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from 
the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  As  for  thee  also,  because  of  the  blood  of  thy 
covenant  I  have  set  free  thy  prisoners  from  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water.  Turn 
you  to  the  stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope  ;  even  to-day  do  I  declare  that  I  will 
render  double  unto  thee.  For  I  have  bent  Judah  for  Me,  I  have  filled  the  bow 
with  Ephraim  ;  and  I  will  stir  up  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy  sons,  O  Greece, 
and  will  make  thee  as  the  sword  of  a  mighty  man.  And  Jehovah  shall  be  seen 
over  them,  and  His  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning,  and  the  Lord  Jehovah 
will  blow  the  trumpet,  and  will  go  with  whirlwinds  of  the  south.  And  Jehovah 
of  hosts  will  defend  them,  and  they  shall  devour,  and  shall  tread  down  the 
sling-stones ;  and  they  shall  drink,  and  make  a  noise  as  through  wine  ;  and  they 
shall  be  filled  like  bowls,  like  the  corners  of  the  altar.  And  Jehovah  their  God 
will  save  them  in  that  day  as  the  flock  of  His  people  :  for  they  shall  be  as  the 
stones  of  a  crown,  lifted  on  high  over  His  land.  For  how  great  is  His  goodness, 
and  how  great  is  His  beauty  !  grain  shall  make  the  young  men  flourish,  and  new 
wine  the  virgins. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

THE  overthrow  of  world-power,  and  the  establishment 
of  Messiah's  Kingdom,  may  be  given  as  the  epitome 
of  the  last  chapters  of  Zechariah,  to  which  we  have 
now  come.      The  two  oracles  which  make  up  the  whole  of 
the  second  half  of  the  book  (chaps,  ix.— xi.  and  xii.— xiv.) 
show  by  their  headings,  as  well  as  by  their  contents,  and 
even    by   their   formal    arrangement,  that  they  are   corre 
sponding  portions  of  a  greater  whole.     Both  sections  treat 
of  war  between  the   heathen  world  and   Israel,  though  in 
different  ways. 

In  the  first  (chaps,  ix.— xi.),  the  judgment  through  which 
Gentile  world-power  over  Israel  is  finally  destroyed,  and 
Israel  is  endowed  with  strength  to  overcome  all  their  enemies, 
forms  the  fundamental  thought  and  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
prophetic  description.  In  the  second  (chaps,  xii.— xiv.),  the 
judgment  through  which  Israel  itself  is  sifted  and  purged  in 
the  final  great  conflict  with  the  nations,  and  transformed 
into  the  holy  nation  of  Jehovah,  forms  the  leading  topic. 

"  The  formal  or  structural  resemblance  between  the  two 
long  oracles  into  which  the  last  six  chapters  divide  them 
selves  appears  also  in  the  fact  that  in  the  centre  of  each  the 
announcement  suddenly  takes  a  different  tone  without  any 
external  preparation  (chaps,  xi.  I  and  xiii.  7),  so  that  it 
appears  as  if  it  were  the  commencement  of  a  new  prophecy  ; 
and  it  is  only  by  a  closer  study  that  the  connection  of  the 
whole  is  brought  out  and  the  relation  between  the  two  is 
clearly  seen — namely,  that  the  second  section  contains  a 
more  minute  description  of  the  manner  in  which  the  events 
announced  in  the  first  section  are  to  be  realised.  In  the 

threatening     word      concerning      the     land     of     Hadrach, 

285 


286     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

chaps,  ix.  and  x.  form  the  first  section,  chap.  xi.  the  second. 
In  that  concerning  Israel  the  first  section  extends  from 
chap.  xii.  i  to  xiii.  6,  and  the  second  from  chap.  xiii.  7  to 
the  end  of  the  book." l 

Chaps,  ix.  and  x.,  as  has  just  been  observed,  go  together 
and  form  a  continuous  proohecy.  The  foreground,  or  more 
immediate  future,  to  which  it  refers,  is  the  course  of  the 
victories  of  Alexander  the  Great,  "  which  circled  round  the 
Holy  Land  without  hurting  it,"  and  ended  in  the  overthrow 
of  the  Persian  Empire — though  the  foreground  merges,  as 
we  shall  see,  into  solemn  events  both  of  judgment  and  of 
mercy  of  a  more  distant  future. 

The  prophecy  begins  with  the  word  N&ip  (massa),  which 
the  Authorised  Version,  together  with  all  the  ancient 
versions  (with  the  exception  of  the  Septuagint),  have 
rendered  "  burden  "  ;  but  the  majority  of  modern  scholars 
translate  simply  "  oracle,"  or  "  utterance,"  or  "  sentence." 

It  is  not  necessary  to  enter  here  into  a  long  critical  ex 
amination  of  the  actual  force  of  this  word  when  used  as  a 
superscription  to  prophetic  utterances ;  but  it  is  certainly 
true  that  NE>D  (massa*),  which  is  from  the  verb  N^3  (nasa\  I 
"  to  lift,"  or  "  take  up,"  as  a  man  takes  up  a  burden, 
"  is  never  placed  in  the  title,"  as  is  observed  already  by 
Jerome,  "  save  when  the  vision  is  heavy,  and  full  of  burden 
and  toil." 

It  is  used  by  Isaiah  entirely  as  the  heading  to  the 
prophecies  which  contain  threatenings  and  announce  judg- 
msnts  against  the  nations  who  have  acted  as  oppressors  of 
Israel,2  and  in  Nahum  it  forms  the  introductory  formula 
to  the\  prophetic  description  of  the  destruction  of  Nineveh. 
In  shcVt,  in  ordinary  Hebrew  "  massa  is  unquestionably 
used  in  the  sense  of  a  burden,  and  the  prophecies  to  which 
it  is  affixeVl  are  mainly  prophecies  of  woe  and  disaster." 
Here,  moreover  (in  Zech.  ix.  i  and  in  chap.  xii.  i),  massa 

1  Keil.     I  have    taken  the  liberty   of  recasting  and  slightly  condensing  his 
valuable  remarks. 

2  Isa.  xiii.   i,  xiv.  2$,  *v.  I,  xvii.  i,  xix.   i,  xxi.  I,   n,  13,  xxii.  i,  xxiii.  I. 
A  full  and  able  criticism,  i'ive  pages  long,  on  the  use  of  the  word  will  be  found  in 
Ilengstenberg  (Christology /  on  Zech.  ix. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  287 

does  not  stand  alone  as  the  introductory  formula,  as  is  the 
case  in  Isaiah  and  Nahum,  but  is  followed  by  nirr  IJH 
(debhar  Yehovah\  "  the  word  of  Jehovah  "  ;  as  is  the  case 
also  in  Mai.  i.  I,  which  begins,  "  The  burden  of  the  word  of 
Jehovah  to  Israel''' 

Very  many  pages  have  been  devoted  by  commentators 
to  the  discussion  as  to  the  meaning  of  Hadrach,  Because 
the  name  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Bible,  and  because  of 
the  difficulty  in  identifying  it  with  any  known  place  or 
district  in  Syria,  it  has  been  generally  understood  by  Jewish 
and  Christian  commentators  as  having  a  symbolical  or 
mystical  significance.  Thus  Kimchi  says,  "  We  find  in  the 
words  of  our  Rabbis  of  blessed  memory  that  Rabbi  Benaiah 
says  Hadrach  is  the  name  of  the  Messiah,  who  is  sharp — 
in  (Jiad) — to  the  Gentiles,  and  tender — "P_  (rakli) — to  Israel." 
And  this  interpretation  of  Rabbi  Benaiah  is  echoed  also  by 
other  Jewish  expositors.  The  explanations  given  by  most 
Christian  commentators  have  been  quite  as  fanciful.  Thus 
Hengstenberg  (who  devotes  eight  learned  pages  to  it  in  his 
Christology),  Kliefoth,  Keil,  and  others  explain  Hadrach  to 
be  "  a  symbolic  epithet,  descriptive  of  the  Medo-Persian 
Empire,  which  is  called  '  sharp-soft,'  or  '  strong-weak,'  on 
account  of  its  inwardly  divided  character."  * 

Gesenius,  Bleek,  and  others  have  taken  Hadrach  as  the 
name  of  some  Syrian  king  who  is  supposed  to  have  reigned 
in  Damascus  between  Benhahad  in.  and  Rezin,  which 
utterly  baseless  supposition  (since  there  is  no  trace 
whatever  in  history  of  the  existence  of  such  a  king)  has 
been  taken  by  them  as  a  support  for  the  theory  of  a  pre- 
exilic  origin  of  these  chapters. 

Others  have  wrongly  understood  the  word  as  standing 
for  "  an  Assyrian  fire-god,"  or  as  the  name  of  "  a  deity  of 
Eastern  Aramea,"  of  which  also  there  is  no  trace  in  history  ; 
while  Olshausen,  Von  Ortenberg,  Bredenkamp,  and  others 
regard  Hadrach  as  a  scribal  error  for  Hauran,  which  is  a 
district  south  of  Damascus,  and  is  mentioned  also  in  con 
nection  with  Hamath  and  Damascus  in  Ezek.  xlvii.  1 8. 

1  Keil. 


288     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  it  is  now  pretty  certain  that  there  was  a  city  called 
Hadrach  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Damascus,  for  compara 
tively  recent  monumental  historical  discoveries  have  in  this, 
as  in  so  many  instances  beside,  confirmed  and  thrown  light 
on  the  Hebrew  text.  In  the  list  of  Assyrian  eponyms — 
that  is,  the  list  of  the  various  officers  after  whom  the 
Assyrian  years  were  named  in  a  certain  definite  order,  the 
kings  themselves  acting  in  due  course  as  eponyms — we 
read,  in  B.C.  772,  in  the  eponymy  of  Assur-bel-ezer, 
governor  of  Calah,  of  an  "  expedition  to  Hadrach  "  (Ha-ta- 
ri-ka).  This  statement  immediately  follows  the  name  of 
the  governor  of  Sallat  (or  Salmat,  as  Rawlinson  and 
Schrader  give  the  name),  who  was  the  eponym  in  the 
previous  year,  when  an  expedition  was  made  to  the  city  of 
Damascus.  Hadrach  (or  Hatarika)  figures  also  in  the 
expeditions  in  the  eponyms  of  later  Assyrian  kings  and 
generals. 

Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  says  that  in  the  catalogue  of 
Syrian  cities  tributary  to  Nineveh  (of  which  we  have 
several  copies  in  a  more  or  less  perfect  state,  and  varying 
from  each  other  both  in  arrangement  and  extent)  there  are 
three  names  which  are  uniformly  grouped  together,  and 
which  read  Manatsuah,  Magida  (Megiddo),  and  Du'ar 
(Dor).  "  As  these  names  are  associated  with  those  of 
Samaria,  Damascus,  Arpad,  Hamath,  Carchemish,  Hadrach 
(or  Hatarika)  and  Zobah,  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the 
position  of  the  cities."  x 

We  proceed  to  the  next  line — "And  Damascus  shall  be 
its  resting-place";2  that  is,  the  judgment  which  is  the 
"  burden  "  of  this  prophecy  shall  first  of  all  have  Damascus 

1  Those  interested  in  this  subject  will  find  full  notes  and  long  quotations  from 
Rawlinson,  Schrader,  etc. ,  in  Dr.  Wright's  Zechariah  and  his  Prophecies,  and  in 
Pusey  in  his  Minor  Prophets. 

2  nrmp  (menuchah)  is  indeed  commonly  used  of  "quiet,  peaceful  resting,"  and 
some  (as  already  the  Targum)  have  understood  it  as  indicating  the  conversion  of 
the  people  of  Damascus.     But  this  idea  is  contrary  to  the  context.     Rather  is  it 
to  be  understood  of  the  lighting  down  of  God's  wrath,  which  shall  there  rest 
until  it  has  accomplished  His  purpose  of  judgment.     Dr.  Wright  suggests  as  a 
parallel  Jer.  xlix.  38,  when,  in  allusion  to  His  judgment  impending  over  Elam, 
God  says,  "  I  will  set  My  throne  in  Elam." 

\ 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  289 

as  its  goal,  and  from  that  centre  it  shall  spread  itself 
over  the  whole  district  which  the  passage  goes  on  to 
describe. 

The  easiest  and  most  natural  translation  of  the  second 
half  of  the  first  verse — Ki  la-  Yehovah  'ein  adam  ve  khol 
shibhte  Israel — is  that  given  in  the  Authorised  Version 
''and  in  the  text  of  the  "  Revised  " — i.e.,  "for  the  eye  of  man 
and  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  is  toward  the  Lord "  ;  but  the 
margin  of  the  Revised  Version  has  another  rendering,  which 
is  supported  by  the  LXX,  the  Syriac,  and  the  Targum,  and 
is  adopted  also,  with  slight  variations,  by  some  modern 
scholars — namely,  "for  Jehovah  has  an  eye  (or  '  to  Jehovah 
is  an  eye')  upon  (or  'over')  man  and  the  tribes  of  Israel" — 
which  is  regarded  as  a  parallelism  to  Jer.  xxxii.  19  :"  Great 
in  counsel  and  mighty  in  work,  for  Thine  eyes  are  open  upon 
all  the  ways  of  the  sons  of  men,  to  give  every  one  according 
to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings''  But 
the  rendering  given  in  the  Authorised  Version  is  doubtless 
the  true  one. 

It  primarily  describes  the  consternation  into  which  men 
would  be  thrown  at  the  approach  of  the  conqueror,  who 
would  be  the  executor  of  God's  judgment,  or,  as  another 
has  expressed  it,  when  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy 
takes  place  "  upon  Hadrach  and  Damascus,  and  the 
wrath  of  God  descends  upon  those  cities  and  districts, 
the  eyes  of  the  nations,  as  well  as  those  of  the  people 
of  Israel,  will  look  toward  Jehovah,  and  marvel  at  the 
wonders  of  judgment  which  will  then  be  performed  in 
their  sight,  in  accordance  with  the  solemn  warnings  of  the 
prophet." 

The  eye  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  is  particularly  speci 
fied  as  directed  then  toward  Jehovah,  probably  because  the 
Jews  had  special  reason  to  fear  the  wrath  of  Alexander, 
their  high  priest  having  from  a  sense  of  loyalty  to  the 
Persians  refused  at  first  to  pay  tribute  or  allegiance  to  the 
Macedonian  conqueror.  But  what  is  here  foretold  as 
primarily  taking  place  as  the  result  of  the  terror  inspired 
among  the  nations  which  then  constituted  parts  of  the 

19 


290     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Medo-Persian  Empire  by  the  rapid  march  and  conquests  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  also  foreshadows  what  will  take  place 
in  a  yet  future  time,  when,  driven  by  fear  and  consternation 
of  God's  judgments  which  shall  then  be  in  the  earth,  the 
eyes  of  all  men,  and  "  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel "  in 
particular,  shall  be  directed  toward  Him  who  was  once 
pierced,  but  now  marches  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer 
(Rev.  i.  7). 

In  Isa.  xvii.  we  have  a  somewhat  parallel  prediction  of 
men's  eyes,  and  specially  of  the  eyes  of  Israel,  being  turned 
to  God  as  the  result  of  judgment,  and  there  also  it  is 
primarily  coupled  with  the  burden,  or  oracle,  against 
Damascus :  "  In  that  day"  we  read,  "  shall  a  man  look  unto 
his  Maker,  and  his  eyes  shall  have  respect  to  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel ;  and  he  shall  not  look  to  the  altars,  the  work  of  his 
hands,  neither  shall  he  have  respect  to  that  which  his  fingers 
have  made" — a  passage  which  reminds  us  also  of  the 
language  of  the  godly  remnant  in  the  26th  chapter:  "  Yea, 
in  the  way  of  Thy  judgments,  O  Lord,  have  we  waited  for 
Thee  :  to  Thy  Name  and  to  Thy  Memorial  is  the  desire  of 
our  soul.  With  my  soul  have  I  desired  Thee  in  the  night  ; 
yea,  with  my  spirit  within  me  will  I  seek  Thee  early :  for 
when  Thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth  the  inhabitants  of  the 
world  learn  righteousness"  l 

But  to  proceed  to  the  2nd  verse:  "  And  Ha  math,  also, 
which  border eth  thereon  " — i.e.,  on  Damascus — shall  be 
involved  in  the  like  fate,  and  share  in  the  burden  of  wrath 
of  which  Damascus  is  the  "  resting-place." 

There  was  a  district  or  small  kingdom  in  Syria,  as 
well  as  a  city  of  that  name  (which  was  its  capital),  the 
present  Hamath,  and  within  its  bounds  "  in  the  land 
of  Hamath"  Riblah  was  situated,  associated  in  Jewish 
memory  with  terrible  sufferings  and  humiliations  at  the 
hands  of  their  conquering  foes  (2  Kings  xxiii.  33,  xxv. 
6,  7,  20,  21). 

Then,  having  spoken  of  the  two  capital  cities  which 
represent  Syria,  the  prophet  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  two 

1  Isa.  xvii.  1-8,  xxvi.  8,  9. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  291 

capitals  of  Phoenicia :  "  Tyre  and  (or  '  with ')  Sidon,1  because 
(or  '  although  ')  she  is  very  wise" 

How  Tyre  especially  showed  her  worldly  wisdom,  and 
the  great  material  prosperity  which  she  attained  thereby, 
we  see  in  the  3rd  verse :  "  And  Tyre  built  herself  a  strong 
hold,  and  heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  fine  gold  as  the 
mire  of  the  street?  The  words  in  the  Hebrew  are  vatibhen 
Tsor  matsor.  There  is  a  kind  of  play  on  the  word  Tyre 
(Tsor].  The  similarity  of  the  sound  and  meaning  may  be 
somewhat  imitated,  as  Dr.  Wright  suggests,  by  the  English 
rendering,  "  Tyre  built  herself  a  tower"  though  the  Hebrew 
word  "  matsor "  has  a  much  wider  significance  than  the 
English  "tower."  "Tyre"  (Tsor)  was  perhaps,  in  the  first 
instance,  so  called  because  of  her  natural  strength,  or  strong 
fortifications,  the  word  suggesting  a  rocky  stronghold.  But 
she  was  not  satisfied  with  that — she  built  herself  in  addition 
a  matsor — a  strong  rocky  fortress.  This  refers,  no  doubt, 
to  the  new  Tyre,  which  was  on  an  island  thirty  stadia 
(about  seven  hundred  paces)  from  the  mainland.  This  new 
Tyre  is  called  in  Isa.  xxiii.  4,  E'n  Tiyip,  maoz  hayyam,  "  the 
stronghold  of  the  sea,"  because,  although  very  small  in 
extent,  it  was  surrounded  by  a  wall  a  hundred  and  fifty 
feet  high,  and  was  so  strong  a  fortification  that  Shal- 
maneser  besieged  it  for  five  years  without  success,  and 
Nebuchadnezzar  for  thirteen  years,  and  apparently  was 
unable  to  conquer  it.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  heathen 
historian  Diodorus  Siculus,  who  says,  "  Tyre  had  the 
greatest  confidence  owing  to  her  insular  position  and 
fortifications,  and  the  abundant  stores  she  had  pre 
pared."  Thus,  thinking  herself  doubly  strong  and  im 
pregnable,  she  gave  herself  up,  as  the  capital  of  Phoenicia, 
to  commercial  enterprise,  and  "  heaped  up  silver  as  the 

1  Sidon  is  regarded  as  an  annexe  of  Tyre,  which,  as  Keil  points  out,  answers 
to  the  historical  relation  in  which  the  two  cities  stood  to  one  another.  Tyre  was, 
indeed,  originally  a  colony  of  Sidon,  but  it  very  soon  overshadowed  the  mother 
city,  and  rose  to  be  the  capital  of  all  Phoenicia,  so  that  even  in  Isaiah  and 
Ezekiel  the  prophecies  concerning  Sidon  are  attached  to  those  concerning  Tyre, 
and  its  fate  appears  interwoven  with  that  of  Tyre.  Hence,  after  the  mere 
mention  of  Sidon,  Tyre  only  is  spoken  of  in  vexs.  3  and  4  of  this  prophecy. 


292     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

dust,  and  fine  or  shining  gold  (tiarutz)  as  the  mire  of  the 
street."  * 

But  worldly  wisdom,  natural  strength,  and  material 
resources  are  of  no  avail  if  it  is  the  Lord  who  rises  in 
judgment  against  us ;  and  that  is  true  of  nations  as  of 
individuals. 

"  BeJiold,  the  Lord  will  dispossess  her,  and  He  shall  smite 
her  power  (or  '  her  wealth ')  in  tJie  sea ;  and  she  shall  be 
devoured  with  fire"  "  Behold  "  (hinneh}y  by  which  word 
our  special  attention  is  directed  to  something  very 
important.  "  Behold,"  though  Tyre  is  so  wise,  so  doubly 
strong,  so  rich — yea,  even  though  her  strength  were  a 
hundred  times  as  great,  and  she  enclosed  herself  in  a 
hundred  strong  walls  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  high, 
"  the  Lord  will  dispossess  her  "  ;  for  cities  or  peoples  cannot 
barricade  themselves  against  God,  and  "  it  is  altogether 
useless  to  build  strongholds  to  keep  Him  out."  It  was  the 
Lord  who  did  it  through  Alexander,  whom  He  used  as  His 
scourge  against  Phoenicia  and  the  Persian  power  at  that 
time. 

"If  the  reference  of  a  prophecy  can  be  judged  of  by  the 
event,"  says  another  writer,  "  there  can  be  no  doubt  what 
ever  to  what  period  this  prophecy  must  refer.  The  judg 
ments  denounced  against  Damascus,  Hadrach,  and  Hamath 
are  expressed  in  such  general  terms  that  several  events 
which  occurred  at  very  different  periods  might  be  adduced 
as  fulfilments  of  the  prophecy.  But  the  prophecies  referring 
to  Tyre  were  not  accomplished  until  the  capture  and 
destruction  of  that  city  by  Alexander  the  Great.  Tyre 
was  unsuccessfully  attacked,  during  the  supremacy  of  the 
Assyrian  power,  by  Shalmaneser.  It  was  again  besieged 
for  many  years  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  it  is  still  a  matter 
of  doubt  whether  it  was  actually  taken  by  that  monarch. 
It  is,  indeed,  highly  probable  that  Nebuchadnezzar,  though 
he  failed  in  his  attack  on  the  island  fortress,  was  so  far 

1  Compare  especially  Ezek.  xxviii.  No  wonder  the  Prince  of  Tyre  became 
the  foreshadowing  of  Antichrist,  and  the  King  of  Tyre  (Ezek.  xxviii.  12)  the 
earthly  foreground  and  type  of  the  chief  of  the  fallen  angels. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  293 

successful  as  to  gain  possession  of  the  city  on  the  mainland, 
which  was  possibly  denuded  of  all  that  was  valuable,  and 
that  the  Tyrians  after  the  loss  of  the  city  on  the  mainland 
made  peace  with  the  Chaldean  monarch  on  favourable 
terms.  But  it  is  certain  that  if  Tyre  was  captured  at  all 
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  it  was  not  then  burned  with  fire — her 
sea-girt  fortress  was  not  destroyed  nor  her  naval  power 
ruined.  Though  she  may  have  lost  her  independence,  she 
did  not  lose  the  important  position  she  occupied  as  the 
greatest  commercial  and  naval  city  in  the  world,  and  the 
naval  power  of  the  Phoenicians  proved  in  the  Persian  period 
of  the  greatest  possible  importance  to  that  empire. 

"  The  case  was  very  different  when  Alexander  the  Great, 
having  completely  shattered  the  might  of  Persia  in  the  de 
cisive  battle  of  Issus,  marched  with  his  victorious  army  into 
Syria.  Alexander  directed  the  main  division  of  his  army 
against  Phoenicia,  while  he  dispatched  Parmenio  with  a  strong 
detachment  to  operate  against  Damascus.  Damascus, 
where  Darius  had  deposited  his  riches,  opened  its  gates  to 
that  general,  who  overran  all  the  land  of  Hadrach,  and 
must  also  necessarily  have  occupied  Hamath,  which  probably 
submitted  without  a  struggle.  Sidon  surrendered  without 
making  any  resistance ;  but  Tyre,  after  a  vain  attempt  at 
negotiation,  ventured  to  resist. 

"  Proudly  confident  in  the  strength  of  their  island  fortress, 
the  Tyrians  mocked  the  attempts  of  Alexander  to  reduce 
their  city.  Every  engine  of  war  suited  for  defence  had 
been  stored  up  in  their  bulwarks,  and  every  device  which 
their  skilful  engineers  could  suggest  was  had  recourse  to, 
and  for  a  time  with  marked  success.  '  Ye  despise  this  land 
army  through  confidence  in  the  place  that  ye  dwell  in  is  an 
island,  but  I  will  show  you  that  ye  dwell  on  a  continent,' 
was  the  language  of  Alexander.  The  shallow  channel 
between  the  mainland  and  the  island  was  at  last  bridged 
over  by  a  huge  dam  of  earth  erected  after  repeated  failures, 
and  the  city  which  had  stood  a  five  years'  siege  from  the 
Assyrians,  a  thirteen  years'  siege  from  the  Chaldeans,  was 
taken  after  a  short  siege  of  seven  months  by  Alexander. 


294     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Ten  thousand  of  its  brave  defenders  were  either  massacred 
or  crucified,  the  rest  were  sold  into  slavery,  and  none 
escaped  save  those  who  were  concealed  by  the  Sidonians 
in  the  ships.  O.  Curtius  adds  distinctly  that  '  Alexander 
having  slain  all  save  those  who  fled  to  the  temples,  ordered 
the  houses  to  be  set  on  fire.' l 

"  The  city  of  Tyre  was  afterwards  repeopled  by  fresh 
settlers,  and  recovered  some  of  its  prosperity.  During  the 
reigns  of  the  Seleucidian  monarchs  it  rose  again  to  consider 
able  importance.  But  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah  had  been 
fulfilled  to  the  letter.  The  city  lost  its  insular  position  ;  for 
the  mole  of  Alexander  was  never  removed,  and  covered 
over  and  strengthened  by  the  deposits  of  sand  and  other 
matter,  it  remains  even  to  this  day  a  monument  of  the 
execution  of  the  Divine  wrath  upon  the  proud,  luxurious, 
and  idolatrous  city."  2 

But  the  burden  of  judgment  travels  south.  The  over 
throw  of  the  Phoenician  stronghold  and  the  approach  of  the 
powerful  enemy  greatly  terrifies  Philistia :  "  Ashkelon  shall 
see  it  (or  '  let  Ashkelon  see  it'}  and  fear ;  Gaza  also  shall 
be  sore  pained  (or  '  greatly  tremble ')  ;  and  Ekron,  for  her 
expectation  (or  '  her  hope ')  shall  be  ashamed ;  and  a  king 
shall  perish  from  Gaza,  and  Ashkelon  shall  not  be  inhabited 
(or  'shall  not  abide'}.  And  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in 
Ashdod,  and  I  will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines." 

Only  four  of  the  five  capital  cities  of  the  Philistines  are 
mentioned,  Gath  being  usually  omitted  in  the  later  prophets, 
perhaps  because  it  belonged,  for  a  time  at  any  rate,  to  the 
kingdom  of  Judah,  and  was,  according  to  some,  ultimately 
incorporated  with  it. 

The  order  in  which  these  Philistine  cities  are  named  is 
the  same  as  in  Jer.  xxv.,  which  prophecy  was  certainly  not 
unknown  to  Zechariah. 

1  There  is  a  full  and  graphic  account  of  the  siege  and  capture  of  Tyre  by 
Alexander  in  Professor  George  Rawlinson's  Phoenicia  ("The  Story  of  the 
Nations  "  Series),  pp.  216-236. 

3  At  present  Tyre,  now  called  Sur,  is  an  unimportant  place  with  6000  inhabit 
ants,  about  half  of  whom  are  Moslems  and  the  rest  Latin  Christians  and  "  United 
Catholics." 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  295 

Though  no  special  mention  is  made  of  Ashkelon,  Ekron, 
or  Ashdod  in  the  histories  of  Alexander's  march,  they  were 
no  doubt  occupied  by  the  Macedonian  troops.  The  fate  of 
Gaza,  however,  at  that  time  is  fully  recorded.  "  Strongly 
fortified,  and  occupying  an  important  position,  its  very 
name,  '  the  strong,'  testified  to  its  natural  strength.  Despite, 
therefore,  of  the  terror  caused  by  the  overthrow  of  Tyre, 
Gaza  ventured  to  resist  Alexander,  and  was  not  reduced  to 
submission  for  five  months.  Its  king  perished,  and  the 
city  lost  the  semi-independence  which  it  seems  to  have  had 
under  the  Persian  Empire.  For  the  Persians,  like  their 
predecessors,  the  Assyrians  and  the  Babylonians,  were  wont 
to  permit  many  of  the  cities  and  districts  which  formed  a 
portion  of  their  empire  to  retain  a  state  of  semi-independence. 
Hence  frequent  mention  is  made  of  kings  subject  to  the 
Persian  '  King  of  kings.'  " 

The  one  who  actually  bore  the  name  of  King  of  Gaza 
at  the  time  of  the  siege  of  the  city  by  Alexander  was  Betis, 
or  Batis,  who,  though  a  Persian  satrap  and  commander  of  the 
city,  had  assumed  a  relatively  independent  position.  His  end 
was  tragic.  After  the  fall  of  Gaza,  when  ten  thousand  of 
the  inhabitants  were  slain  and  the  rest  sold  into  slavery, 
Batis  was  bound  to  a  chariot  with  thongs  thrust  through 
the  soles  of  his  feet,  and  dragged  through  the  city. 

We  cannot  with  certainty  define  what  is  meant  by  "  a 
bastard  shall  dwell  in  Ashdod."  The  word  "'too,  mamzer, 
is  only  found  in  one  other  place  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures 
(Deut.  xxiii.  3),  and  its  etymology  is  somewhat  obscure. 
Among  the  Jews  the  term  is  used  of  one  born  out  of  lawful 
wedlock,  but  some  think  that  it  properly  describes  only  one 
who  is  mixed,  or  of  ignoble  birth,  and  not  necessarily  one 
illegitimately  born.  The  ancient  versions  (the  LXX,  Syriac, 
Targum,  Vulgate)  render  the  word  in  our  passage  by  "  a 
foreigner."  In  any  case,  as  Keil  observes,  it  describes  one 
whose  birth  has  some  blemish  connected  with  it,  so  that  he 
is  "  not  an  equal  by  birth  with  the  citizens  of  a  city  or  the 
inhabitants  of  a  land."  Hengstenberg  has  rendered  it  freely 
by  "  Gesindel "  (a  rabble). 


296     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  second  line  in  the  6th  verse  may  be  taken  as 
explanatory  of  the  first.  By  the  dwelling  of  the  mamzer 
in  Ashdod  "  the  pride  of  the  Philistines  shall  be  cut  off" 

"  It  would  appear  that  the  Philistines  were  wont  to  pride 
themselves  upon  their  nationality,  their  prowess,  and  their 
independence.  Their  pride  would  be  humbled  by  Gaza's 
being  deprived  of  any  ruler  bearing  the  name  of  king,  by 
the  city  of  Ashkelon  being  removed  from  its  ancient  place 
(i.e.,  ceasing  to  exist),  and  by  Ashdod  being  inhabited  by  a 
mixed  and  bastard  population."  * 

In  the  7th  verse  there  is  a  ray  of  promised  mercy 
shining  out  of  the  thick  cloud  of  judgment  which  was  to 
alight  upon  Philistia,  for  the  end  of  the  judgment  is  the 
deliverance  of  the  people  from  their  idolatrous  abominations, 
and  the  incorporation  of  the  remnant  which  shall  remain, 
among  God's  people. 

"And  I  will  take  away  his  blood  and  his  abominations 
from  between  his  teeth,  and  he  also  shall  be  a  remnant  (or 
'  shall  remain  ')  for  our  God :  and  he  shall  be  as  a  chieftain 
(or,  '  as  a  small  tribe,  or  family ')  in  Judah,  and  Ekron  shall 
be  as  a  Jebusite"  It  is  the  Philistine  nation  or  people 
personified  as  one  man  who  are  here  spoken  of  in  the 
singular.  The  blood  (or,  literally,  "  bloods,"  for  the  word  is 
in  the  plural)  which  God  will  "  take,"  or  "  cause  to  pass 
away  "  from  his  mouth,  is  the  blood  of  his  idolatrous  sacrifices, 
which  in  the  next  sentence  are  called  shiqqutsim — "  abomina 
tions  " — and  thus  deprived  of,  or  delivered  from,  their 
polluting  idolatry,  the  remnant  that  remains  shall  belong  to 
"  our  God  " — the  living  God  of  Israel — who  stands  out  so 
glorious  in  His  holiness  when  contrasted  with  the  "  abomina 
tions  "  of  the  heathen,  "  and  He  shall  be  as  a  chieftain  in 
Judah." 2 

1  Wright. 

2  The  word  ^N  (alliiph)  is  used   in  the  earlier  books  of  the  Bible  of  the 
"dukes,"  or  tribal  chiefs  or  princes  of  Edom  and  of  the  Horites  (Gen.  xxxvi.; 
Ex.  xv.  15)  ;  but  is  applied  by  Zechariah  in  chap.  xii.  of  the  princes  or  chieftains 
of  Judah.      It  is  connected  with  ^N  (elleph),  "a  thousand,"  and  stands  perhaps 
literally  for  chief,  or  "  head  of  a  thousand.''     Some  critics  would  substitute  eleph 
for  alluph  in  our  passage,  and  render  it  "he  shall  be  as  a  thousand,"  i.e.,  a  small 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  297 

"  And  Ekron  shall  be  as  the  Jebusite"  which  latter,  to 
quote  the  word  of  another  commentator,  "  stands  here  for 
the  former  inhabitants  of  the  citadel  of  Zion,"  who  adopted 
the  religion  of  Israel  after  the  conquest  of  this  citadel  of 
David,  and  were  incorporated  into  the  nation  of  the  Lord. 
"  This  is  evident  from  the  example  of  the  Jebusite  Araunah, 
who  lived  in  the  midst  of  the  covenant  nation  (2  Sam.  xxiv. 
and  i  Chron.  xxi.)  as  a  distinguished  man  of  property,  and 
not  only  sold  his  threshing-floor  to  King  David  as  a  site  for 
the  future  Temple,  but  also  offered  to  present  the  oxen  with 
which  he  had  been  ploughing,  as  well  as  the  plough  itself, 
for  a  burnt-offering." 

Here  we  are  reminded  once  again  that  though  the  more 
immediate  reference  of  the  prophecy  in  this  chapter  was  to 
Alexander's  march  and  conquests,  it  looked  on  and  merges 
into  a  more  distant  future.  Koehler  rightly  points  out  that 
this  7th  verse  was  not  fulfilled  by  the  deeds  of  Alexander, 
"  since  neither  the  remnant  of  the  Phoenicians  nor  the  other 
heathen  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  Israel  were  converted  to 
Jehovah  through  the  calamities  connected  with  his  expedi 
tion."  On  this  ground  this  German  scholar  regards  the 
conquests  of  Alexander  as  the  commencement  of  the  fulfil 
ment,  which  was  then  continued  through  the  calamities 
caused  by  the  wars  of  succession — the  conflicts  between  the 
Egyptians,  Syrians,  and  Romans — until  it  was  completed 
by  the  fact  that  the  heathen  tribes  within  the  boundaries  of 
Israel  gradually  disappeared  as  separate  tribes,  and  their 
remnants  were  received  into  the  community  of  those  who 
confessed  Israel's  God.  But,  as  Keil  observes,  "  we  must 

tribe  or  "clan"  injudah.  Calvin,  however,  gives  quite  a  different  interpretation 
to  this  somewhat  difficult  passage.  He  paraphrases  the  7th  verse  thus  :  "I  will 
rescue  the  Jew  from  the  teeth  of  the  Philistine"  (the  figure,  according  to  him, 
being  taken  from  wild  beasts  rending  their  prey  with  the  teeth),  "who  would 
have  devoured  him  as  he  would  devour  blood  or  flesh  of  his  abominable  sacrifices 
to  idols  ;  and  even  /te,  the  seemingly  ignoble  remnant  of  the  Jews,  shall  be 
sacred  to  our  God ;  and  though  so  long  in  a  servile  position,  and  bereft  of 
dignity,  I  will  make  them  all  to  be  as  governors,  or  princes,  ruling  others  ;  and 
Ekron  shall  be  as  a  tributary  bondservant,  as  the  Jebusite."  Then  the  antithesis 
would  be  between  the  Jew  that  remaineth  and  the  Ekronite.  But  the  interpreta 
tion  I  have  given  above  is  doubtless  the  correct  one. 


298     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

go  a  step  further,  and  say  that  the  fulfilment  has  not  yet 
reached  its  end,  and  will  not,  until  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
shall  attain  that  complete  victory  over  the  heathen  world  " 
which  is  foretold  in  the  following  verses  of  this  chapter. 
Then,  as  has  already  been  stated,  when  God's  judgments 
are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  shall  learn 
righteousness,  and  after  Israel  as  a  nation  is  converted,  all 
the  tribes  and  families  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed  with  and 
through  them. 

But  while  Israel's  enemies  in  the  north  and  south  have 
occasion  to  tremble  at  the  approach  of  the  hostile  army, 
God  Himself  would  be  the  shield  and  protector  of  His 
people  and  His  special  dwelling-place  in  their  midst. 
"And  I  will  camp  about  My  house,  WE?  iT:ro — vechanithi 
lebhethi  (or  '  for  ' — i.e.,  on  account,  or  for  the  protection  of  My 
house)  because  of  the  army "  (which  is  most  probably  the 
correct  reading,  though  some,  by  a  slight  alteration  of  the 
first  vowel,  would  read  nzisro  {matsabhak\  instead  of  nayo 
(mitsabhaK),  and  translate :  "  I  will  encamp  about,  or  for, 
My  house,  as  a  garrison,  or  guard  "), "  because  (or  '  on  account ') 
of  him  who  passeth  through  or  returneth  ;  x  and  no  oppressor 
shall  pass  through  them  any  more,  for  now  have  I  seen 
with  Mine  eyes" 

"  My  house  "  stands  not  for  the  congregation  of  Israel, 
as  some  suppose,  but  for  the  Temple ;  but  the  protection  of 
the  house  carries  with  it  also  the  protection  of  the  people, 
which  it  is  supposed  will  henceforth  be  under  God's  favour, 
so  that  in  the  next,  or  parallel  line,  the  plural  is  used  in  the 
expression,  "  no  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any  more." 

The  word  tMis  (noges),  translated  "  oppressor,"  primarily 
means  "  taskmaster " — one  who  compels  slaves  to  perform 
their  appointed  tasks  (Ex.  iii.  7,  v.  6— 10).  It  is  used 

1  The  phrase  3?p?  laiyo  (me'obher  umishabh),  "because  of  him  that  passeth 
by  and  because  of  him  that  returneth  "  ;  or,  "  because  of  him  that  passeth  to  and 
fro,"  occurs  altogether  only  four  times  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  and  as  it  is  found 
in  Zech.  vii.  14  and  here  in  chap.  ix.  8,  it  has  rightly  been  taken  (as  the  expres 
sion  is  so  unusual)  as  an  indication  of  the  common  authorship  of  the  first  and 
second  halves  of  this  book,  as  is  pointed  out  in  the  Introduction  to  the  second 
part  of  this  book. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  299 

also  of  cattle-drivers  and  tax-gatherers.  Once  only,  and  in 
this  very  prophecy  (chap.  x.  4),  it  is  used  in  a  good  sense, 
as  describing  one  who  has  absolute  rule ;  but  here  it 
stands  for  the  foreign  tyrants,  the  heads  of  the  great 
Gentile  kingdoms  who  oppressed  Israel. 

In  the  last  sentence  in  the  8th  verse,  "  For  now  have 
I  seen  with  Mine  eyes,"  we  have  an  echo  and  reminiscence 
of  Ex.  iii.  7 :  "  /  Jtave  surely  seen  (or  '  seeing  I  have 
seen  ')  the  affliction  of  My  people  which  are  in  Egypt,  and  have 
heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  their  taskmasters  ;  for  I  know 
their  sorrows " ;  where  also  the  word  "  for  I  have  seen  " 
stands  in  connection  with  Israel's  affliction  at  the  hands  of 
their  "  taskmasters,"  which  is  the  same  word  in  plural  form 
as  rendered  "  oppressor"  in  Zech.  ix.  8.  Yes,  the  God  who 
delivered  Israel  from  under  the  oppression  of  Egypt,  and 
with  Whom  only  to  "  see  "  the  afflictions  of  His  people  is 
to  be  moved  with  compassion  for  their  sorrows,  will  yet 
again  look  "  with  His  own  eyes,"  and  interpose,  and  deliver 
them  from  the  power  of  their  oppressors  ;  which  promise, 
whatever  the  more  immediate  reference,  will  not  be 
exhaustively  fulfilled  until  the  final  national  deliverance  of 
Israel,  of  which  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  is  regarded  in 
the  prophetic  Scriptures  as  a  type,  and  until  the  final  over 
throw  of  the  enemies  of  God  and  of  His  people,  of  which 
the  overthrow  of  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  Red  Sea  was 
a  foreshadowing. 

With  regard  to  the  special  fulfilment  of  the  prediction 
in  the  8th  verse  in  the  more  immediate  future  from  the 
prophet's  point  of  view,  let  me  remind  my  readers  of  the 
account  given  by  Josephus  of  the  remarkable  episode  in 
Alexander's  march  through  Palestine,  which  agrees  also 
with  traditions  preserved  in  the  Talmud  and  Midrashic  litera 
ture.  At  the  commencement  of  his  campaign  against 
Phoenicia,  Alexander  the  Great  sent  messengers  to  the 
Jewish  high  priest  in  Jerusalem  demanding  aid  from  the 
Jews  and  the  payment  of  the  tribute  which  they  used 
to  pay  to  the  King  of  Persia.  The  high  priest,  how 
ever,  refused  to  break  the  oath  of  fidelity  which  he  had 


300     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

sworn  to  Darius,  and  Alexander  in  consequence  threatened 
to  inflict  a  severe  chastisement  on  Jerusalem  as  soon 
as  he  had  captured  Tyre,  and  reduced  the  Philistine 
strongholds. 

"  Now  Alexander,  when  he  had  taken  Gaza,  made 
haste  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  Jaddua  the  high  priest, 
when  he  heard  that,  was  in  an  agony,  and  under  terror, 
as  not  knowing  how  he  should  meet  the  Macedonians,  since 
the  king  was  displeased  at  his  foregoing  disobedience. 

"  He  therefore  ordained  that  the  people  should  make 
supplications,  and  should  join  with  him  in  making  sacri 
fices  to  God,  whom  he  besought  to  protect  that  nation,  and 
to  deliver  them  from  the  perils  that  were  coming  upon 
them  ;  whereupon  God  warned  him  in  a  dream,  which  came 
upon  him  after  he  had  offered  sacrifice,  that  he  should  take 
courage,  and  adorn  the  city,  and  open  the  gates ;  that  the 
rest  should  appear  in  white  garments,  but  that  he  and  the 
priests  should  meet  the  king  in  the  habits  proper  to  their 
order,  without  the  dread  of  any  ill  consequences,  which  the 
providence  of  God  would  prevent.  Upon  which,  when  he 
rose  from  his  sleep,  he  greatly  rejoiced ;  and  declared  to 
all  the  warning  he  had  received  from  God.  According  to 
which  dream  he  acted  entirely,  and  so  waited  for  the  coming 
of  the  king. 

"  And  when  he  understood  that  he  was  not  far  from 
the  city,  he  went  out  in  procession  with  the  priests  and  the 
multitude  of  the  citizens.  The  procession  was  venerable, 
and  the  manner  of  it  different  from  that  of  other  nations. 
It  reached  to  a  place  called  Sapha,  which  name,  translated 
into  Greek,  signifies  a  prospect ;  for  you  have  thence  a 
prospect  both  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  Temple.  And  when 
the  Phoenicians  and  the  Chaldeans  that  followed  him 
thought  they  should  have  liberty  to  plunder  the  city  and 
torment  the  high  priest  to  death — which  the  king's  dis 
pleasure  fairly  promised  them — the  very  reverse  of  it 
happened  ;  for  Alexander,  when  he  saw  the  multitude  at  a 
distance  in  white  garments,  while  the  priests  stood  clothed 
in  fine  linen,  $nd  the  high  priest  in  purple  and  scarlet 
\ 

\ 
\ 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  301 


clothing — with  his  mitre  on  his  head — having  the  golden 
plate  whereon  the  name  of  God  was  engraved,  he  approached 
by  himself,  and  adored  that  name,  and  first  saluted  the 
high  priest  The  Jews  also  did  altogether,  with  one  voice, 
salute  Alexander  and  encompass  him  about ;  whereupon  the 
kings  of  Syria  and  the  rest  were  surprised  at  what  Alex- 
5r  ander  had  done,  and  supposed  him  disordered  in  his  mind. 
However,  Parmenio  alone  went  up  to  him  and  asked  him 
how  it  came  to  pass  that,  when  all  others  adored  him,  he 
should  adore  the  high  priest  of  the  Jews  ?  To  whom  he 
replied,  '  I  did  not  adore  him,  but  that  God  who  hath 
honoured  him  with  his  high  priesthood  ;  for  I  saw  this  very 
person  in  a  dream,  in  this  very  habit,  when  I  was  at  Dios 
in  Macedonia,  who,  when  I  was  considering  with  myself 
how  I  might  obtain  the  dominion  of  Asia,  exhorted  me  to 
make  no  delay,  but  boldly  to  pass  over  the  sea  thither,  for 
that  he  would  conduct  my  army,  and  would  give  me  the 
dominion  over  the  Persians ;  whence  it  is,  that  having 
seen  no  other  in  that  habit,  and  now  seeing  this  person 
in  it,  and  remembering  that  vision,  and  the  exhortation 
which  I  had  in  my  dream,  I  believe  that  I  bring  this 
army  under  Divine  conduct,  and  shall  therewith  conquer 
Darius  and  destroy  the  power  of  the  Persians,  and  that 
all  things  will  succeed  according  to  what  is  in  my  own 
mind. 

"  And  when  he  had  said  this  to  Parmenio,  and  had 
given  the  high  priest  his  right  hand,  the  priests  ran  along 
by  him  and  he  came  into  the  city ;  and  when  he  went  up 
to  the  Temple,  he  offered  sacrifice  to  God  according  to  the 
high  priest's  direction,  and  magnificently  treated  both  the 
high  priest  and  the  priests.  And  when  the  Book  of 
Daniel  was  showed  him  wherein  Daniel  declared  that  one 
of  the  Greeks  should  destroy  the  empire  of  the  Persians,  he 
supposed  that  himself  was  the  person  intended ;  and  as 
he  was  then  glad,  he  dismissed  the  multitude  for  the 
present,  but  the  next  day  he  called  them  to  him  and  bade 
them  ask  what  favours  they  pleased  of  him  ;  whereupon 
the  high  priest  desired  that  they  might  enjoy  the  laws 


302     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

of   their    forefathers,   and    might    pay    no    tribute    on    the 
seventh  year." l 


IsraePs  Prince  of  Peace  and  His  Mission  in  the  World 

From  the  victorious  progress  of  the  great  Gentile  world- 
conqueror,  with  his  great  army,  which  God  uses  as  His  rod 
to  chastise  the  peoples  and  cities  enumerated  in  the  first 
verses  of  this  chapter;  and  from  the  deliverance  of  the 
people  and  land  of  Israel  by  Jehovah,  who  would  camp 
round  about  His  house  with  an  invisible  host,  "  because  of 
him  who  passeth  by,  and  because  of  him  that  returneth  " 
(the  primary  reference  of  which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  to  a 
more  immediate  future) — the  prophet  passes  to  the  true 
King  of  Israel,  whose  strength  rests  not  in  chariots  and 
horses,  or  in  the  multitude  of  an  host ;  and  to  the  great 
deliverance  and  salvation  which  He  shall  bring,  not  only  to 
Israel,  but  to  "  the  nations." 

And  it  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the  character  of  Old 
Testament  prophecy  that  there  is  no  perspective  observed, 
nor  clear  indications  given  of  the  pauses  and  intervals 
between  the  different  stages  and  acts  by  which  Messiah's 
work  would  be  accomplished,  and  His  Kingdom  finally 
established.  Like  the  traveller  who  from  a  great  distance 
beholds  a  whole  mountain  range  as  one  mountain,  without 
discerning  the  different  peaks,  with  the  long  valleys 
between,  so  do  the  Old  Testament  seers  often  behold 

1  Josephus'  Antiquities  of  the  Jews,  xi.  8.  3.  "  Rationalism,  while  it  remains 
such,"  observes  Pusey,  "cannot  admit  of  Daniel's  prophecies  which  the  high 
priest  showed  him,  declaring  that  a  Greek  should  destroy  the  Persian  empire, 
which  Alexander  rightly  interpreted  of  himself.  But  the  facts  remain  that  the 
conqueror,  who  above  most  gave  way  to  his  anger,  bestowed  privileges  almost 
incredible  on  a  nation,  which  under  the  Medes  and  Persians  had  been  '  the 
most  despised  part  of  the  enslaved '  (Tacitus),  made  them  equal  in  privileges  to 
his  own  Macedonians,  who  could  hardly  brook  the  absorption  of  the  Persians, 
although  in  inferior  condition,  among  themselves.  The  most  despised  of  the 
enslaved  became  the  most  trusted  of  the  trusted.  They  became  a  large  portion 
of  the  second  and  third  then  known  cities  in  the  world — they  became  Alex 
andrians,  Antiochenes,  Ephesians,  without  ceasing  to  be  Jews.  The  law  com 
manded  faithfulness  to  oaths,  and  they  who  despised  their  religion  respected  its 
fruits." 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  303 

Messiah's  Person  and  Mission  without  clearly  discerning 
from  their  distant  point  of  view  the  interval  between  the 
sufferings  and  the  glory  that  should  follow.  And  not  only 
are  their  eyes  always  fixed  on  the  distant  and  ultimate 
future,  and  the  final  great  national  and  spiritual  deliverance 
of  Israel  at  the  time  of  the  end,  but  the  distant  future  was 
always  connected  by  them  with  the  more  immediate  or 
proximate  future.  Every  promised  deliverance  they  re 
garded  as  a  pledge  of  the  final  great  deliverance,  and  in 
every  redemption  which  God  wrought  for  His  people  they 
saw  already  the  last  great  redemption  which  was  to  be 
brought  to  the  world  by  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  This 
we  must  bear  in  mind  as  we  proceed  to  examine  the 
prophecy  which  is  now  before  us. 

We  shall  not  stop  to  argue  with  those  who  would  give 
a  non-Messianic,  non-Christian  interpretation  to  this  great 
prophecy.  Fortunately,  such  are  in  the  minority,  even 
among  the  critics. 

The  attempts  of  one  and  another  rationalistic  writer  to 
apply  this  passage  to  Zerubbabel,  or  Nehemiah,  or  Judas 
Maccabeus,  or  to  the  entrance  of  Uzziah  into  Jerusalem 
after  his  victories  over  the  Philistines,  or  to  the  entry  of 
Hezekiah  into  Jerusalem  on  the  day  of  his  coronation  (of 
which  there  is  no  historic  record,  and  which,  as  well  as  its 
application  to  Uzziah,  is  bound  up  with  the  theory  of  a 
pre-exilic  origin  of  the  second  part  of  Zechariah),  have  been 
sufficiently  refuted  by  scholars  of  the  same  school. 

"  When  we  brush  aside  all  the  trafficking  and  bargain 
ing  over  words  that  constitutes  so  much  of  modern 
criticism,  which  in  its  care  over  the  letter  so  often  loses  the 
spirit,  there  can,  at  least,  be  no  question  that  this  prophecy 
was  intended  to  introduce,  in  contrast  to  earthly  warfare 
and  kingly  triumph,  another  Kingdom,  of  which  the  just 
King  would  be  the  Prince  of  Peace,  who  was  meek  and 
lowly  in  His  Advent,  who  would  speak  peace  to  the 
heathen,  and  whose  sway  would  yet  extend  to  earth's 
utmost  bounds.  Thus  much  may  be  said,  that  if  there 
ever  was  a  true  picture  of  the  Messiah-King  and  His 


304     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Kingdom,  it  is  this ;  and  that,  if  ever  Israel  was  to  have 
a  Messiah,  or  the  world  a  Saviour,  He  must  be  such  as  is 
described  in  this  prophecy — not  merely  in  the  letter,  but 
in  the  spirit  of  it.  And,  as  so  often  indicated,  it  was  not 
the  letter  but  the  spirit  of  prophecy — and  of  all  prophecy — 
which  the  ancient  synagogue,  and  that  rightly,  saw  fulfilled 
in  the  Messiah  and  His  Kingdom.  Accordingly,  with 
singular  unanimity,  the  Talmud  and  the  ancient  Rabbinic 
authorities  have  applied  this  prophecy  to  the  Christ."  : 

But  let  us  approach  the  Scripture  itself.  In  view  of 
the  magnitude  and  the  joyful  character  of  the  announce 
ment  about  to  be  made,  the  prophet  exclaims,  "  Rejoice 
greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion ;  shout,  O  daughter  of 
Jerusalem"  which  reminds  us  of  the  similar  summons  in 
the  first  part  of  this  book  :  "  Sing  and  rejoice,  O  daughter 
of  Zion  :  for,  lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
thee,  saith  Jehovah"  2  which  again  is  an  inspired  post-exilic 
echo  of  the  joyous  proclamation  with  which  the  Book  of 

1  Edersheim.  Many  pages  could  be  filled  with  quotations  from  the  Talmud, 
the  Midrashim,  and  Jewish  commentators,  in  which  this  passage  is  applied  to 
the  Messiah.  In  the  Talmud  Bab.,  fol.  98,  we  read  Rabbi  Joshua  ben  Levi 
asks  :  "  It  is  written  in  one  place,  '  Behold,  one  like  the  Son  of  Man  came  with 
the  clouds  of  heaven,'  but  in  another  place  it  is  written,  '  lowly,  and  riding  upon 
an  ass.'  How  is  this  to  be  understood  ?  The  answer  is,  If  they  be  righteous  (or 
deserving)  He  shall  come  with  the  clouds  of  heaven  ;  if  they  be  not  righteous, 
then  He  shall  come  lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass." 

With  the  exception  of  Rabbi  Moshe  ha-Kohen  (quoted  by  Aben-Ezra,  who 
applied  the  prophecy  to  Nehemiah)  and  Aben-Ezra  (who  applies  it  to  "Judas, 
the  son  of  the  Hasmonean ")  all  the  Jewish  commentators  apply  it  to  the 
Messiah.  Rashi  says,  "This  cannot  be  explained  except  of  King-Messiah,  for 
it  is  said  of  Him,  'And  His  dominion  shall  be  from  sea  to  sea' ;  but  we  do  not 
find  that  such  a  one  ruled  over  Israel  in  the  time  of  the  Second  Temple." 

Saadiah  Gaon,  commenting  on  the  words  in  Dan.  vii.,  "  Behold,  one  like  the 
Son  of  Man  came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  says,  "This  is  the  Messiah  our 
righteousness.  But  is  it  not  written  of  the  Messiah,  '  Lowly,  and  riding  upon  an 
ass '  ?  Yes,  but  this  shows  that  He  will  come  in  humility,  and  not  in  pride  upon 
horses." 

Non-Jewish  readers  interested  in  Rabbinic  interpretations  must  be  referred  to 
Schottgen,  vol.  ii.  p.  20  ff.  ;  Pusey,  The  Minor  Prophets  (who  has  a  fairly  full 
collection  of  passages  with  references) ;  Wiinsche,  Die  Leiden  des  Messias,  pp. 
66,  103,  etc.  ;  Hengstenberg,  in  his  Christology  ;  Alexander  McCaul,  in  his 
Observations  on  the  gth  chapter  of  his  (Kimchi's)  Commentary,  etc. 

-  Chap.  ii.  10. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  305 

Immanuel l  closes:  "Cry  aloud  and  shout,  thou  inhabitress 
of  Zion  :  for  great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst 
of  thee"  But  when  the  infinite  Jehovah,  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel,  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  or  can  see,  manifests  Him 
self,  and  comes  visibly  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  His  people, 
it  is  always  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  "  Lo,  I 
come,  and  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,"  is  explained 
therefore  by  the  equivalent  announcement,  "  Behold,  thy 
King  (Messiah)  cometh  unto  thee." 

The  coming  of  the  King,  which  is  announced  in  our 
passage  in  Zech.  ix.  is,  however,  a  different  one  from  the 
coming  foretold  in  the  passages  quoted  from  Isa.  xii.  and 
Zech.  ii.  For  although,  as  already  stated,  there  is  no  per 
spective  observed  in  Old  Testament  prophecy,  and  the  two 
advents  of  the  Messiah  are  often  seen  and  spoken  of  by 
the  prophets  as  one,  we  know  now,  in  the  fuller  light  of  the 
partial  fulfilment,  that  there  is  a  coming  of  the  Redeemer 
first  in  humiliation  to  suffer  and  die,  before  He  shall  come 
again  a  second  time  in  divine  majesty  to  reign  over  this 
earth,  and  to  fulfil  in  a  literal  sense  the  hope  and  promise 
contained  in  the  name  "  Immanuel,"  by  Himself,  the  God- 
Man,  visibly  dwelling  "  in  the  midst  of  them,"  so  that 
Israel  will  at  that  time  be  able  to  say  to  the  nations, 
"  God  is  with  us," 2  not  only  in  the  spiritual  sense,  in  which 
His  presence  is  a  reality  to  us  now,  but  in  the  literal  sense 
of  having  their  Divine  Messiah-King  dwelling  and  reigning 
among  them. 

It  is  to  the  first  advent  of  Messiah,  then,  that  attention 
is  especially  called  by  the  word  "  Behold,"  in  the  pth  verse 
of  the  chapter  we  are  now  considering,  although,  as  we 
shall  see,  this  very  prophecy  looks  on  also  to  the  second 
advent,  and  beyond  the  sufferings  of  Messiah,  to  the  glory 
that  should  follow. 

I  have  already,  in  the  exposition  of  chap.  vi.  12, 
pointed  out  how  the  Messiah  is  introduced  to  us  four 
different  times  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  under  four 

1  Isa.  vii.-xii.  has  been  appropriately  so  styled. 
-  Hebrew,  "  Immanu-El,"  Isa.  viii.  10,  the  same  as  Isa.  vii.  14. 
20 


3o6     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

different  aspects,  by  this  word  "  Behold,"  which  correspond 
also  to  the  fourfold  portraiture  of  Christ  in  the  four  Gospels. 
Here  it  is  especially  as  Zion's  King  that  we  are  called 
upon  to  contemplate  Him  :  "  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto 
thee"  He  does  not  say  "  a  King,"  but  "  thy  King ;  thine 
own,  the  long-promised,  the  long-expected ;  He  who,  when 
they  had  kings  of  their  own  given  them  by  God,  had  been 
promised  as  the  King  ; l  the  Righteous  Ruler  among  men, 
of  the  seed  of  David  ;  He  who,  above  all  other  kings,  was 
their  King  and  Saviour,  whose  Kingdom  was  to  absorb  in 
itself  all  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  the  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords."2 

"Cometh  unto  thee" — that  is,  to  Zion,  or  Israel.  He 
was  in  a  manner,  then,  "  of  her,"  and  not  of  her,  as  another 
writer  observes.  "  Of  her,  since  He  was  to  be  her  King ; 
not  of  her,  since  He  was  to  come  to  her.  As  man  He  was 
born  of  her  ;  as  God,  the  Word  made  flesh,  He  came  to 
her." 

But  the  word,  ^,  lakh,  rendered  "  unto  thee,"  means  also 
"for  thy  good"  as  Keil  points  out,  as  is  implied  also  from 
the  whole  context,  "  He  cometh  unto  thee"  that  is,  as  thy 
Deliverer,  or,  as  an  ancient  cabalistic  Jewish  writing  para 
phrases  it,  "  He  shall  come  to  thee  to  upraise  thee ;  He 
shall  come  to  thee  to  raise  thee  up  to  His  temple,  and  to 
espouse  thee  with  an  everlasting  espousal."3 

Zion's  coming  Saviour-King  is  described  first  as 
(tsaddik\  "  righteous "  (rendered  in  the  English  version 
"  just "),  which  means,  not  "  one  who  has  a  right  cause,"  as 
one  or  two  commentators  have  explained,  nor  merely  "  one 
righteous  in  character,  answering  in  all  respects  to  the 
will  of  Jehovah,"  as  Koehler  expresses  it,  but  one  animated 
with  righteousness,  and  maintaining  and  displaying  in 
His  righteous  rule  this  fundamental  attribute  of  the  ideal 
king. 

Secondly,  He  is  JWfo  (noska'\  which  the  English  Bible 
renders  "  having  salvation,"  in  which  it  is  supported  by  the 

1  e.^.,  Ps.  ii.,  Ixxii.  ;  Isa.  xxxii.  i  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5,  6  ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  3. 
a  1'usey.  s  Zohar. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  307 

authority  of  the  ancient  versions  (e.g.,  the  LXX,  the 
Targum,  the  Syriac,  and  Vulgate),  who  all  render  the  word 
"  Saviour." 

A  Jewish  controversialist,  who  has  written,  perhaps, 
the  best-known  polemical  work  against  Christianity,  accuses 
the  Christians  of  corrupting  the  text  here,  saying : 

"  The  Nazarenes  have  altered  the  word  JJEfa,  nosha? 
(saved\  and  written  instead  of  it  V^B,  moshia'  (Saviour), 
in  order  to  add  some  auxiliary  confirmation  to  their  faith."  l 
But  in  the  first  place  the  accusation  as  it  stands  is  false. 
The  Christians  have  never  altered  this  word.  In  every 
Christian  edition  of  the  Hebrew  Bible  it  stands  just  as  it 
does  in  those  edited  by  Jews.  But,  in  "  the  next  place, 
allowing  him  to  mean  what  he  does  not  say,  that  some 
Christians,  as  the  Vulgate,  have  translated  the  word 
'  Saviour,'  and  not  '  saved,'  as  he  would  have  it,  they  did 
not  do  this  with  a  fraudulent  intention  to  confirm  their  faith, 
but  were  led  by  Jews  to  think  that  this  was  the  right  sense 
of  the  word.  The  Jews,  who  translated  Zechariah  into 
Greek  before  the  rise  of  Christianity,  translated  Wft  (nosha'} 
by  (Tca&v,  '  saving,'  or  '  Saviour,'  and  Christians  simply 
followed  them.  The  mistake,  therefore,  is  not  to  be 
attributed  to  the  Christians,  but  to  the  Jews  themselves. 
But  if  Jews  say  that  the  Greek  text  has  been  altered,  then 
we  refer  them  to  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  who  translates 
the  word  by  p'HEj  (Phariq),  '  Redeemer,'  or  '  Saviour ' ;  and 
surely  Jonathan  had  no  fraudulent  desire  to  favour  Christi 
anity.  His  translation  shows  that  the  meaning  of  the 
word  originated,  and  was  common,  amongst  the  Jews 
themselves ;  they,  therefore,  and  not  the  Christians,  are 
answerable  for  it."2 

But  it  is  pretty  generally  agreed  now  that  VEfa  (noska'} 
is  the  Niphal  participle  of  the  verb  V^  (yasha'},  and  is  used 
in  the  passive  sense,  so  that  the  word  must  be  rendered  not 
"saving,"  but  "saved";  though  it  may  be  used  here,  as 

1  Rabbi  Isaak  ben  Abraham,  of  Troki  (born  1533,  died  1594),  in  his  Chizzuk 
Emunah. 

"  Alexander  McCaul. 


3o8     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Hengstenberg  suggests,  in  a  more  general  sense  (as  in 
Deut.  xxxiii.  29  and  Ps.  xxxiii.  16,  where  nosha' — "saved" 
is  found)  as  describing  one  "  who  is  endowed  with  salva 
tion,"  or  "  furnished  with  the  assistance  of  God  "  requisite 
for  the  fulfilment  of  His  mission. 

We  shall  see  presently  the  application  of  the  prophecy 
contained  in  this  word  to  our  Lord,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  but 
to  the  prophet's  contemporaries  the  expression  would 
probably  recall,  as  Dr.  Wright  suggests,  the  language  of 
the  2nd  Psalm,  "  where  the  Messiah  is  represented  as 
saved  and  delivered,  in  spite  of  all  the  combinations  made 
against  Him,  and  destined  to  be  one  day  seated  on  His 
royal  throne." 

But  taken  in  its  passive  sense  as  meaning  "  saved," 
there  is  none  the  less  promise  in  the  word  for  the  people  as 
well  as  for  the  Messiah ;  for,  as  has  been  well  observed,  if 
the  King  of  Israel  is  "  saved,"  His  people  (whose  Head 
and  Representative  He  is)  must  be  saved  likewise.  "  His 
deliverance,  or  salvation,  is  a  sure  sign  of  the  deliverance 
of  His  people,  which  is  to  be  accomplished  by  His  means." 

The  ideal  King  of  Israel  is  further  characterised  as  ^y 
('ani\  which  is  rendered  in  the  English  versions  "  lowly," 
but  which  primarily  means  "poor"  "  afflicted"  This  word, 
as  is  properly  observed  by  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  and  others, 
gathers  up  "  the  whole  of  the  lowly,  miserable,  suffering 
condition "  of  the  righteous  Servant  of  Jehovah,  as  it  is 
elaborately  depicted  in  Isa.  liii. ; l  and  those  who  feel  them 
selves  constrained  to  recognise  in  that  great  prophecy  in 
Isaiah  a  vivid  description  of  the  suffering  and  death  of  the 
Messiah,  cannot  regard  it  as  strange  that  Zechariah,  who 

1  Keil.  The  apparent  paradox  that  the  King  who  is  endowed  with  salvation 
and  comes  to  deliver  should  be  "  afflicted,"  or  "  poor,"  led  the  translators  of  the 
LXX,  the  Targumists,  the  majority  of  Jewish  commentators,  and  many  critics 
in  modern  days,  to  adopt  the  translation  "  lowly,"  or  "meek,"  which  is  also  the 
rendering  given  by  the  evangelists  in  the  Gospels,  who,  however,  simply  quote 
the  word  from  the  Greek  LXX.  'iy  ('am'),  and  ijj?  ('anav),  both  come  from 
njj;  ('ana/i),  to  be  "bowed  down,"  to  be  "humbled";  but  'Jj;  (ani)  seems,  as 
Von  Orelli  points  out,  to  refer  more  to  the  physical  state  (in  the  sense  of  being 
"poor"  "wretched"  "  afflicted'"),  and  ijj;  ('anav)  to  qualities  of  the  spirit  (in 
the  sense  of  being  "  harmless,"  "humble,"  "  meek,"  etc.). 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  309 

was  doubtless  acquainted  with  the  writings  of  Isaiah,  and 
who  in  all  his  Messianic  passages — both  in  the  first  and 
second  parts  of  his  book — tersely  summarises  the  great 
predictions  of  "  the  former  prophets,"  should  be  led  to 
describe  Israel's  Redeemer-King  as  "  afflicted  "  and  suffering. 

And  in  keeping  with  His  character  shall  be  the  manner 
in  which  He  shall  present  Himself  to  His  people.  Not  in 
outward  pomp  or  with  display  of  worldly  power,  shall  He 
appear,  but  "  riding  upon  an  ass,  even  upon  a  colt,  the  foal * 
of  an  ass." 

The  second  sentence  in  this  line  more  precisely  defines 
the  kind  of  ass  which  the  Messiah  shall  ride  upon.  It  shall 
be  a  young  animal  not  yet  ridden  on,  but  still  accustomed 
to  run  behind  the  she-asses,  as  the  last  qualifying  words  of 
the  description  imply. 

The  question  is  discussed  by  commentators  whether 
the  riding  upon  an  ass  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  emblem  of 
Messiah's  "  lowliness,"  in  keeping  with  the  description  of 
Him  as  "  'ani"  "  poor,"  "  afflicted,"  or  as  an  outward  sign  of 
the  peacefulness  of  His  mission.  But  it  seems  to  me  that 
both  ideas  are  merged  in  the  prophecy  of  this  symbolic 
action.  It  is  true  that  in  the  East  the  ass  is  generally  of 
a  nobler  breed,  and  is  not  so  despised  as  in  the  West,  and 
in  the  earliest  times  of  Jewish  history  we  read  of  judges 
and  rulers  riding  on  asses ;  but  that  was  only,  as 
Hengstenberg  has  shown  by  a  full  discussion  of  all  the 
references,  until  horses  were  introduced,  when  it  was  no 
longer  in  accordance  with  the  dignity  of  kings  and  rulers 
of  Israel  to  ride  on  asses.2  "In  fact,  from  the  time  of 
Solomon  downwards,  we  do  not  meet  with  a  single  example 
of  a  king,  or  of  any  distinguished  personage,  riding  upon  an 
ass." 

In  Jeremiah's  time,  for  instance,  it  was  certainly 
regarded  as  becoming  royal  dignity  for  kings  and  princes 
to  be  "  sitting  in  chariots  and  riding  on  horses," 3  so  that 
when  the  Messiah  is  here  represented  as  "  riding  on  an  ass," 

1  Lit.,  "the  son  of  she-asses."  2  Hengstenberg. 

3  Jer.  xvii.  25. 


310     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

it  does  suggest  the  idea  of  lowliness,  in  keeping  with  what 
had  just  been  said  of  Him  as  being  "  poor  "  or  "  afflicted." 
At  the  same  time,  as  there  is  a  contrast  suggested  in  the 
context  between  the  great  Gentile  world-conqueror,  who 
with  his  chariots  and  horses  comes  to  subdue  and  tread 
down,  and  Israel's  Redeemer-King,  who  comes  to  "  speak 
peace,"  and  as  in  the  loth  verse,  the  horse  is  certainly  one 
of  the  emblems  of  war,  His  riding  upon  an  ass  does  also 
symbolise  $&&  peaceable  character  of  His  mission. 

Before  passing  on  to  the  roth  verse,  let  me  very  briefly 
point  out  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophetic  picture  of  the 
Messiah  in  the  Christ  of  history  : 

(a)  The  Messiah  was  to  be,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  Zion's 
King;  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  born  "  King  of  the 
Jews,"  and  the  very  inscription  on  His  cross,  Jesus  Nasa- 
renus,  Rex  Jud&orum,  still  proclaims  this  everlasting,  indis 
soluble  relationship  between  Christ  and  Israel.  It  is  true 
that  the  Jews  as  a  nation  still  say,  "  We  will  not  have  this 
Man  to  reign  over  us,"  and  that  the  "  many  days  during 
which  the  children  of  Israel  abide  without  a  king  and  with 
out  a  prince "  still  continue.  But  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is 
Israel's  King;  and,  as  sure  and  certain  as  there  was  once 
a  cross  raised  for  Him  on  Golgotha,  so  certain  is  it  that 
"  the  Lord  God  "  will  yet  "  give  unto  Him  the  throne  of 
His  Father  David,"  and  that  He  will  "  reign  on  Mount  Zion 
and  before  His  ancients  gloriously." 

(V)  "  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee"  which  reminds 
us  of  the  pathetic  lament  of  the  evangelist,  "  He  came  unto 
His  own,"  i.e.,  His  own  estate,  His  own  possession  (the  word 
being  in  the  neuter),  the  land  and  people  where  above  all 
other  places  in  the  world  He  had  a  right  to  expect  a 
welcome,  and  to  be  greeted  with  the  enthusiastic  joy 
depicted  by  the  prophet ;  but,  alas !  as  the  sequel  proved, 
"  His  own  " — they  that  were  His  by  reason  of  peculiar  and 
manifold  relationship,  and  who  ought  to  have  been  prepared 
for  Him  as  a  bride  for  the  bridegroom — "  received  Him  not? 
(c)  And  Christ  is  the  only  Person  in  all  history  whose 
character  and  experience  answer  to  the  description  of  the 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  311 

ideal  King  in  this  prophecy.  He  alone,  among  the  sons 
of  men,  can  be  described  as  the  true  Tsaddik — the 
Righteous  One,  who  did  no  violence,  nor  was  deceit  found 
in  His  mouth  ;  the  One  who  always  loved  righteousness 
and  hated  iniquity,  whose  purity  and  beauty  of  character  is 
borne  witness  to  even  by  those  who  have  not  learned  to 
bow  their  knees  in  allegiance  before  Him  as  the  Son  of 
God. 

(d}  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  us  men  and  our  salvation 
also  became  "  poor "  and  "  afflicted  " — so  poor  that  He 
Himself  could  say :  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds 
of  the  air  have  nests,  but  the  Son  of  Man  hath  not  where 
to  lay  His  head." 

(e)  And  of  Him  alone  also  is  it  true  that  He  is  endowed 
with,  and  is  the  bringer  of,  salvation,  because  He  was 
Himself  "  saved  "  or  "  delivered,"  or  "  made  victorious  "  (as 
some  would  render)  in  the  great  conflict  which  He  came  to 
wage  on  our  behalf  with  the  powers  of  darkness.  "  He 
trusted  in  Jehovah  that  He  would  deliver  Him,"  l  and  the 
chief  priests  and  scribes  taunted  Him  with  it  on  the  cross, 
saying :  "  Let  Him  deliver  Him  now  if  He  desireth  Him  : 
if  He  is  the  King  of  Israel,  let  Him  now  come  down  from 
the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  on  Him :  He  saved  others, 
Himself  He  cannot  save!' 2  Thus  in  their  blindness  and 
ignorance  uttering  unconsciously  an  eternal  truth,  for  it  was 
because  He  came  to  save  others,  and  His  life,  as  He  Himself 
had  predicted,  had  to  be  laid  down  "  a  ransom  for  many," 
that  He  could  not  save  Himself. 

But  though  He  willingly  drank  the  cup  of  shame  and 
sorrow  which  the  Father  had  given  Him  to  drink,  and  was 
not  delivered  from  the  death  on  the  cross,  "  He  was  delivered 
in  very  deed  from  the  hand  of  the  great  destroyer,  for  God 
raised  Him  from  the  dead,  having  loosed  the  pains  of  death, 
because  it  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of 
it." 3  Thus  He  was  saved  by  the  almighty  power  of  the 
Father,  "  and  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power, 
by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  And  because  He 

1  Ps.  xxii.  8.  a  Matt,  xxvii.  39-43.  '*  Acts  ii.  23,  24. 


3i2     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

became  obedient  unto  death — even  the  death  of  the  cross 

He  was  made  perfect  as   Redeemer  and  Mediator,  and 

is  now  the  Author  of  eternal   salvation   unto  all   them  that 
obey  Him."  : 

We  cannot  enter  here  into  the  significance  of  Christ's 
triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem,  which  believers  in  the  New 
Testament  can  never  dissociate  from  this  prophecy  in 
Zechariah. 

But  I  agree  with  the  view  of  Vitringa,  Hengstenberg, 
and  Koehler,  that  though  this  scripture  then  received  a 
literal  accomplishment,  "  that  triumphal  procession  was  not, 
in  the  main,  the  fact  which  the  prophecy  was  designed  to 
depict.  The  prophecy  would  have  been  as  truly  and  really 
fulfilled  if  the  triumphal  procession  had  never  taken  place. 
That  single  incident  in  the  life  of  our  Lord  is  not  the  point 
which  the  prophet  had  in  view.  It  was  rather  the  whole 
of  the  Saviour's  life,  the  entire  series  of  events  connected 
with  Christ's  first  advent,  which  was  presented  in  one 
striking  picture.  The  actual  entrance  of  Christ  into  Jeru 
salem  in  the  manner  described  in  the  Old  Testament 
prophecy  was  an  express  declaration  that  this  passage  was 
indeed  Messianic  in  the  fullest  sense,  and  was  fulfilled  in 
His  Person  and  work."2 

It  is  in  this  sense  that  Matthew  and  John  3  quote  this 
passage  in  connection  with  that  entry  ;  not,  however,  in  the 
stiffness  and  deadness  of  the  letter.  "  On  the  contrary  (as 
so  often  in  Jewish  writings),  two  prophecies — Isa.  Ixii.  1 1 
and  Zech.  ix.  9 — are  made  to  shed  their  blended  light  upon 
this  entry  of  Christ,  as  exhibiting  the  reality,  of  which  the 
prophetic  vision  had  been  the  reflex.  Nor  yet  are  the 
words  of  the  prophets  given  literally — as  modern  criticism 
would  have  them  weighed  out  in  the  critical  balances- 
cither  from  the  Hebrew  text,  or  from  the  LXX  rendering  ; 
but  their  meaning  is  given,  and  they  are  "  Targumed  "  by 
the  sacred  writers  according  to  their  wont.  Yet  who  that 
sets  the  prophetic  picture  by  the  side  of  the  reality — the 

1  Rom.  i.  3  ;  Phil.  ii.  8  ;  Heh.  v.  9.  2  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 

s  Matt.  xxi.  4,  5  ;  John  xii.  14,  15. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  313 

description  by  the  side  of  Christ's  entry  into  Jerusalem — 
can  fail  to  recognise  in  the  one  the  fulfilment  of  the 
other  ?  " l 

From  the  Messiah's  humiliation,  the  depths  of  which 
are  reached  in  the  words  "  poor,"  or  "  afflicted,"  and  "  riding 
upon  an  ass  "  (ver.  9),  the  prophet's  vision  is  directed  to  the 
glory  that  should  follow,  and  to  the  blessed  results  of  the 
advent  of  this  Redeemer-King,  not  only  in  relation  to  Zion 
and  Israel,  but  to  the  whole  earth : 

"  And  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim?  and  the 
horse  from  Jerusalem,  and  tJie  battle-bow  shall  be  cut  off ; 
and  He  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  nations  :  and  His  dominion 
shall  be  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth" 

As  the  deliverance  which  Israel's  Prince  of  Peace  shall 
bring  will  not  be  by  means  of  chariots  and  horses,  or  by 
the  multitude  of  a  host,  so  also  shall  His  Kingdom  not  be 
founded  on  worldly  might ;  nor  shall  those  subject  to  His 
rule  have  need  to  rely  on  any  of  these  things.  This  is  in 
keeping  with  what  the  Lord  had  already  spoken  through 
one  of  the  earlier  prophets :  "  /  will  have  mercy  upon  the 
house  of  Judah,  and  I  will  save  them  by  (or  '  in ')  Jehovah 
ttieir  God,  and  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword,  nor 
by  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horsemen" 3  In  other  words, 
Jehovah  alone,  in  the  Person  of  the  Messiah,  shall  then  be 
the  hope  and  confidence  of  His  people,  for  "  He  is  their 
Help  and  their  Shield  "  ; 4  or,  as  He  had  already  said  of 
restored  Jerusalem,  through  Zechariah,  in  the  third  vision  : 
"  /,  saith  Jehovah,  ivill  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  about, 
and  I  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her "  6 — that  is,  her 
all-sufficient  outward  protection  and  inward  illumination. 

1  Edersheim. 

2  The  mention  of  Ephraim  alongside  of  Jerusalem  in  this  place  is  considered 
by  some  commentators  as  proof  of  the   pre-exilic  origin  of  the  second  half  of 
Zechariah — "when  the  kingdoms  of  Israel,  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  Judah  on 
the  other,  were  independent  nations."     Von  Orelli  even  sees  in  this  passage  a 
proof  that  Ephraim  "at  the  time,  apparently,  rejoiced  in  considerable  military 
strength."     But,  as  I  have  shown  in  the  "Introduction  to  the  Second  Part  of 
Zechariah,"  the  argument  rests  on  a  misconception,  and  has  no  real  basis  in  fact. 

3  Hos.  i.  7.  4  Ps.  cxv.  9.  5  Chap.  ii.  5. 


314     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

He  will,  therefore,  "cut  off"  the  instruments  of  war  and 
emblems  of  worldly  power,  first  of  all  from  His  own  people 
because  they  shall  have  no  need  of  them,  and  lest  they 
should  still  be  tempted  to  be  like  the  Gentile  world-powers, 
some  of  whom  "  trust  in  chariots  and  some  in  horses."  l 

But  the  mission  of  the  Jewish  Messiah — the  Prince  of 
peace — extends  not  only  to  Israel  and  Palestine :  "  He  shall 
speak  peace  to  the  nations  " — an  expression  which  does  not 
mean  exactly  that  Messiah  would  command  peace  to  the 
nations,  as  Koehler  and  others  interpret ;  or  that  He  "  would 
bring  about  peace  by  compassing  the  disputes  and  quarrels 
of  the  contending  nations,"  as  some  other  writers  understand 
it.  The  phrase  Di?^  ~\y\t  daber  shalom  (•'  to  speak  peace  "), 
is  used  in  some  instances  in  the  sense  of  speaking  that 
which  avowedly  has  peace  for  its  object,  whether  the  profession 
be  sincere  or  not ; 2  or  simply  speaking  in  the  sense  of 
announcing  peace  and  the  removal  of  hostility.  Thus  God  is 
said  to  "  speak  peace  to  His  people  and  to  His  saints."  3 

It  is  in  this  latter  sense,  I  believe,  that  the  words  are 
to  be  understood  here.  Israel's  Redeemer-King  comes  to 
publish  peace  to  the  nations — not  only  peace  from  outward 
strife  and  conflict  with  one  another,  but  that  deeper  inner 
peace,  and  the  removal  of  hostility  between  man  and  God, 
which  has  been  the  cause  of  all  outward  restlessness 
and  strife — though  it  is  implied  also  that  there  is  both 
power  and  authority  in  the  word  which  He  shall  speak  to 
bring  about  the  blessed  end  which  He  has  in  view. 

"And  His  dominion  shall  be  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from 
the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth" — which  is  a  verbal 
quotation  by  our  prophet  from  the  72nd  Psalm,  where 
the  effects  of  the  blessed  reign  of  the  true  Son  of 
David,  Israel's  ideal  "  King,"  is  so  beautifully  depicted,  and 
where  we  read  that  "  He  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea 
to  sea,  and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  They 
that  dwell  in  the  wilderness  shall  bow  before  Him  ;  and  His 
enemies  shall  lick  the  dust.  .  .  .  Yea,  all  kings  shall  fall 
down  before  Him  ;  all  nations  sJtall  serve  Him" 

1  PS.  jcx.  7.  *  Ps.  xxviii.  3,  xxxv.  20.  *  Ps.  Ixxxv.  8. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  315 

The  phrase  QJ  "W  DJO,  miyyam  ad  yam — from  sea  to 
sea — is  idiomatic,  and  equivalent  to  "  from  the  sea  to  the 
other  end  of  the  world  where  the  sea  begins  again."  The 
nahar  ("  river ")  is  the  Euphrates,  and  is  mentioned  as  the 
remotest  eastern  boundary  of  the  promised  land,  according 
to  Gen.  xv.  1 8  ;  Ex.  xxiii.  3 1 . 

In  short,  from  the  Holy  Land,  which  will  then  be 
extended  to  the  limits  originally  promised  to  the  fathers, 
and  which  will  be  the  centre  of  Messiah's  blessed  rule,  His 
dominion  will  extend  even  "  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

Before  finally  taking  leave  of  the  loth  verse,  we  must 
note  once  more  that,  in  keeping  with  the  special  style  and 
characteristic  of  our  prophet  (which  we  had  occasion  to 
observe  again  and  again  in  our  study  of  the  first  half  of 
the  book),  Zechariah  not  only  bases  his  prophecy  of 
Messiah's  Person  and  Mission  on  the  utterances  about 
Israel's  coming  Redeemer  of  the  "  former  prophets,"  but 
gives,  so  to  say,  a  terse  summary  of  God's  previous  revela 
tions  on  this  great  theme.  This  indeed  is  one  reason  why 
this  short  prophetic  book  of  only  fourteen  chapters  is  so 
marvellously  rich  in  its  contents ;  for,  in  addition  to  new 
Divine  communications  granted  to  this  priest-prophet,  we 
have  in  it,  as  it  were,  an  inspired  condensation,  or  summary, 
of  the  great  prophecies  and  promises  contained  in  the 
earlier  prophets. 

We  have  already  noted  the  verbal  quotation  from  the 
72nd  Psalm,  but  there  are  also  earlier  prophetic  utterances 
which  are  interwoven  in  this  inspired  picture  of  Messiah's 
Person  and  Mission  as  presented  by  Zechariah.  The  chief 
of  these  is  Mic.  v. :  "  But  thou,  Bethlehem-Ephratah,  which 
art  little  (or  '  least ')  to  be  among  the  cities  of  Judah,  out 
of  thee  shall  One  come  forth  unto  Me  that  is  to  be  Ruler  in 
Israel ;  whose  goings  forth  are  from  of  old,  from  everlasting. 
.  .  .  And  He  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strengtli  of  Jehovah, 
in  the  majesty  of  the  name  of  Jehovah  His  God :  and  they 
shall  abide,  for  now  shall  He  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  And  this  One  shall  be  our  peace.  .  .  .  And  it  shall 
come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  Jehovah,  that  I  will  cut  off  thy 


316     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

horses  out  of  the  midst  of  thee,  and  I  will  destroy  thy  chariots, 
and  I  will  cut  the  (walled)  cities  of  thy  land,  and  1  will 
throw  down  all  thy  strong  holds'' x 

Here  we  have  a  Child  born  in  time,  in  a  small  obscure 
place  in  Palestine,  and  of  a  race  despised  by  the  other 
nations,  whose  "  goings  forth  "  are  from  eternity,  and  who 
would  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  not  only  be 
the  bringer  of  peace,  but  Himself  "  be  our  peace" 

And  the  same  picture  of  the  true  Son  of  David  and 
ideal  King  of  Israel,  with  the  same  enigmatical  and 
apparently  paradoxical  combination  of  characteristics  of 
humiliation  and  helplessness  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  power 
and  dominion  on  the  other,  which  is  to  spread  over  the 
whole  earth,  not  by  force  of  arms  but  by  means  of  His 
simple  Word,  is  given  also  by  Micah's  contemporary  Isaiah 
the  son  of  Amos,2  and  was  also  doubtless  in  the  mind  of 
Zechariah  as  he  spoke  of  the  King  who  should  appear  in 
lowliness  but  would  yet  speak  peace  to  the  nations,  and 
exercise  a  sway  which  would  extend  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth. 

Secondly,  I  must  once  again  repeat  what  has  been 
stated  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks  on  the  9th  verse, 
that  there  is  no  perspective  observed  in  the  Old  Testament 
prophecy,  and  that  the  prophets  behold  from  their  distant 
point  of  view  the  two  advents  of  Messiah  as  one,  not 
observing  the  different  stages  and  long  pauses  in  the  process 
of  the  fulfilment  of  His  mission  on  earth. 

A  pause  of  nearly  two  thousand  years  has  already 
ensued  between  the  Qth  and  loth  verses  of  this  great 
prophecy — between  the  time  when  Jesus,  "  that  it  might  be 
fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet"  Zechariah, 
presented  Himself  to  the  daughter  of  Zion  as  her  true 
King,  "  meek,  and  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a  colt,  the 
foal  of  an  ass,3  and  the  time  when  He  shall  "  speak  peace  to 
the  nations,"  and  shall  visibly  "  stand  and  feed  (or  '  rule ') 
in  the  strength  of  Jehovah,  in  the  majesty  of  the  name  of 
Jehovah  His  God." 

1  Mic.  v.  2,  4,  10,  II.  -  Isa.  ix.  1-7  (R.V.).  3  Matt.  xxi.  4,  5. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  317 

Indeed,  we  know  by  comparing  scripture  with  scripture 
that  before  the  instruments  of  war  shall  finally  be  "  cut  off," 
and  the  Messiah  is  manifested  as  the  Judge  and  "  Reprover  " 
of  strong  nations,  so  that  they  "  shall  beat  their  swords 
into  ploughshares  and  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks,"  and 
neither  learn  nor  practise  war  any  more,  the  greatest  war 
which  this  afflicted  earth  has  ever  seen  is  to  take  place, 
during  which  time  the  nations  will  "  beat  their  plough 
shares  into  swords,  and  pruning-hooks  into  spears." 

But  this  is  sure  and  certain,  that  however  long  the 
pause  may  last,  God  never  loses  the  thread  of  the  purpose 
which  He  has  formed  for  this  earth ;  and  as  surely  as  the 
prophecies  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  have  been  literally 
fulfilled,  so  surely  will  those  also  be  which  relate  to  His 
glory  and  reign  ;  and  although  Israel  and  the  nations  have 
had  to  wait  long  for  it,  the  angels'  song  at  the  birth  of  our 
Saviour,  "  Peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  toward  men,"  will 
yet  be  realised,  and  Christ  will  not  only  be  owned  by  His 
own  people  as  "  the  King  of  the  Jews,"  but  His  rule  will 
extend  "  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  unto  the 
ends  of  the  earth." 

Meanwhile,  while  He  is  still  rejected  on  earth,  He  is 
exalted  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  heaven  ;  and  to  those 
who  already  recognise  Him  as  King,  and  render  to  Him  the 
glad  allegiance  of  their  hearts,  He  already  "  speaks  peace," 
yea,  a  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding  even  in  the 
midst  of  outward  strife  and  travail — such  as  the  world 
can  never  give  nor  take  away. 

The  last  seven  verses  of  the  pth  chapter  (to  which  the 
whole  of  the  I  oth  chapter  is  linked)  set  forth  in  fuller  detail 
the  results  of  the  advent  and  mission  of  the  Redeemer- 
King,  more  particularly  in  relation  to  Israel  nationally. 
The  prophet  had  spoken  of  Messiah  in  the  loth  verse,  as 
the  One  who  would  also  "  speak  peace  to  the  (Gentile) 
nations,"  whose  dominion  would  extend  even  "  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth " ;  now  he  turns  again  to  Zion  and  Israel. 
"  As  for  thee  (or,  literally,  '  thou  also '),  by  (or  '  because 
of ')  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  "  (or  release, 


3i8     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

or  send  free)  "  thy  prisoners  "  (or  captives :  literally,  "  thy 
bound  ones  ")  "  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water''' 

It  is  the  whole  nation  which  is  thus  addressed,  as  we 
see  from  the  context,  where  the  inclusive  terms  "  Ephraim 
and  Judah  "  and  "  Judah  and  Ephraim  "  l  are  used.  This 
is  clear  also  from  the  words  which  follow,  for  the  covenant 
which  God  made,  whether  with  Abraham  or  with  the  people 
at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai,  included  the  whole  people,  and 
there  was  no  provision  or  promise  in  it  which  applied  to 
one  part,  or  to  some  of  the  tribes  and  not  to  the  others. 

The  primary  reference  of  the  phrase  =iri'n.?  E"!?,  bedam 
berithekh — "  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  " — is  most  probably 
to  Ex.  xxiv.,  when,  at  the  ratification  of  the  Sinaitic  cove 
nant,  we  read  that  Moses  took  the  blood  of  the  slain 
animals  in  basins,  and,  after  sprinkling  half  on  the  altar, 
which  represented  God,  and  half  on  the  people,  he  ex 
claimed,  "  Behold,  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  which  the  Lord 
hath  made  with  you  concerning  all  these  words."  2 

To  that  covenant  Israel  proved  itself  unfaithful ;  and 
as  they  still  persist  as  a  nation  in  taking  their  place  before 
God  on  the  ground  of  a  broken  law,  and  strive,  though 
vainly,  to  establish  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  they  have 
been  permitted  to  have  a  long  and  bitter  taste  of  the  curses 
which  the  law  proclaims  against  disobedience  to  its  pre 
cepts.  But  though  Israel  proved  themselves  unfaithful,  and 
this  particular  covenant  itself  was  "  broken,"  3  "  the  blood  of 
the  covenant"  on  which  emphasis  is  laid  in  this  prophecy, 
was  a  sign  and  pledge  of  the  faithfulness  of  God  (though 
all  men  prove  liars),  and  typically  set  forth  the  provision 
which  God  has  made  by  which  eventually  His  disobedient 
and  rebellious  people  would  be  brought  back  within  the 
sphere  of  blessing. 

But  the  covenant  of  Sinai  was  not  the  only  one  which 
God  made  with  and  for  Israel ;  there  was  a  much  earlier 
one — the  one  He  made  with  Abraham,  which  was  in  the 
nature,  not  of  a  contract  between  two  parties,  but  of  a 
promise  to  the  fulfilment  of  which  God  alone  was  pledged. 

1  Vers.  10-13.  2  Ex.  xxiv.  8.  3  Jer.  xxxi.  31. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  319 

And  in  connection  with  that  covenant,  too,  there  was  the 
shedding  of  the  blood  of  the  animals  and  birds  which 
Abram  was  commanded  to  slay l — which,  as  well  as  the 
blood-shedding  on  Sinai,  and  indeed  of  all  the  blood  of  the 
sacrifices  which  were  "  on  Jewish  altars  slain,"  pointed  to 
the  great  sacrifice  "  of  nobler  name,"  and  to  the  much  more 
precious  blood  which  alone  secures  to  sinful  man  God's 
covenanted  blessings. 

The  antitypical  ratification  of  the  covenant,  therefore 
(whatever  the  primary  reference  of  these  words  in  Zechariah), 
took  place  when  Israel's  Messiah,  Jesus,  appeared  as  the 
"  minister  of  the  circumcision  to  confirm  the  promises  made 
unto  the  fathers."  2 

"  This  is  My  blood  of  the  new  covenant,"  He  said, 
when  about  to  lay  down  His  life  a  ransom  for  many ;  and 
since  the  great  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  all  the  promises  of 
God,  "  how  many  soever,"  or  whatever  they  may  be,  whether 
made  to  Israel  nationally,  or  intended  for  all  men  generally 
— ratified  as  they  now  are  in  His  own  precious  blood,  have 
become,  so  to  say,  doubly  sure  and  certain ,  for  "  in  Him  is 
the  Yea,  and  in  Him  the  Amen,  to  the  glory  of  God  by  us."  3 

But  to  return  to  our  prophecy.  Because  of  the  ever 
lasting  covenant-relationship  which  exists  between  Him  and 
His  people,  sealed  and  ratified  with  blood,  "  /  have  sent  forth" 
God  says,  "  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water" 

The  perfect  tense  of  the  verb  'nn?B>  (shillachti) — "  I 
have  sent  forth,"  or  "  released  " — is  prophetic  of  what  God 
intends  to  do,  there  being  many  instances  in  the  prophetic 
Scriptures  where  the  perfect  is  used  for  the  future.  With 
the  eternal,  unchangeable  God,  His  promises,  however 
distant  be  the  set  time  of  their  fulfilment,  are  already  as 
good  as  accomplished. 

The  description  "  prisoners  "  in  a  "  pit,"  or  "  dungeon," 
"  wherein  is  no  water,"  primarily  describes,  figuratively, 
Israel's  condition  in  captivity,  out  of  which  God,  in  virtue 
of  His  covenant  promise,  will  deliver  them. 

It  reminds  us  of  the  description  of  Jacob,  when  given 

1  Gen.  xv.  9,  10.  2  Rom.  xv.  8,  9.  *  2  Cor.  i.  20. 


320     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

over  for  a  time  "  for  a  spoil,"  and  "  Israel  to  the  robbers," 
which  we  find  in  Isaiah :  "  But  this  is  a  people  robbed  and 
spoiled ;  they  are  all  of  them  snared  in  holes,  and  they  are 
hid  in  prison  houses :  they  are  for  a  prey,  and  none  deliver eth  ; 
for  a  spoil,  and  none  saith,  Restore"  x  But  though  in 
"  prison,"  and  "  robbed,"  and  "  spoiled,"  they  are  not  given 
over  to  death,  this  being  already  hinted  at  in  the  expres 
sion  bor  ein  mayim  bo — "  the  pit  (or  '  dungeon  ')  without 
water  in  it"  which  is  an  echo  of  Gen.  xxxvii.  24  (where 
exactly  the  same  phrase  is  found),  with  an  evident  allusion 
to  the  story  of  Joseph.  It  was  with  a  view  to  save  him 
from  a  violent  death  that  Reuben  proposed  that  Joseph 
should  be  thrown  into  the  pit,  which  was  doubtless  a  dis 
used  cistern,  such  being  on  occasion  also  used  as  dungeons. 
But  it  made  all  the  difference  to  Joseph  that  there  was  no 
water  in  that  pit  or  cistern  ;  for  had  there  been  water  in  it, 
he  would  have  been  drowned. 

So  it  is  with  Israel.  They  are  likened  to  one  bound 
and  in  a  "  pit,"  or  "  dungeon,"  which,  alas !  has  also  been 
literally  the  case  with  multitudes  of  Israel's  sons  and 
daughters  during  the  period  of  their  "  captivity  "  ;  but  God 
sees  to  it  that  there  should  be  no  water  in  the  pit,  and  that 
His  people,  which  is  still  bound  to  Him  by  covenant  blood, 
should  not  utterly  perish.  And  eventually,  at  the  word  of 
God,  Israel,  like  Joseph,  shall  be  freed  from  the  pit  and 
lifted  from  the  position  of  humiliation  and  suffering  to 
become  a  nation  of  princes  on  the  earth. 

And  Israel's  deliverance  from  national  bondage  will 
synchronise,  and  be,  so  to  say,  the  outward  sign  of  their 
still  greater  spiritual  deliverance,  for  the  words  "  prisoners  " 
(asirim,  literally,  "  bound  ones  ")  and  "  pit  "  (bor)  are  used 
in  other  scriptures  to  describe  the  condition  of  men, 
who  are  not  only  in  outward  bodily  captivity,  but  who  are 
in  the  bondage  of  sin  and  captives  to  Satan. 

Thus  the  Messiah  is  anointed  and  sent  to  open  the 
prison-gates  "  to  them  that  are  bound  " ; 2  and  in  the  day 

1  Isa.  xlii.  22. 

3  Asurttn,  Isa.  Ixi.  I  ;  the  same  as  "prisoners"  hi  Zech.  ix.  u. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  321 

when  Israel,  by  a  look  at  their  crucified  Messiah,  is 
"  redeemed  from  all  his  iniquities "  and  experiences  God's 
"  plenteous  redemption," l  it  will  be  this  greater  spiritual 
deliverance  that  they  will  celebrate  in  words  which  are 
already  familiar  and  precious  to  us  who  know  the  Messiah 
of  Israel  as  our  personal  Redeemer. 

"  He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out  of  the 
miry  clay  ;  and  He  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  established 
my  goings"  (Ps.  xl.  2,  3). 

And  the  same  double  promise  of  national  and  spiritual 
deliverance  and  blessing  is  contained  also  in  the  I  2th  verse: 

"  Turn  ye  to  the  stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  /wpe." 

The  pi-p,  bhitsaron — "  stronghold,"  or  "  fortress  " — to 
which  the  captives  are  invited  to  return,  is  perhaps  primarily 
their  own  land,  which  is  as  a  rocky  and  fortified  "  fastness  " 
as  compared  with  the  low-lying  "  pit "  of  their  captivity. 
But  even  the  Jewish  commentator  Kimchi  sees  in  it  a 
reference  also  to  God,  who  is  the  strength  and  sure  refuge 
of  His  people,  and  paraphrases  the  first  words  of  this  verse, 
"  Turn  ye  to  God,  for  He  is  a  stronghold  and  tower  of 
strength."  And  this  agrees  also  with  earlier  prophetic 
utterances  in  which  God  Himself  is  spoken  of  as  the  safe 
hiding-place  and  defence  of  His  people,  as,  for  instance, 
Joel  iii.  (which  seems  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  scriptures  from 
i  the  earlier  prophets  which  was  in  the  mind  of  Zechariah 
when  writing  the  last  verses  of  the  9th  chapter),  where  we 
read  that  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  shall  gather  the  nations 
for  judgment,  and  the  whole  order  of  nature  shall  be  shaken, 
"Jehovah  will  be  the  refuge  of  His  people ,  and  a  stronghold 
to  the  children  of  Israel"  z 

The  expression  njpnn  ''"V'DN,  asirei  hatiqvah  — 
"  prisoners  of  hope,"  or  of  "  the  hope  " — truly  describes  the 
Jewish  people  in  their  banishment  and  scattering,  and 
marks  the  difference  between  the  nation  which  stands  in  an 
indissoluble  relationship  to  God  by  reason  of  the  "  blood  of 
the  covenant,"  and  all  other  nations  as  nations.  The 

1  Ps.  cxxx.  7,  8. 

-  Joel  iii    1-6.      Here  the  word  for  stronghold  is  rijfl?  (moat). 
21 


322     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Jewish  nation  may  for  its  sins  be  sent  into  captivity  as 
"  prisoners " ;  Jacob  may  be  "  given  over  for  a  spoil,  and 
Israel  to  the  robbers,"  "  but  there  is  hope  (tiqvaJt)  for  thy 
latter  end,  saith  Jehovah,"1  or,  to  quote  from  an  earlier 
chapter  of  the  same  prophet :  "  For  I  know  the  thoughts 
that  I  think  towards  you,  saith  Jehovah,  thoughts  of  peace, 
and  not  of  evil,  to  give  you  nipfN  n^nx  (acharith  vethiqvah)" — 
literally,  "  a  latter  end  and  hope  " 2 — that  is,  a  "  latter  end  " 
according  to  the  hope  based  on  God's  own  promise. 
Therefore  the  Psalmist,  in  response  to  the  agonising  cry  of 
the  remnant  of  Israel  "  from  the  depths  "  of  their  national 
tribulation  and  anguish  in  Ps.  cxxx. — which  at  the  same 
time  breathes  such  a  spirit  of  confident  reliance  on  God's 
word  of  promise  as  is  expressed  in  the  words  :  "  /  wait  on 
Jehovah  ;  my  soul  doth  wait,  and  in  His  word  do  I  hope  " — 
is  inspired  to  address  to  them  the  encouraging  exhortation  : 
"  O  Israel,  hope  in  Jehovah  (for  it  is  a  hope  which  will  not  be 
put  to  shame)  ;  for  with  Jehovah  there  is  mercy,  and  with  Him, 
there  is  plenteous  redemption,  and  He  shall  redeem  Israel  from 
all  his  iniquities" 3  And  since  his  iniquities  have  been  the 
underlying  cause  of  all  his  sufferings  and  sorrows,  when 
God  forgives  Israel  his  sins,  and  removes  his  transgressions, 
He  shall  "  redeem  "  him  also  "  out  of  all  his  troubles."  4 

And  there  is  a  certain  analogy  in  this  respect  between 
Israel  and  the  Church,  or  rather  between  Israel  in  their 
present  condition  as  "  prisoners  of  hope,"  and  those  who,  in 
and  through  Christ,  have  already  set  their  hope  upon  God. 
We  are  not  in  outward  or  bodily  dispersion  and  banish 
ment,  as  Israel  is ;  nor,  praise  be  to  God,  are  we  in 
bondage  to  sin  or  Satan.  In  Christ  we  have  even  now 
"  redemption  by  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins  according 
to  the  riches  of  His  grace  "  ;  already  we  have  been  delivered 
out  of  the  power  of  darkness  and  are  translated  into  the 
kingdom  of  the  Son  of  His  love,  and  are  made  heirs  and 
joint-heirs  with  Christ  of  an  inheritance  which  is  incor 
ruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away.  Yet, 

1  Jer.  xxxi.  17.  2  Jer.  xxix.  n. 

8  Ps.  cxxx.  7,  8.  *  Ps.  xxv.  22. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  323 

inasmuch  as  we  are  still  environed  by  an  unrenewed 
creation,  which,  on  account  of  man's  sin,  was  subjected  to 
vanity ;  so  long  as  we  still  carry  about  "  the  body  of  this 
death  "  and  know  the  motions  of  sin  and  death  within  us  ; 
so  long  as  we  are  still  in  this  present  evil  age,  and  not 
actually  in  our  glorious  promised  land,  and  our  Father's 
own  house — we  are  "  prisoners  of  hope,"  for  not  only  do 
we  still  form  part  of  that  creation  which  groaneth  and 
travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now,  but  ourselves  also, 
•which  have  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves 
groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  our  adoption,  to  wit,  the 
redemption  of  our  body.  For  by  hope  are  we  saved ;  but  hope 
that  is  seen  is  not  hope :  for  who  hopeth  for  that  which  he 
seeth  ?  But  if  we  hope  for  that  which  we  see  not,  then  do  we 
with  patience  wait  for  it." l 

We  are  therefore  longing  and  looking  for  the  realisation 
of  "  the  Blessed  Hope,"  namely,  "  the  appearing  of  the  glory 
of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  who  also  shall 
bring  rest  and  deliverance  to  a  groaning  creation  and 
fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation  that  it  may  be 
conformed  to  the  body  of  His  glory,  according  to  the 
working  whereby  He  is  able  even  to  subject  all  things 
unto  Himself.2 

1  Rom.  viii.  22-25. 

2  Zech.  ix.  12  is  the  only  place  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  where  the  word  for 
hope  has  the  article.     It  is  therefore,  as  has  been  observed,  not  any  hope,  or 
general  hope,  that  the  prophet  speaks  about,  but  THE  SPECIAL  hope  of  Israel, 
"  the  hope  which  sustained  him  through  all  the  years  of  patient  expectation." 
The  centre  and  essence  of  it  is  the  Messiah,  and  the  great  promised  national  and 
spiritual  redemption  which  He  was  to  accomplish,  and  which  will  not  be  fully 
realised  till  He  shall  appear  a  second  time  apart  from  sin  unto  salvation,  and  to 
establish  His  righteous  rule  on  the  earth. 

The  hope  is  carried  over  therefore  from  the  Old  Testament  into  the  New. 
Paul  speaks  of  it  as  "  the  hope  of  Israel,"  for  which  the  Jews  of  Rome  saw  him 
bound  as  a  prisoner  in  a  chain  (Acts  xxviii.  20),  or,  as  he  said  in  his  defence 
before  Agrippa  :  "  I  stand  here  to  be  judged  for  the  hope  of  the  promise  made 
of  God  unto  our  fathers,  unto  which  promise  our  twelve  tribes  earnestly  serving 
God  night  and  day  hope  to  attain.  And  concerning  this  hope  I  am  accused  by 
the  Jews,  O  King"  (Acts  xxvi.  6,  7). 

It  was  doubtless  in  his  mind  when  he  spoke  of  "the  blessed  hope  and  the 
appearing  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ"  (Tit.  ii.  13),  for  then  the 
hope  as  regards  the  Church,  and  Israel,  and  the  world,  will  be  fully  realised. 


324     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But,  to  proceed  to  the  second  half  of  the  1 2th  verse, 
"  even  to-day"  in  thy  present  adversity  and  in  spite  of  all 
appearances,  "  do  I  declare  "  (or  "  tell  "  you  as  good  news, 
from  which  you  may  already  draw  consolation  and  hope) 
"  that  I  will  render  "  (or  "  cause  to  return  ")  "  double  unto 
thee." 

There  are  several  scriptures  in  which  the  word 
"  double "  occurs  as  expressing  a  principle  of  God's 
dealing  with  His  own  people.  The  key  and  explanation 
of  it  is  found  in  His  own  appointment  in  reference  to 
the  first-born.  According  to  the  law,  the  first-born  son 
inherited  a  double  portion  of  his  father's  property  as 
compared  with  the  other  members  of  the  family.  This, 
except  it  were  forfeited  by  personal  unfitness,  or  trans 
gression,  was  his  inalienable  right.  If,  contrary  to  God's 
original  appointment,  any  man  of  Israel  had  two  wives, 
"  the  one  beloved  and  the  other  hated,  and  they  had  borne 
him  children,  both  the  beloved  and  the  hated,  and  if  the 
first-born  son  be  hers  that  was  hated,  then  it  shall  be  in 
the  day  that  he  causeth  his  sons  to  inherit  that  which  he 
hath,  that  he  may  not  make  the  son  of  the  beloved  the 
first-born  before  the  son  of  the  hated,  .  .  .  but  he  shall 
acknowledge  the  first-born,  the  son  of  the  hated,  by  giving 
him  a  double  portion  (shenayini}  of  all  that  he  hath ;  .  .  . 
the  right  of  the  first-born  is  his."  :  An  illustration  of  this 
principle  we  have  in  the  case  of  Joseph.  Reuben  having, 
by  an  act  of  personal  moral  defilement,  disqualified  himself 
to  inherit  the  birthright,  it  was  transferred  to  Joseph,2  and 
as  a  consequence  his  descendants  were  counted  as  two 
tribes — Ephraim  and  Manasseh — who  had  two  portions  of 
the  land  instead  of  one ;  and  Joseph  himself  became  by 
this  act  entitled  to  a  double  portion  of  Jacob's  personal 
possessions.  Now  Israel  is  God's  "  son,"  God's  "  first-born  " 
in  relation  to  the  other  nations,3  and  He  deals  with  them 
on  the  principles  of  His  own  law.  In  his  own  land,  and 
under  the  protection  of  the  Covenant-keeping  God  of  his 
fathers,  Israel  enjoys  a  "  double  portion "  of  favour  and 
1  Deut.  xxi.  15-17.  a  I  Chron.  v.  i,  2.  3  Ex.  iv.  22. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  325 

blessing.  But  commensurate  with  privilege  is  responsi 
bility,  and  of  him  to  whom  much  is  given  much  is  required. 
Therefore  when  Israel  sinned  he  was  visited  with  "  double  " 
punishment.  This  is  the  explanation  of  such  passages  as 
"  She  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand  double  "  (kiphlayim 
— "  twofold  ")  "  for  all  her  sins  "  ; x  or,  "  I  will  recompense 
their  iniquity  and  their  sin  double "  (mishneh — "  a  repeti 
tion  " ;  once  and  again)  "  because  they  have  defiled  My 
land  .  .  .  and  have  filled  Mine  inheritance  with  their 
abominations." 2  This  is  the  key  and  explanation  of  the 
woeful  history  of  the  Jewish  people  during  the  centuries  of 
their  banishment  and  dispersion.  This  is  why  under  the 
whole  heaven  it  hath  not  been  done  as  has  been  done 
upon  Jerusalem  ; 3  and  that,  as  Josephus  complains,  Israel's 
sorrows  and  sufferings  surpass  that  of  all  the  rest  of 
mankind. 

But  Israel's  disobedience  and  consequent  sufferings  are 
not  to  last  for  ever.  Even  in  their  dispersion  they  are,  as 
we  have  seen,  "  prisoners  of  the  hope,"  and  when  restored 
to  their  land  and  brought  back  into  favour  as  God's  "  first 
born  "  among  the  nations,  then  "for  their  shame  they  shall 
have  double  " — mishneh — "  and  for  the  "  (or,  instead  of) 
"  confusion  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  portion  ;  therefore  in 
their  land  they  shall  possess  the  double.  Everlasting  joy  sJiall 
be  unto  them" 4 

And  it  is  particularly  this  grand  prophecy  in  Isa.  Ixi., 
to  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  there  is  this  inspired  reference 
in  our  passage  in  Zechariah  when  he  announces  to  them 
in  their  then  still  national  day  of  gloom  that  God  will 
cause  the  double  to  return  to  them. 

From  the  final  results  to  Israel  and  the  nations  of  the 
advent  and  mission  of  the  Messiah  we  are  in  the  next  three 
verses  taken  back  to  the  process. 

Before  Judah  shall  finally  be  saved,  and  Israel  possess 
again  in  their  land  the  "  double  "  portion  of  blessing  and 
privilege,  Gentile  world-power  must  be  broken,  and  the 

1  Isa.  xl.  2.  2Jer.  xvi.  18. 

3  Dan.  ix.  12.  *  Isa.  Ixi.  7. 


326     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

enemies  of  God's  kingdom  be  finally  overthrown.  The 
figures  in  vers.  1 3  to  I  5  are  very  bold  and  graphic :  "  For 
I  will  bend  (or  '  stretch  ')  Judah  for  Me  as  a  bow,  and  I  will 
fill  it  with  Ephraim  ;  l  and  I  will  stir  up  thy  sons,  O  Zion, 
against  thy  sons,  O  Greece,  and  I  will  make  thee  as  the 
sword  of  a  mighty  man.  And  Jehovah  shall  appear  above 
them,  and  His  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning :  and 
the  Lord  Jehovah  shall  blow  the  trumpet,  and  shall  go  forth 
(or  '  march ')  with  whirlwinds  (or  '  in  the  tempests ')  of  the 
south"  Judah  is  the  drawn  bow,  Ephraim  the  arrow,  and 
Zion  the  sword  in  the  hand  of  Jehovah,  by  means  of  which 
the  foe  is  thoroughly  subjugated. 

The  !£  ""P.2,  Benei-  Yavan,  sons  of  Javan,  who  come 
within  the  range  of  the  prophet's  vision  in  this  passage, 
are  "  the  Greeks  as  the  world-power,"  or  the  Graeco- 
Macedonian  kingdom ;  but,  as  we  shall  see,  the  more 
immediate  merges  here  also  into  the  more  distant  future. 
The  "weak  beginnings"  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy, 
to  borrow  an  expression  from  Keil,  is  to  be  seen  "  in  the 
wars  between  the  Maccabees  and  the  Seleucidae,  or  Greek 
rulers  of  Syria,"  to  which  also  some  ancient  Jews  applied 
this  prophecy : 

"  The  wars  of  the  Jews  against  Greece,  under  the  heroic 
leadership  of  the  Maccabees,  were  occasioned  by  the  attempt 
to  overturn  the  Jewish  religion  and  substitute  in  its  place 
Grecian  customs  (comp.  I  Mace.  viii.  9-18;  2  Mace.  iv. 
13-15).  Those  wars  were  essentially  religious  in  their 
character.  The  Maccabean  heroes  went  forth  to  the  con 
test  with  the  full  conviction  that  the  cause  in  which  they 
were  engaged  was  the  cause  of  God,  and  that  the  Lord 
was  with  them  in  all  their  various  difficulties  and  trials. 
In  the  glowing  language  of  the  prophet  (ver.  14),  Jehovah 
was  seen  over  them,  and  His  arrow  went  forth  as  the 
lightning ;  yea,  the  Lord  Jehovah  blew  with  the  trumpet, 
for  He  was  the  real  Captain  of  His  host,  and  the  war 
waged  by  the  Jews  was  in  defence  of  His  truth.  The 

1  on?*  'fix1??.     Von  Orelli  regards  Ephraim  as  the  quiver — the  object  filled 
with  arrows  for  God's  u<»e. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  327 

Lord  is  further  described  as  going  forth  in  the  storms  of 
the  south  ;  because  the  storms  from  that  quarter,  coming 
from  the  desert,  were  generally  the  most  violent  (Isa. 
xxi.  i).  The  language  used  is  highly  figurative,  but  it 
need  not  surprise  us  that  the  exploits  of  the  Maccabees 
should  be  so  described  when  we  call  to  mind  the  vivid 
language  in  which  David  depicts  his  own  deliverance  in  the 
remarkable  song  in  the  day  when  God  delivered  him  from 
his  foes.1  Small  as  were  the  armies  which  Judas  and  his 
brethren  commanded,  those  armies  were  the  armies  of 
Israel,  and  they  went  forth  to  battle  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  who  was 
then  defied  by  the  Grecian  foe,  even  as  in  former  days  He 
had  been  defied  by  the  Philistine  (i  Sam.  xvii.  45).  Thus 
doing  battle  against  the  enemies  of  their  God,  '  out  of 
weakness  they  were  made  strong,  they  waxed  valiant  in 
fight,  and  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens'  (Heb. 

xi-  34)-" 

But  that  the  prophecy  cannot  be  altogether  restricted 
to  the  Maccabean  struggle  with  the  Syrian  Greeks  is  mani 
fest,  for  the  whole  passage  points  to  the  complete  subjuga 
tion  of  imperial  world-power. 

No ;  Zion  and  Greece,  as  has  been  well  observed  by 
another  writer,  are  in  this  prophecy  of  Zechariah  opposed 
to  one  another  as  the  city  of  God  and  the  city  of  the  world 
(the  "  civitas  Dei,  and  the  civitas  mundi"  as  Augustine  has 
it),  and  the  defeat  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  and  his  suc 
cessors  at  the  hands  of  comparative  handfuls  of  despised 
Jews,  to  which  this  passage  may  primarily  refer,  foreshadows 
the  final  conflict  with  world-power,  and  the  judgments  to 
be  inflicted  on  the  confederated  armies  who  shall  be 
gathered  against  Jerusalem,  not  only  directly  by  the  hand 
of  God,  but  also  by  the  hand  of  Israel,  who  shall  then  be 
made  strong  in  Jehovah,  so  that  "  the  feeble  among  them 
shall  in  that  day  be  as  David,  and  the  house  of  David  shall 
be  as  God,  as  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  before  them." 

1  Ps.  xviii.  6-9  ;  comp.  also  Ps.  cxliv.  6,  7  ;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  16-19  ;  and  especially 
Hab.  iii.  12-14. 


328     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Then,  in  a  literal  sense,  Jehovah  in  the  person  of  their 
Messiah  "shall  be  seen  over  them,  and  His  arrow  shall  go 
forth  as  the  lightning,"  and  He  Himself  as  the  Captain  of 
the  Host  "  shall  blow  the  trumpet," *  and  "  shall  go  forth 
and  fight  against  those  nations  as  when  He  fought  in  the 
day  of  battle."  z 

The  1 5th  verse  illustrates  the  word  of  the  Psalmist, 
"  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly,  for  He  it  is  that 
shall  tread  down  our  adversaries."3  "Jehovah  of  hosts" 
we  read,  "  shall  defend  them  ;  4  and  they  shall  devour ;  and  they 
shall  tread  down  the  sling  stones  ;  and  they  shall  drink,  and 
make  a  noise  as  through  wine :  and  they  shall  be  filled  like 
bowls,  like  the  corners  of  the  altar"  The  devouring  (or 
"  eating  ")  and  "  drinking  "  must,  of  course,  be  understood  in 
a  figurative  sense — for  it  is  only  to  a  perverted  imagination, 
worthy  of  those  who  from  time  to  time  seek  to  revive  the 
diabolical  lie  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  the  "  Blood 
Accusation,"  that  the  thought  could  ever  occur  that  the 
Jews  did  literally  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  their 
conquered  adversaries.5 

The   figure  which  is  here  before  the  prophet's  mind  is 

1  See   the   somewhat   parallel   passage   Isa.    xxx.   30-33,   where   the   enemy 
primarily  referred  to  is  the  Assyrian. 

2  Chap.  xiv.  3. 

3  Ps.  Ix.  12,  cviii.  13. 

4  Ci!T.?y  }5J,  yagen  'aleihem — literally,  "shall  be  a  shield  over  them."     Pusey 
points  out  that  the  word  is  used  before  only  by  Isaiah  (xxxvii.  33,  xxxviii.  6). 
This  image   of  complete  protection   stands   first    in    God's   word   to   Abraham, 
"I   am   thy  shield"   (Gen.  xv.   i).       But  it   is  laid  hold    of  by  David    when 
he  appeals  to  God  :   "  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  a  shield  around  me  "  (Ps.  iii.  3). 

5  A  German  scholar  named  Ghillany,  in  a  treatise  on  Die  Menschenopfer  der 
Alien  Hcbraer,  published  in  Nuremberg  in  1842,  does  actually  descend  to  this 
absurdity.     He  adduces  this  verse  in  Zechariah  in   proof  that  the  prophet  "in 
his  dreams  of  victory  let  us  have  an  insight  into  the  barbarism  of  the  victorious 
Hebrews,"  who,  according  to  him,  "did  actually  in  ancient  times  eat  their  fallen 
foes  as  food,  and  drank  their  blood  in  the  rage  of  victory,  as  well  as  partook  of 
portions  of  their  bodies  "  ! 

But  whatever  cannibal  "barbarisms"  may  have  existed  among  some  of  the 
Gentile  nations,  both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West,  Israel  had  never  sunk  quite  so 
low  even  in  the  most  "ancient"  times,  and  the  very  idea  of  actually  drinking 
blood  is  repugnant  to  the  Jewish  religion,  as  Dr.  Wright  well  observes,  and  is 
condemned  in  both  the  Law  and  the  Prophets. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  329 

that  which  was  used  by  Balaam  ages  before :  "  Behold  the 
people  (Israel)  shall  rise  up  as  a  great  lion,  and  lift  up 
himself  as  a  young  lion.  He  shall  not  lie  down  till  he  eat 
the  prey  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  slain  "  (Num.  xxiii.  24). 
It  is  also  found  in  Mic.  v.  8  :  "And  the  remnant  of  Jacob 
shall  be  among  the  nations,  in  the  midst  of  many  people 
as  a  lion  among  the  beasts  of  the  forest,  as  a  young  lion 
among  the  flocks  of  sheep :  who,  if  he  go  through,  treadeth 
down  and  teareth  in  pieces,  and  there  is  none  to  deliver." 

"  The  idea  of  actually  drinking  blood  was  repugnant  to 
the  Jewish  religion,  and  condemned  in  both  the  Law  and 
the  Prophets ;  but  when  nations  are  compared  to  wild 
animals,  language  must  be  used  characteristic  of  the  habits 
and  usages  of  such  animals."  1  "  The  one  thought  seems 
to  be  that  their  enemies  should  cease  to  be,  so  as  not  to 
molest  them  any  more.  .  .  .  They  should  disappear  as 
completely  as  fuel  before  the  fire,  or  food  before  the 
hungry." z 

The  Authorised  Version  renders  J^g  '33K  WMl  (yekha- 
bhshu  abhnei  qelaj\  "  and  they  shall  subdue  with  sling  stones  " ; 
but  the  sling  stones  cannot,  as  Keil  points  out,  for  gram 
matical  reasons,  if  the  whole  sentence  be  considered,  be 
taken  in  an  instrumental  sense — that  is,  that  Israel  would 
overcome  their  enemies  with  mere  sling  stones,  as  David  did 
Goliath. 

The  true  meaning  is  rather  that  given  in  the  Revised 
Version,  "  they  shall  tread  down  sling  stones " ;  and  since 
in  the  next  verse  Israel  is  likened  to  the  precious  stones  set 
in  a  crown,  it  is  probably  correct  to  suppose,  with  Heng- 
stenberg,  Keil,  Hitzig,  Pusey,  etc.,  that  "  the  sling  stones " 
are,  in  comparison,  to  be  taken  "  as  a  figure  denoting  the 
enemy,  who  is  trampled  under  the  feet  like  stones." 

The  idea  is  further  carried  out  in  figurative  language 
when  the  victorious  Israelites  are  described  in  the  second 
half  of  the  I5th  verse  as  making  a  noise  like  men  drunk 
with  wine — the  drink  with  which  they  are  made  drunk 
being  the  blood  of  the  enemies  of  the  Lord.  "  With  this 

1  Wright.  a  Pusey. 


330     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

blood  the  prophet  describes  the  victorious  Jews  as  being 
filled,  like  the  sacrificial  bowls  in  which  the  priests  were  wont 
to  catch  the  blood  of  the  victims  which  were  slain  ;  and  they 
would  be  sprinkled  with  it  like  the  corners  of  the  altar, 
which  expression  includes  the  horns  of  the  altar,  which  were 
wont  to  be  sprinkled  with  the  sacrificial  blood."  x 

The  climax  is  reached  in  the  last  two  verses.  The 
final  overthrow  and  subjugation  of  world-power  is  followed 
by  the  exaltation  and  the  glorification  of  the  people  of  God. 
"  And  Jehovah  their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day  as  the 
flock  of  His  people  :  for  they  shall  be  as  the  stones  of  a  crown 
lifted  on  high" 

The  picture  in  the  i6th  verse  changes  from  war  and 
bloodshed  to  that  of  the  Shepherd  and  His  flock,  which 
plays  so  prominent  a  part  in  the  last  chapters  of  this  pro 
phetic  book. 

Jehovah  in  that  day  shall  "save  them"  This  does  not 
mean  here  merely  that  He  will  help  and  deliver  them. 
This,  as  another  writer  points  out,  would  affirm  much  too 
little  after  what  has  gone  before.  "  When  Israel  has  trodden 
down  his  foes,  he  no  longer  needs  deliverance."  The  mean 
ing  is  rather  that  God  will  in  that  day  endow  them  with 
salvation,  not  only  in  the  negative  sense  of  deliverance, 
but  in  the  positive  sense ;  and,  if  we  want  to  know  what 
is  implied  in  it,  we  have  it  in  the  figure  of  the  next 
clause.  He  will  do  for  them  and  be  to  them  all  that  a 
shepherd  does  and  is  to  his  flock,  which  implies  that  He  will 
not  only  seek,  and  deliver,  and  gather  them,  but  He  Him 
self,  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  as  all  the  prophets  bear 
witness,  will  tend,  and  feed,  and  lead,  and  rule  over  them— 
all  which  is  implied  in  the  Hebrew  word  "  Shepherd." 
That  most  beautiful  "  nightingale  song,"  Ps.  xxiii.,  which  is 
so  precious  to  us  now,  will  then  express  the  experience  of 
saved  Israel.  "Jehovah  is  my  Shepherd,  I  shall  not  want" 
— because  in  His  Shepherd-care  the  fullest  provision  is 
made  for  every  need,  both  spiritual  and  temporal,  for  His 
own  flock. 

1  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  331 

Another  aspect  of  this  positive  "  Salvation "  which 
Jehovah  shall  then  bestow  upon  His  people,  is  brought 
before  us  in  the  second  half  of  this  verse.  In  contrast  to 
their  enemies,  who  are  likened  to  "  sling  stones,"  which  shall 
then  be  contemptuously  trodden  under  foot,  saved  Israel 
shall  be  "\T3  "oaK,  abhnei-nezer  "  stones  of  a  crown  "  (or  jewels 
set  in  a  consecrated  crown),1  lifted  on  high  over  His  land — 
which  reminds  us  of  Isa.  Ixii.,  where  we  read  that  after 
"  Zion's  righteousness  shall  go  forth  as  brightness,  and  her 
salvation  as  a  lamp  that  burneth,"  so  that  "  the  nations  shall 
see  thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  thy  glory" — then 
"  Thou  shalt  also  be  a  crown  of  beauty  in  the  hand  of  Jehovah, 
and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  God"  We  note  the 
expression  in  this  verse,  "  over  His  land,"  which  reminds  us 
of  the  unique  relationship  in  which  Jehovah  stands  to  the 
land,  as  well  as  to  the  people  of  Israel.  "  The  land  is 
Mine,"  2  He  said  of  Palestine  in  a  very  special  sense,  though 
the  whole  earth  belongs  to  Him  ;  and  this,  as  Pusey  observes, 
"  was  laid  down  as  the  title-deed  to  its  whole  tenure."  He 
appointed  it  in  His  sovereign  right,  and  with  a  gracious 
purpose  in  view,  as  the  inheritance  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  ; 
but  the  ownership  remains  vested  in  Him.  It  is  called  also 
"  Immanuets  Land"  3  because  the  theocratic  King-Messiah 
is  the  true  heir  to  it,  not  only  by  reason  of  His  being  the 
true  Son  of  Abraham,  and  Son  of  David,  to  whom  the  land 
was  promised,  but  because  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  to  Whom 
it,  in  a  special  sense,  belongs. 

For  a  long  time  Israel  has  been  banished  from  their 
possession  on  account  of  sin,  and  Jerusalem  and  Palestine 
are  being  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles ;  but  the  counsel  of 
Jehovah,  both  as  regards  the  land  and  the  people,  standeth 
for  ever,  the  gifts  and  the  calling  of  God  are  without 
repentance ;  and  when  the  covenant  relations  between  God 

1  The  primary  meaning  of  the  masculine  noun  i?},  nezer,  is  separation,  or  con 
secration.     Then  it  is  used  also  of  the  sign  of  consecration — as,  for  instance,  the 
long  hair  of  the  "  Nazarite,"  and  the  crown  of  the  king,  or  priest.     The  word  is 
first  found  in  Ex.  xxix.  6,  where  it  is  used  of  the  "  holy  crown  "  which  the  high 
priest  was  to  wear  over  the  "  mitre." 

2  Lev.  xxv.  23.  s  Isa.  viii.  8 


332     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  "  His  own  "  people  Israel  are  restored,  "Jehovah  shall 
inherit  Judah,  His  portion  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  shall 
choose  Jerusalem  again'' * 

The  prophet  ends  this  section  of  the  prophecy  with  the 
exclamation  :  "  For  how  great  is  His  goodness,  and  how 
great  is  His  beauty! — ^  no*  iaro  np  ^3,  Ki  mah  tubho 
umah  yaphyo — corn  shall  make  the  young  men  to  flourish 
and  new  wine  the  maids" 

There  is  difference  of  opinion  among  commentators  to 
whom  the  first  half  of  this  verse  is  to  be  applied.  On  strict 
grammatical  grounds  it  must  be  applied  to  God,  to  whom 
the  suffixes  "  His  land,"  "  His  people,"  refer  in  the  verse 
immediately  preceding  ;  but  it  is  argued  by  Koehler  and 
others  that  since  beauty  is  never  attributed  to  Jehovah 
Himself  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  better  to  understand 
the  words  as  applying  to  the  people.  And  this  is  the  view 
taken  by  most  modern  scholars.  With  this  contention, 
however,  I  cannot  concur ;  for,  first,  though  it  be  true  that 
the  term  ""S),  yaphi  (beauty),  was  not  used  before  of  God,  it 
is  used  of  the  Messiah  in  such  scriptures  as,  "  Thou  art 
fairer "  (or  more  beautiful)  "  than  the  sons  of  men,"  and 
"  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  His  beauty."  And  it  is 
in  the  face  of  their  Messiah-King  that  Israel  shall  behold, 
even  as  we  do  already,  the  glory  and  beauty  of  the 
invisible  God. 

"  Goodness  "  is  very  frequently  attributed  to  God  in  the 
Old  Testament,  as,  for  instance,  in  Ps.  xxxi.  19:"  Oh  how 
great  is  Thy  goodness,  which  Thou  hast  laid  up  for  them  that 
fear  Thee.  Which  Thou  hast  wrought  for  them  that  put  their 
trust  in  Thee,  before  the  sons  of  men "  ;  and  Ps.  cxlv.  7  : 
"  They  shall  utter  the  memory  of  Thy  great  goodness" 

I  take  the  words  then,  with  Hengstenberg  and  others, 
as  referring  to  God,  "  whose  great  doings  had  been  the 
prophet's  theme  throughout." 

Let  me,  in  closing  the  exposition  of  this  chapter,  echo 
this  exclamation  of  the  prophet,  "  How  great  is  His 
goodness  !  "  "  Goodness  is  that  attribute  of  God  whereby 

1  Chap.  ii.  12. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE  333 

He  loveth  to  communicate  to  all  who  can  or  will  receive  it, 
all  good — yea,  Himself,  who  is  the  fulness  and  universality 
of  good,  Creator  of  all  good,  not  in  one  way,  not  in  one 
kind  of  goodness  only,  but  absolutely,  without  beginning, 
without  limit,  without  measure,  save  that  whereby  without 
measurement  He  possesseth  and  embraceth  all  excellence, 
all  perfection,  all  blessedness,  all  good." 

"  This  good  His  goodness  bestoweth  on  all  and  each, 
according  to  the  capacity  of  each  to  receive  it ;  nor  is  there 
any  limit  to  His  giving,  save  His  creatures'  capacity  of 
receiving,  which  also  is  a  good  gift  from  Him.  From  Him 
all  things  sweet  derive  their  sweetness,  all  things  fair  their 
beauty,  all  things  bright  their  splendour,  all  things  that 
live  their  life,  all  things  sentient — their  sense,  all  that  move 
their  vigour,  all  intelligences  their  knowledge,  all  things 
perfect  their  perfection,  all  things  in  any  wise  good  their 
goodness."  l 

"  And  how  great  h  His  beauty  !  "  This  we  cannot  fully 
know  until  we  are  fully  transformed  into  His  image  and 
can  gaze  upon  His  unveiled  glory.  But  even  now  we  may 
pray  with  David  :  "  One  thing  have  I  asked  of  the  Lord, 
that  will  I  seek  after,  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life,  to  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord, 
and  to  inquire  in  His  temple "  (Ps.  xxvii.  4).  And  the 
more  we  behold  it  even  now  by  faith  and  with  the  veil  of 
flesh  between,  and  inquire  about  it,  the  more  shall  we  be 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as 
by  the  Lord  the  Spirit. 

But,  to  come  back  to  the  context,  this  goodness  and 
beauty  of  Jehovah  shall  in  that  future  day  also  be  reflected 
by  restored  and  converted  Israel,  when  "  they  shall  be  as 
precious  stones  of  a  crown  lifted  up  high  over  His  land." 

And  of  the  abundance  of  spiritual  blessing  and  "  glory  " 
which  shall  then  dwell  in  the  land,2  material  prosperity  and 
temporal  abundance  will,  as  is  not  the  case  in  the  present 
dispensation,  be  the  outward  sign  and  accompaniment. 
"  Corn"  exclaims  the  prophet,  "  shall  make  the  young  men 
1  Quoted  by  Pusey.  a  Ps.  Ixxxv.  9. 


334     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

cheerful"  (yenobhabh,  literally,  to  "  grow"  or  to  "increase"), 
"  and  new  wine  the  maids  (or  '  virgins ')." 

But  the  mention  of  young  men  and  maidens  is,  as 
has  been  observed,  merely  intended  to  "  heighten  the 
picture  of  prosperity  given  by  the  prophet,"  and  is  in 
some  respects  a  parallel  to  the  prophetic  description  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  land  and  people  in  the  earlier  portion  of 
the  book,  where  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  are  spoken  of  as 
being  again  "  full  of  boys  and  girls  playing  in  the  streets 
thereof  "  l 

1  Chap.  viii.  5. 


CHAPTER    XV 

WHAT  ISRAEL'S  SHEPHERD-KING  WILL 
BE  AND  DO  FOR  HIS  PEOPLE 

(CHAPTER  x) 


335 


Ask  ye  of  Jehovah  rain  in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain,  even  of  Jehovah  that 
maketh  lightnings  ;  and  He  will  give  them  showers  of  rain,  to  every  one  grass  in 
the  field.  For  the  teraphim  have  spoken  vanity,  and  the  diviners  have  seen  a 
lie ;  and  they  have  told  false  dreams,  they  comfort  in  vain  :  therefore  they  go 
their  way  like  sheep,  they  are  afflicted,  because  there  is  no  shepherd.  Mine 
anger  is  kindled  against  the  shepherds,  and  I  will  punish  the  he-goats  :  for 
Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  visited  His  flock,  the  house  of  Judah,  and  will  make  them 
as  His  goodly  horse  in  the  battle.  From  him  shall  come  forth  the  corner-stone, 
from  him  the  nail,  from  him  the  battle  bow,  from  him  every  ruler  together.  And 
they  shall  be  as  mighty  men,  treading  down  their  enemies  in  the  mire  of  the 
streets  in  the  battle  ;  and  they  shall  fight,  because  Jehovah  is  with  them  ;  and  the 
riders  on  horses  shall  be  confounded.  And  I  will  strengthen  the  house  of  Judah, 
and  I  will  save  the  house  of  Joseph,  and  I  will  bring  them  back,  for  I  have 
mercy  upon  them  ;  and  they  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  them  off ;  for  I  am 
Jehovah  their  God,  and  I  will  hear  them.  And  they  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a 
mighty  man,  and  their  heart  shall  rejoice  as  through  wine ;  yea,  their  children 
shall  see  it,  and  rejoice  ;  their  heart  shall  be  glad  in  Jehovah.  And  I  will  hiss 
for  them,  and  gather  them  ;  for  I  have  redeemed  them  :  and  they  shall  increase  as 
they  have  increased.  And  I  will  sow  them  among  the  peoples,  and  they  shall 
remember  Me  in  far  countries  ;  and  they  shall  live  with  their  children  ;  and  shall 
return.  I  will  bring  them  again  also  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  gather  them 
out  of  Assyria ;  and  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Gilead  and  Lebanon  ; 
and  place  shall  not  be  found  for  them.  And  he  will  pass  through  the  sea  of 
affliction,  and  will  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea,  and  all  the  depths  of  the  Nile  shall 
dry  up  :  and  the  pride  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought  down,  and  the  sceptre  of  Egypt 
shall  depart.  And  I  will  strengthen  them  in  Jehovah  ;  and  they  shall  walk  up 
and  down  in  His  name,  saith  Jehovah. 


336 


CHAPTER    XV 

THE  blessed  and  prosperous  condition  of  restored  and 
converted  Israel  under  the  care  and  leadership  of 
their  true   Shepherd-King   may  be   given   as   the 
summary  of  the  chapter  to  which  we  have  now  come.      The 
first  verses  are  linked  on,  and  are  a  continuation   of  the 
promises  contained  in  the  last  section  (vers.   7—11)  of  the 
9th  chapter. 

Of  the  abundance  of  spiritual  blessings  and  glory  which 
shall  then  dwell  in  the  land,  to  repeat  a  few  sentences  from  my 
notes  on  chap.  ix.  1 9 — "  Material  prosperity  and  temporal 
abundance  will,  as  is  not  the  case  in  the  present  dispensa 
tion,  be  the  outward  sign  and  accompaniment."  "  Corn," 
exclaims  the  prophet  at  the  conclusion  of  that  chapter, 
"  shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful  (or,  literally,  '  grow ' 
or  '  increase '),  and  new  wine  the  maids  (or  '  virgins ')." 

But  for  Palestine  to  become  once  again,  yea,  even  more 

than  before,  a  land  "  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,"  after  its 

many  centuries  of  barrenness  and  desolation,  the  fertilising 

!  showers    are    essential ;    and    though    this    is  promised  to 

!  them,  they  are  yet  exhorted  to  "  ask  "  for   it,  even  as  in 

i  Ezek.   xxxvi.,  where,  after  promising,  among  many  other 

i  great    things,    that    "  this    land    which    was  desolate   shall 

I  become  like  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  the  waste  and  deso- 

|  late  and  ruined  cities  shall  become  fenced  and  inhabited," 

we  read  :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  yet  for  this  will  I  be 

inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel  to  do  it  for  them  "  * — 

for  the  promises  of  God,  whether  in  relation  to  temporal 

or  spiritual  blessings,  are  only  turned  into  experience  by 

the  faith  and  prayers  of  His  people. 

1  Ezek.  xxxvi.  37. 


338     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  it  is  perhaps  necessary  to  repeat  and  emphasise 
that  it  is  literal  rain  which  is  meant  here,  in  the  first 
instance,  in  which  connection  it  is  important  to  observe  that 
Israel  was  taught  to  regard  the  giving  or  withholding  of 
this  great  temporal  blessing,  upon  which  the  prosperity  of 
the  land  and  the  life  of  man  and  beast  are  dependent,  as 
entirely  in  the  hand  of  God.  "Are  there  any  among  the 
vanities  of  tJie  heathen  that  can  cause  rain  ?  "  exclaimed  the 
prophet  Jeremiah,  "  or  can  the  heavens  (of  themselves]  give 
showers  ?  art  not  Thou  He,  O  Jehovah  our  God  ?  there 
fore  we  will  wait  upon  TJice  :  for  Thou  hast  made  all  these 
things."  * 

In  these  modern  times  men  have  grown  wiser,  and  no 
longer  recognise  or  acknowledge  God  in  what  to  them  is 
entirely  due  to  "  natural  causes  "  ;  but  such  wisdom  is  based 
on  a  science  only  falsely  so  called,  and  is  foolishness  in  the 
eyes  of  those  who  know  that  there  is  a  living,  personal  God, 
the  Creator  and  Upholder  of  all  things,  who,  though  He  in 
His  infinite  power  and  wisdom  appointed  certain  "  laws  "  to 
govern  His  creation,  is  Himself  all  the  time  behind  and 
above  these  laws,  to  guide  and  control ;  and  does,  either  by 
using  "  natural  means "  which  are  known  to  us,  or  apart 
from  them,  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  men  and  nations  with 
a  view  to  deliver,  or  instruct,  or  correct.  To  Israel,  rain  in 
due  season,  so  that  the  land  should  yield  her  increase,  was 
promised  as  the  direct  reward  of  national  obedience. 

"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  ye  shall  hearken 
diligently  unto  My  commandments  whidi  I  command  you  this 
day,  to  love  the  Lord  your  God,  and  to  serve  Him  with  all 
your  Jieart  and  with  all  your  soul,  that  I  will  give  the  rain 
of  your  land  in  its  season,  the  former  rain  and  the  latter 
rain,  that  thou  mayest  gather  in  thy  corn,  and  thy  wine,  and 
thine  oil."  2 

And  it  is  a  notorious  fact  that  the  withholding  of  the 
showers  and  the  scarcity  of  the  rainfall — whatever  the 
secondary  causes  by  which  it  may  be  accounted  for — was 
one  of  the  chief  factors  in  the  predicted  desolation  of 

1  Jer.-xiv.  22.  ~  Deut.  xi.  13-15  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  3,  4  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  I-I2. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  339 

Palestine,  during  the  many  centuries  that  the  people  has 
been  banished  from  it  on  account  of  apostasy. 

But  to  return  to  our  passage.  It  is  especially  "  the 
latter  rain  "  which  in  Palestine  is  so  important  as  strengthen 
ing  and  maturing  the  crops,  that  they  are  here  exhorted  to 
ask  of  the  Lord,  so  that  He  may  graciously  complete 
"what  He  had  begun  by  the  former  rain,  filling  the  ears 
before  the  harvest." l 

But  though  the  primary  reference  is  to  literal  showers, 
"  on  which  the  successful  cultivation  of  the  fruits  of  the 
ground  depends,"  I  agree  with  the  German  Bible  scholar 
who  says  that  the  exhortation  to  ask  for  rain  "  only  serves 
Ifto  individualise  the  prayer  for  the  bestowal  of  the  blessings 
of  God,  in  order  to  sustain  both  temporal  and  spiritual  life." 

Indeed,  there  is  a  blending  of  temporal  and  spiritual 
blessings    in   the    promise  in    the   9th    and    roth   chapters, 
'  Sjithe  outward  and  visible  being  the  types  and  symbols  of 
n  ithe  spiritual  and  eternal.     When,  on  coming  out  of  Egypt, 

fld   |       l  There  are  four  words  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  for  rain,  three  of  which  occur  in 
u   ithis  1st  verse  of  our  chapter. 

(l)  rnv,  yorch  (also  rniD,  moreA),  which  stands  for  the  "  first "  or  "former,"  or 
i  very  early  rain. 
ith   I       (2)  np£,  matar,  the  ordinary  word  for  "  rain"  during  the  rainy  season. 

(3)  D^j,  geshem,  which  stands  for  heavy,  or  torrential  rain. 

(4)  tPip^D,  mafqosh,  "  the  latter  rain." 

The  variations  of  sunshine  and  rain,  which  in  England  extend  throughout  the 
year,  are  in  Palestine  confined  chiefly  to  the  latter  part  of  autumn  and  winter. 

\lt    The  autumnal,  or  "early"  rain,  commences  in  October  (in  the  Lebanon  about 

,,  a  month  earlier)  and  continues  to  November,  with  long  spells  of  beautiful 
weather — the  whole  fall  being  very  small.  It  prepares  the  soil  for  ploughing 

*'    and  sowing.     November  to  February  inclusive  is  the  rainy  season,  the  storms 

diff    and  showers  often  being  extremely  heavy  ;  but  during  these  months  also  there 

.ft.    inay  be  many  days  at  a  time  of  fine  weather. 

In  March  and  April  is  the  time  of  the  latter  rain.     The  period  of  sowing 

'**  i  varies  according  to  situation  from  the  end  of  October  right  into  December 
(barley  is  not,  as  a  rule,  sown  till  January  or  February).  Harvest-time  also 

tig  differs  according  to  situation  from  early  in  May,  or  even  April  (in  the  low-lying 
parts),  to  June  and  even  July,  as  we  have  ourselves  witnessed  on  the  higher 
slopes  of  the  Lebanon.  From  May  to  the  end  of  September  is  the  very  dry  and 

fflS  |  hot  season.     The  almost  uninterruptedly  cloudless  and  burning  sun  dries  up  all 


' 


[-11 


moisture,  and,  as  the  heat  increases  the  grass  withers,  the  flower  fades,  the 
bushes  and  shrubs  take  on  a  hard  grey  look,  the  soil  becomes  dust,  and  many 
parts  of  the  country  assume  the  aspect  of  parched  and  barren  deserts. 


340     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Israel  was  brought  into  covenant  relationship  with  God,  we 
read,  "  Thou,  O  God,  didst  send  a  plentiful  rain ;  Thou 
didst  confirm  Thine  inheritance  when  it  was  weary"  1 

And  when  Jehovah  shall  have  mercy  upon  Zion  again, 
and  bring  back  His  people  after  the  long  centuries  of  their 
"  weary  "  wanderings,  the  light  of  His  blessed  countenance 
shall  be  as  "  life  "  to  them,  "  and  His  favour  as  a  cloud  of 
the  latter  rain  " 2 — yea,  in  response  to  the  spirit  of  grace 
and  of  supplication  which  shall  then  be  created  in  them, 
God  says,  "  /  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and 
streams  (or  'floods'}  upon  the  dry  ground ;  I  will  pour  My 
Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  My  blessing  upon  thine  offspring.  "  s 

Viewed  as  a  symbol  of  spiritual  gifts  and  blessings, 
there  is  a  message  also  for  you  and  me  in  this  ancient 
exhortation,  dear  reader.  Indeed,  1  look  upon  this  passage 
as  one  of  the  most  beautiful  scriptures  in  the  Old  Testa 
ment  in  reference  to  prayer,  and  God's  manner  of  answering. 

I.  "  Ask  ye  of  Jehovah,   .  .  .  and  Jehovah  shall  give" 
which  reminds  us  of  the  word  of  our  Lord  Jesus :  "  Ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive,"  for  the  God  of  Israel  is  a  God  who 
does  answer  prayer.     Sometimes  the  answer  may  be  brought 
about  by  apparently  natural  causes,  but  all  the  same  it  is 
"  Jehovah  that  maketh  lightnings," 4  and  commandeth  the 
clouds  to  discharge  their  fertilising  showers. 

II.  "Ask  ye  of  Jehovah  RAIN,  .  .  .  and   He  shall  give 
them  showers  of  rain,   D5?J  "i£?p,    tritar  geshem " — literally, 
"  rain  of  plenty,  or  pouring  rain  "  ;  for  our  God  is  able  to 
do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,  and 
this  both  in  relation  to  temporal  and  spiritual  things. 

III.  "And  He  will  give  to  every  one  grass  in  the  field?  \ 
for  He  individualises  His  gifts  and  blessings,  and  not  one!; 
is  left  out  of  His  gracious  and  bountiful  provision  and  careJ 

But  one  great  condition  of  effectual  prayer  is  that  our; 
hearts  and  expectations  be  set  wholly  upon  God.     "  Hear 

1  Ps.  Ixix.  9.  -  Prov.  xvi.  15. 

*  Isa.  xliv.  3. 

4  The  lightnings  are  spoken  of  as  the  harbingers  of  rain  ;  see  also  Jer.  x.  13, 
"  He  maketh  lightnings  for  the  rain,"  which  is  a  verbal  repetition  of  Ps.  cxxxv.  7 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  341 

O  My  people,  and  I  will  testify  unto  thee  :  O  Israel,  if  thou 
;}  wouldest  hearken  unto  Me ;  there  shall  no  strange  god  be 
in  thee  ;  neither  shalt  thou  worship  any  strange  god.  I  am 
the  Lord  thy  God,  which  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt :  open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it"  x 

It  was  Israel's  divided  heart,  the  turning  away  from  the 
true  and  living  God  to  follow  after  the  vanities  of  the 
Gentiles,  which  was  the  cause  of  Israel's  calamities  and 
ruin  in  the  past.  This  is  what  the  prophet  reminds  them 
of  in  the  2nd  verse :  "  For  the  idols  ('  teraphim ')  have 
spoken  vanity,  and  the  diviners  fiave  seen  a  lie ;  they  have 
told  false  dreams  (or,  '  and  dreams  speak  vanity '),  they 
comfort  in  vain  :  therefore  they  went  their  way  (or 
'  wandered ')  like  sheep,  they  are  oppressed  (or  '  afflicted '), 
because  there  was  no  shepherd'' 

It  is  the  teraphim,  or  "speaking"  oracles  of  the  heathen, 
and  their  consulters,  or  diviners,  that  the  prophet  specially 
speaks  of  in  this  verse. 

"  Apart  from  our  passage  there  are  only  seven  other 
scriptures  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  where  the  teraphim  are 
introduced  ;  but  these  suffice  to  show  that  they  were  not 
only  idols,  the  use  of  which  is  classed  by  God  with  '  witch 
craft,  stubbornness,  and  iniquity,'2  but  that  they  were  a 
peculiar  kind  of  idols,  namely,  those  used  for  oracular 
responses.  The  first  mention  of  the  teraphim  is  in  connec 
tion  with  Jacob's  flight  from  Laban,  in  Gen.  xxx. ;  and  in 
the  light  of  the  other  passages  there  seems  probability  in 
the  explanation  of  Aben  Ezra  that  Rachel  stole  them  in 
order  that  her  father  might  not  discover  the  direction  of 
their  flight  by  means  of  these  oracles.3 

"  The  second  place  where  we  find  them  is  in  that 
strange  narrative  about  the  Ephraimite  Micah,  and  the 
Danite  expedition  to  Laish,  in  Judg.  xvii.  and  xviii.,  where 
we  get  a  sad  and  characteristic  glimpse  of  the  condition  of 
some  among  the  tribes  in  those  days,  '  when  there  was  no 

1  Ps.  Ixxxi.  8-10.  -  i  Sam.  xv.  23. 

3  See  Aben  Ezra  in  loc.     Gesenius  traces  "teraphim"  to  the  unused  root 
"  taraph,"  which  in  the  Syriac  has  the  significance,  "  to  inquire." 


342     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

king  in  Israel,  and  every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in 
his  own  eyes.'  This  narrative  supplies  an  illustration  of 
the  fact  that  not  only  is  man  incapable  of  himself  to  find 
God,  but  that,  left  to  himself,  he  is  incapable  of  retaining 
the  knowledge  of  God  in  its  original  purity  even  when  once 
divinely  communicated  ;  and  that  even  the  things  revealed, 
apart  from  the  continued  teaching  of  God's  Spirit,  are  liable 
to  become  corrupted  and  distorted  in  his  mind.  Here  we 
have  a  sad  instance  of  a  certain  knowledge  of  Jehovah 
mixed  up  with  the  worship  of  '  a  graven  image  and  a 
molten  image,'  which  were  an  abomination  in  His  sight,  and 
the  illegitimate  use  of  the  divinely  instituted  ephod,  which 
was  only  to  be  borne  by  the  high  priest,  joined  together 
with  the  pagan  teraphim.  But  the  point  to  be  noted  is 
that  here  also  these  teraphim  were  used  for  oracular  con 
sultations,  for  it  was  of  them  that  the  apostate  Levite  of 
Bethlehem  asked  for  counsel  for  the  idolatrous  Danites.1 
In  Ezek.  xxi.  2 1  we  find  the  exact  antithesis  to  David's 
consulting  the  ephod,  in  the  pagan  king  of  Babylon  '  con 
sulting  with  images  '  (literally,  '  teraphim  '),  in  reference  to 
his  projected  invasion  of  Palestine.2 

"  Now  it  is  clear  that  in  olden  times,  whenever  by 
apostasy  and  disobedience  fellowship  with  Jehovah  was 
interrupted,  and  when  in  consequence  there  was  no  revela 
tion  from  Him,  '  neither  by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim,  nor  by 
prophets,'  Israel  turned  to  the  pagan  teraphim,  or,  like  poor 
Saul,  they  '  sought  unto  such  as  had  familiar  spirits  and 
wizards  that  peep  and  mutter.' 

"  A  parallelism,  in  its  spiritual  significance,  is  to  be 
found  in  Christendon.  What  the  ephod  or  the  prophet 
was  in  olden  times,  Holy  Scripture  is  now.  It  is  even  a 
'  more  sure  word  '  than  voices  from  heaven,  or  answers  by 

1  Judg.  xviii.  5,  6. 

2  The  only  other  instances  where  teraphim  are  mentioned  are  I  Sam.  xix. 
13-16,  from  which  we  gather,  first,  the  sad  fact  that  idolatry  was  practised  by 
Michal,  the  daughter  of  Saul ;  and,  secondly,  that  the  teraphim  must  have  had 
some  resemblance  to  the  human  form,  since  the  idol  could  be  mistaken  for  the 
body  of  David.     There  were  no  doubt  larger  ones  in  the  temples,  and  smaller 
ones  of  all  sizes,  and  for  idolatrous  purposes,  in  the  houses. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  343 

Urim  and  Thummim.  The  Scriptures,  first  spoken  by 
holy  men  of  God  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
are  now  '  the  oracles  of  Godl  themselves  speaking  with 
voices  which  carry  their  own  conviction  to  hearts  honestly 
seeking  for  truth,  and  ever  confirming  themselves  in  the 
world's  history  and  in  the  Christian's  experience ;  but  men 
in  the  present  day,  even  in  Christendom,  stumbling  at  the 
supernatural,  as  if  there  could  be  a  revelation  of  the  Infinite 
and  Everlasting  One  without  such  an  element  in  them,  turn 
away  from  these  oracles  often  on  the  flimsiest  grounds,  and 
instead  are  giving  heed  on  the  one  hand  to  the  speculations 
of  a  '  science  falsely  so  called,'  and  on  the  other  hand  '  to 
seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils,'  and  are  thus  in  a 
measure  supplying  an  illustration  of  the  solemn  words  of 
the  apostle,  that  if  men  receive  not  the  love  of  the  truth 
that  they  might  be  saved,  '  God  shall  for  this  cause  send 
them  strong  delusion  that  they  should  believe  a  lie.' a 

"  For  of  the  modern  Christian  teraphim  it  is  as  true 
as  of  the  ancient  pagan  ones,  that  '  they  speak  vanityl 
or  '  wickedness ' ;  and  as  for  their  '  diviners/  or  false 
prophets  representing  them,  '  they  see  a  lie,  and  tell  false 
dreams,  they  comfort  in  vain  ' ;  for  it  is  a  comfort  not  well 
founded,  and  will  not  stand  the  test  of  death,  or  of  a  judg 
ment  to  come."2 

But  to  return  to  our  passage :  "  Therefore " — the 
prophet  continues,  because  they  followed  lying  oracles,  and 
they  who  should  have  strengthened  them  in  God,  and  in 
His  truth,  told  them  their  own  false  dreams,  and  comforted 
them  with  vain  expectations — "  tliey  went  their  way  (or 
1  wandered ')  3  like  sheep,  they  are  afflicted  (or  '  oppressed '), 
because  there  is  no  shepherd" 

The  primary  reference  is  very  probably  to  their  wander 
ing  and  oppression  in  the  Babylonian  Captivity,  but  the 
picture  is  true  also  of  the  much  longer  exile  and  greater 

1  2  Thess.  ii.  n,  12. 

2  Quoted  from  The  Ancient  Scriptures  and  the  Modern  Jew. 

3  lypj,  nas'u.     The  metaphor  of  the  verb  is  taken  from  the  pulling  up  the 
stakes  of  a  tent  or  sheep-fold,  a  breaking  up  which  involves  an  idea  of  wandering, 
and  in  this  connection  of  wandering  into  captivity. 


344     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

affliction  which  commenced  with  the  destruction  of  the 
second  Temple. 

This  is  how  our  Lord  Jesus  beheld  Israel's  multitudes, 
and  "  was  moved  with  compassion  on  them,1  because  they 
were  distressed  (or  '  plagued,'  or  '  harassed  ')  and  scattered," 
i.e.,  they  were  troubled,  neglected,  uncared  for. 

Their  outward  condition,  as  they  followed  Him  about 
from  place  to  place,  a  disorganised  mass,  hungry  and 
weary,  was  pitiable  enough,  but  this  was  but  a  faint  picture 
of  their  ?  iritual  condition,  of  the  wretchedness  of  their 
souls,  in  insequence  of  the  misguidance  and  tyranny  of 
their  false  leaders. 

And  there  in  Matt,  ix.,  even  as  in  this  passage  in  Zech- 
ariah,  which  may  have  been  in  our  Lord's  mind  at  the 
time,  the  saddest  touch  in  the  gloomy  picture  of  Israel's 
distressed  and  helpless  condition  is  contained  in  the  words, 
"  because  there  is  no  shepherd"  or,  "  as  sheep  having  no 
shepherd"  i.e.,  no  one  to  guide,  or  control,  or  care  for  them. 
There  were  indeed  in  the  time  before  the  Captivity,  as  later 
in  our  Lord's  time,  many  who  called  themselves  "  shepherds," 
but  they  were  false,  deceiving  shepherds,  who  devoured  the 
flock,  and  sought  only  to  feed  themselves. 

But  to  proceed  to  the  3rd  verse. 

Because  their  appointed  shepherds  have  proved  false, 
Jehovah  Himself,  in  the  Person  of  the  Messiah  (as  we  shall 
see  from  the  4th  verse),  is  going  to  act  the  part  of  the 
Good  Shepherd  to  them.  And  first  He  will  show  His 
care  for  His  people  by  delivering  them  from  their  false 
shepherds.  "  Mine  anger  is  kindled  against  the  shepherds, 
and  I  will  punish  the  he-goats"  It  is  not  necessary  to 
suppose,  with  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Koehler,  etc.,  that  by 
these  false  shepherds  and  he-goats,  the  "  heathen  governors 
and  tyrants  "  who  ruled  over  them  in  captivity,  are  meant. 
It  is  much  more  likely  that  the  prophet  has  such  scriptures 
from  the  "  former  prophets,"  as  Jer.  xxiii.  and  Ezek.  xxxiv., 
in  his  mind,  where  the  false  shepherds  are  their  own  faith 
less  princes,  priests,  and  prophets — in  short,  those  in  their 
1  Matt.  ix.  36,  R.V. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  345 

own  nation  who  should  have  led  them,  but  only  misled 
them  ;  and  of  whom,  alas !  there  has  been  no  lack  at  any 
time  or  period  in  Jewish  history. 

DHtfiy,  atudim — "  he-goats,"  though  it  does  sometimes 
(as  in  Isa.  xiv.  9)  signify  rulers  or  princes,  must  not  here 
be  confounded  with  "  the  shepherds,"  but  must  be  viewed 
in  the  light  of  Ezek.  xxxiv.,  where,  after  judgments  are 
announced  against  the  false  shepherds  (or  rulers),  we  read, 
"  And  as  for  you,  O  My  flock,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold, 
I  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle,  as  well  (as  between}  the 
rams  and  the  he-goats  (atudim}  " 1 — where  the  latter  stand 
for  the  rich  and  strong  ones  among  the  people  themselves 
who  oppressed  the  humble  and  the  poor. 

And  not  only  will  He  deliver  them  from  the  false 
shepherds,  the  best  part  of  the  promise  is  contained  in  the 
second  half  of  the  verse,  "  For  Jehovah  of  Jwsts  hath 
visited  (or  '  visits  '}  His  flock,  the  house  of  Judah,  and  makes 
them  as  His  goodly  horse  in  the  war  (or  '  battle ')."  The 
perfect  tense  of  paqad,  "  to  visit,"  is  used  here  also  pro 
phetically  of  what  God  has  resolved  to  do  and  will  assuredly 
carry  out.  And  when  He  visits  His  flock  for  good,  and 
assumes  His  shepherd-care  of  them,  they  will  be  no  more 
like  distressed  and  scattered  sheep,  a  prey  to  any  wild 
beast,  but  they  shall  be  strong  in  Jehovah  and  in  the  power 
of  His  might.  He  shall  make  them  (or  "  set  them  ")  "  as 
His  goodly  horse,"  or,  as  the  phrase  may  be  rendered, 
"the  horse  of  His  Majesty" — that  is,  the  horse  fit  and 
equipped  for  the  God  of  Majesty  to  ride  forth  upon  "  in 
battle,"  to  execute  His  judgments  upon  the  nations. 

We  now  come  to  the  4th  verse  of  the  roth  chapter, 
which  I  regard  as  one  of  the  richest  Messianic  prophecies 
in  the  Old  Testament.  In  keeping  with  Zechariah's  style, 
which  I  have  so  often  had  occasion  to  point  out  in  my 
notes  on  the  earlier  chapters,  we  have  in  this  short  verse 
not  only  allusions,  but  a  terse  summary  of  a  number  of 
utterances  by  the  "former  prophets"  in  reference  to  the 
character  and  mission  of  Israel's  promised  Redeemer. 
1  Ezek.  xxxiv.  17. 


346     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  From  him  the  corner  (or  '  corner-stone  '),  from  him  the 
nail  (or  'peg'},  from  him  the  battle  bow, yea,  from  him  shall 
proceed  every  ruler  together  (or,  '  he  that  will  exercise  all 
rule ')." ! 

1  Many  different  interpretations  of  this  verse  have  been  given  by  commentators, 
who  for  the  most  part  ignore  any  reference  to  the  Messiah.  Dr.  Wright  admits 
that  "the  corner"  means  the  corner-stone,  and  that  in  Isa.  xxviii.  16  this  title, 
with  others,  is  used  in  reference  to  the  Messiah  (p.  272) :  and  so  evidently  the 
term  "nail,"  which  is  taken  from  Isa.  xxii.  ;  but  a  few  pages  further  on  he 
blames  Dr.  Pusey,  Bishop  Wordsworth,  and  others  for  explaining  these  terms  of 
the  Messiah  (which  the  Jewish  Targum  also  does),  and  says  that  "  such  explana 
tion  cannot  be  defended  on  any  rational  principles  of  exegesis."  But  if  in  those 
passages  in  Isaiah  (which  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  were  known  to 
Zechariah,  and  to  which  he  very  probably  alludes)  these  titles  refer  to  the  Messiah, 
what  "  rational "  grounds  are  there  for  saying  that  they  do  not  refer  to  the 
Messiah  in  this  passage  in  Zechariah  ? 

Hengstenberg,  who  translates,  "  Out  of  him  the  corner-stone,  out  of  him  the 
peg,  out  of  him  the  war-bow,  out  of  him  will  every  ruler  come  forth  together," 
explains  in  a  general  way  as  follows  :  "  Having  attained  perfect  freedom  by  the 
help  of  the  Lord,  who  gives  success  to  their  arms,  they  will  now  receive  rulers 
and  officers  from  among  themselves,  and  a  military  force  of  their  own  ;  and 
whereas  they  formerly  were  a  prey  to  strange  conquerors,  they  will  now  terrify 
even  foreign  nations." 

Keil,  who  translates  the  same  as  Hengstenberg,  explains  phinnah,  the 
"corner,"  as  "a  suitable  figure  for  the  firm  stately  foundation  which  Judah  is  to 
receive."  Yathed,  "nail"  or  "plug,"  is  a  suitable  figure  for  the  supports  or 
upholders  of  the  whole  political  constitution.  The  war-bow  stands  for  weapons 
of  war  and  the  military  power ;  and  noges  (which  I  have  rendered  ruler  in  the 
absolute  sense),  according  to  him  (as  well  as  Hengstenberg),  "  has  the  subordinate 
idea  of  oppressor  or  despotic  ruler  in  this  passage  also  ;  but  the  idea  of  harshness 
(which  is  implied  in  the  title)  refers  not  to  the  covenant  nation,  but  to  its  enemies." 
Kliefoth,  explaining  each  word  on  the  principle  of  a  part  of  the  whole,  interprets 
"the  corner-stone"  to  indicate  the  walls  or  fortifications;  the  "tent  peg,"  to 
denote  the  camp;  "the  battle  bow,"  warlike  weapons  of  offence  in  general. 
All  these  are,  according  to  him,  included  in  the  last  phrase,  Khol  noges  yachdav) 
which  he  translates,  "All  which  rules." 

Lange  maintains  that  the  four  terms  are  expressions  denoting  the  leaders  of 
the  people — two  of  them  indicating  the  leaders  required  for  war,  and  the  other 
two  the  leaders  in  the  days  of  peace.  According  to  him,  the  "corner-stone' 
denotes  the  fixed  and  established  government;  the  "tent  peg,"  those  who  took 
charge  of  travel;  while  the  "battle  bow  "  is  supposed  to  indicate  the  regular 
leaders  on  the  battlefield;  and  the  noges,  which  he  renders  "assaulter"  or 
"  oppressor,"  the  man  who  breaks  through  the  hostile  line  of  battle.  But  the 
explanation  is  fanciful,  as  are  others  which  may  be  quoted. 

On  the  rendering  of  the  last  clause  see  the  note  on  p.  355. 

I  must  add  that  in  my  notes  on  this  verse  I  have  embodied  some  paragraphs 
from  the  chapter,  "Four  Precious  Titles  of  the  Messiah,"  in  my  book,  Rays  of 
Messiah's  Glory,  which  is  out  of  print. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  347 

"  From  him,"  must  be  understood  of  Judah  —  the 
sense  being  equivalent  to  "  out  of  himself?  with  a  probable 
allusion  to  Deut.  xviii.  15-19,  where  the  promised  great 
prophet  like  unto  Moses,  but  who  should  yet  be  greater 
than  Moses,  is  spoken  of  as  coming  forth  "from  the  midst 
of  thee,  of  thy  brethren";  and  Jer.  xxx.  25,  where  we 
read:  "And  their  Prince  (literally,  their  'glorious  one') 
shall  be  of  themselves,  and  their  ruler  shall  proceed  from 
the  midst  of  them"  It  is  partly  in  explanation  how, 
and  through  whom,  the  promise  in  the  3rd  verse  shall  be 
fulfilled,  namely,  that  when  Jehovah  visits  "  the  house  of 
Judah  "  they  shall  suddenly  be  transformed  from  a  flock 
of  scattered,  troubled  sheep,  into  His  stately  irresistible 
war-horse. 

It  is  also  in  harmony  with  the  whole  testimony  of 
prophetic  scripture  that  the  family  of  David,  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  should  be  the  human  stock,  and  Bethlehem  Ephratha 
in  the  portion  of  Judah,  the  place  on  earth  where  He  should 
come  forth  "  that  is,  to  be  Ruler  in  Israel"  though  we  are  at 
the  same  time  reminded  that,  according  to  His  Divine 
nature,  "  His  goings  forth  are  from  of  old  from  the  days  of 
eternity,"  as  the  passage  in  Mic.  v.  2  reads  literally. 

I.    The  Corner-stone 

Out  of  Judah  then  shall  come  forth  "  the  corner  "  (H3Q, 
pliinnah,  the  corner-stone}.  The  allusion  is  doubtless  to  Isa. 
xxviii.  1 6,  where,  contrasting  the  sure  refuge  which  He 
Himself  provides  for  His  people  with  the  refuges  of  lies 
which  men  make  for  themselves,  which  shall  be  swept  away 
by  the  hailstorms  of  His  judgments,  the  Lord  says,  "  Behold, 
I  lay  in  Z  ion  for  a  foundation,  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  precious 
corner-stone,  a  sure  foundation  ('  a  foundation  well  founded'}  ; 
he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste  " — a  scripture  which 
has  always  been  regarded  as  Messianic  by  both  Jews  and 
Christians.  The  Christian  cannot  also  forget  the  fact  that 
in  the  New  Testament  the  figure  of  the  foundation  stone, 
and  head-stone  of  the  corner,  is  applied  to  our  Lord  Jesus 


348     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

both  by  Himself  and  by  the  apostles.1  But  the  question 
is,  What  is  implied  in  it?  Writing  as  I  do  here,  primarily 
for  Christians,  and  in  the  full  light  which  the  New  Testa 
ment  revelation  casts  upon  the  ancient  prophecies  in  the 
Old  Testament,  I  would  say  that  the  first  and  most  obvious 
truth  which  the  Spirit  of  God  would  have  us  learn  from 
this  figure  is  that  the  Messiah  is  the  sure  foundation  of 
"  the  House  of  God,  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God." 

For  the  safety  and  stability  of  a  building  almost  every 
thing  depends  on  the  foundation.  The  plan  and  material 
may  be  ever  so  perfect ;  the  ornamentation  ever  so  elaborate 
and  beautiful — but  all  is  of  no  avail  if  the  foundation  be 
sand,  for  it  cannot  abide  the  storm  or  flood.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  materials  of  a  building  may  be  of  more  humble 
quality,  the  ornamentation  may  be  less  elaborate  or  plain  ; 
but  if  the  foundation  be  sound,  the  rain  may  descend,  the 
floods  come,  and  the  winds  blow  and  beat  upon  that  house, 
it  will  not  fall,  for  it  is  built  upon  a  rock.  Now  the  great 
God,  the  Divine  Architect  of  the  universe,  has  purposed 
within  Himself  from  all  eternity  to  raise  out  of  frail,  im 
perfect,  human  materials  a  glorious  Temple  for  His  own 
eternal  habitation  through  the  Spirit,  which,  when  completed, 
shall  show  forth,  even  more  than  the  material  temple  of  the 
universe,  to  principalities  and  powers  the  infinite  power  and 
manifold  wisdom  of  God  ;  and  in  order  to  ensure  its  eternal 
safety  He  has  bestowed  great  care  on  the  foundation.  He 
Himself  has  laid  it :  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation," 
for  it  is  a  task  which  could  not  be  entrusted  to,  or  accom 
plished  by,  men  or  angels. 

And  the  "  tried  "  and  "  precious  "  corner-stone  which 
He  laid  as  the  basis  of  this  mystical  structure  is  His  own 
Son,  who  is  "  perfected  for  evermore,"  against  whom  even 
the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail. 

This  accounts  for  the  continuance  and  immovableness 
of  the  Church  of  Christ,  in  spite  of  the  many  storms  it  has 
had  to  brave,  and  the  insidious  attacks  from  enemies  and 
false  friends.  Let  the  storm  rage ;  let  infidelity  assail  ;  let 

1  Matt.  xxi.  42 ;  Acts  iv.  1 1  ;  I  Pet.  ii.  4-8. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  349 

men  and  devils  do  their  utmost.  Has  it  not  been  foretold 
in  advance  that  the  same  precious  foundation  stone  upon 
which  millions  would  build  unto  their  eternal  safety,  would 
also  become  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  rock  of  offence 
against  which  many  would  stumble,  and  fall,  and  be  broken 
to  pieces  ? l 

But  "  the  foundation  of  God  remains  sure,"  and  those 
whose  feet  are  firmly  planted  on  it  have  no  occasion  to  fear. 
Therefore  the  prophet  adds :  "  He  that  believetk  shall  not 
make  haste " — that  is,  to  flee  in  alarm  at  the  threatened 
judgments,  in  the  day  when  God  ariseth  to  shake  terribly 
this  earth,  but  shall  abide  safe  on  the  unshakeable  Rock  of 
Ages  and  Eternal  Refuge. 

But,  secondly,  the  corner-stone  served  not  only  as  a 
foundation,  but,  to  quote  a  dictionary  definition,  it  is  "  that 
stone  which  unites  the  two  walls  at  the  corner."  It  is  a 
point  of  much  interest  that  the  original  foundation  stone  of 
Solomon's  Temple  was  actually  discovered  as  one  of  the 
early  results  of  the  exploration  carried  on  by  the  Palestine 
Exploration  Fund.  I  take  the  following  from  a  small  work 
by  one  of  its  agents,  which  gives  the  account  of  this 
discovery : 

"  Among  the  ancient  Jews  the  foundation  corner-stone 
of  their  sanctuary  on  Moriah  was  regarded  as  the  emblem  of 
moral  and  spiritual  truths.  //  had  two  functions  to  perform  : 
first,  like  the  other  foundation  stones,  it  was  a  support  for  the 
masonry  above  ;  but  it  had  also  to  face  both  ways,  and  was 
thus  a  bond  of  union  between  two  walls.  .  .  . 

"  The  engineers,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  dimensions  of 
this  foundation  stone,  worked  round  it,  and  report  that  it  is 
three  feet  eight  inches  high  and  fourteen  feet  in  length. 
At  the  angle  it  is  let  down  into  the  rock  to  a  depth  of 
fourteen  inches  ;  but,  as  the  rock  rises  towards  the  north, 
the  depth  of  four  feet  north  of  the  angle  is  increased  by 
thirty-two  inches,  while  the  northern  end  seems  entirely 
embedded  in  the  rock.  The  block  is  further  described  as 
squared  and  polished,  with  a  finely  dressed  face. 

1  Isa.  viii.  14,  15  ;  Matt.  xxi.  42-44. 


350     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  It  does  not  appear  to  have  any  marginal  draft  at  the 
bottom,  and  indeed  this  was  not  necessary,  as  the  lower 
part,  being  sunk  in  the  rock,  would  always  be  hidden  from 
view  ;  but  the  absence  of  the  lower  draft  indicates  that  the 
block  was  dressed  in  the  quarry  in  a  somewhat  peculiar 
style,  with  a  view  to  its  being  the  foundation  corner-stone. 
The  draft  on  the  upper  margin  of  the  stone  is  four  inches 
wide.  Fixed  in  its  abiding  position  3000  years  ago,  it 
still  stands  sure  and  steadfast,  a  fitting  emblem  of  the 
'  Rock  of  Ages,'  that  cannot  be  removed,  but  abideth  fast 
for  ever." l 

And  in  this  respect  also  the  corner-stone  is  a  fit 
emblem  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  For  He  is  our  peace, 
who  hath  made  both  one,  and  hath  broken  down  the  middle 
wall  of  partition  between  us  ;  having  abolished  in  His  flesh  the 
enmity,  even  the  law  of  commandments  contained  in  ordi 
nances  ;  for  to  make  in  Himself  of  twain  one  new  man,  so 
making  peace" 2  In  spite  of  mutual  prejudice  and  the 
otherwise  impassable  legal  and  ceremonial  gulf  that  separated 
the  Jew  from  the  Gentile,  Christ  is  the  angle  at  which  they 
both  meet  to  be  united  as  one  building,  or,  even  more 
closely,  as  the  members  of  one  body.  This  indeed  is  the 
connection  in  which  Paul  speaks  of  Christ  under  this  figure 
in  that  great  scripture  from  which  I  have  already  quoted. 

After  reminding  the  Ephesian  believers  how  that 
formerly  they  were  "  Gentiles  in  the  flesh,  called  uncircum- 
cision  by  that  which  is  called  circumcision  in  the  flesh 
made  by  hands,  .  .  .  without  Christ,  aliens  from  the 
commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants 
of  promise,  having  no  hope  and  without  God  in  the  world," 
he  proceeds  to  say  : 

"  But  now,  in  Christ  Jesus,  ye  ivho  sometimes  were  far 
off  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  CJirist.  .  .  .  Now  therefore 
ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens 
with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God ;  and  are  built 
upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ 

1  Recent  Discoveries  in  the  Temple  Hill  of  Jerusalem,  by  J.  King,  M.A. 

2  Eph.  ii.  14,  15. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  351 

Himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone ;  in  whom  all  the 
building,  fitly  framed  together,  groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in 
the  Lord,  in  whom  ye  also  are  builded  together  for  an 
habitation  of  God  througJi  the  Spirit?  1 

I  must  not  tarry  here  to  point  out  the  difference 
between  the  "  corner-stone "  and  the  "  head-stone  of  the 
corner,"  to  which  there  are  also  many  allusions  in  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures,  and  of  the  important  truths  which  are 
set  forth  under  the  figures  in  reference  to  Israel's  past  and 
future  attitude  to  their  Messiah,  having  elsewhere  fully 
entered  into  these  subjects."  2 

I  proceed  therefore  to  the  second  designation  of  the 
Messiah  in  this  passage. 

II.    The  Nail  in  the  Sure  Place 

The  word  1JV,  yathed,  translated  here  "  nail "  (rendered 
in  the  Septuagint  Trao-o-aXo?),  is  used  first  of  a  tent-pin,  or 
stake,  which  is  driven  into  the  ground  and  to  which  the 
tent  is  fastened  ; 3  and,  secondly,  of  the  strong  peg  inside  the 
Oriental  tent,  or  which  is  built  into  the  wall  of  the  Eastern 
building,  on  which  is  hung  most  of  its  valuable  furniture.4 

The  primary  allusion  is  to  Isa.  xxii.,  where  we  read : 
"  A  nd  tJie  key  of  the  house  of  David  will  I  lay  upon  his 
shoulder,  and  he  shall  open  and  none  shall  shut ;  and  he  shall 
shut  and  none  shall  open.  And  I  will  fasten  him  as  a  nail 
in  a  sure  place  ;  and  he  shall  be  for  a  throne  of  glory  to  his 
fathers  house.  And  they  shall  hang  upon  him  all  the 
glory  of  his  father's  house,  the  offspring  and  the  issue,  every 
small  vessel,  from  the  vessel  of  cups  even  to  all  the  vessels 
of  flagons."  5 

Now  this  prophecy  in  Isaiah,  though  uttered  primarily 
of  a  son  of  David — namely,  Eliakim — merges  into  the  Son 

1  Eph.  ii.  19-22. 

2  See  "The  Conclusion  of  the  Hallel,  a  Prophetic  Drama  of  the  End  of  the 
Age,"  in  The  Ancient  Scriptures  and  the  Modern  Jew. 

3  Ex.  xxvii.  19,  xxxv.  18 ;  Isa.  xxii.  22,  23. 

4  Ezek.  xv.  3. 

6  Isa.  xxii.  22-24  (R.V.). 


352     VISIONS   AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

of  David,  the  Messiah,  in  whom  all  the  promises  given  to 
the  Davidic  house  finally  centre  and  are  being  fulfilled.  It 
is  He  who  is  "  the  glorious  throne  to  His  Father's  house," 
the  true  heir  and  perpetuator  of  the  throne  of  His  father 
David,  and  of  His  Kingdom,  "to  establish  it,  and  to  uphold  it 
with  judgment  and  with  righteousness  from  henceforth,  even 
for  ever,"1  and  who,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  exposition  of 
chap,  vi.,  "  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon 
His  throne."  Anyhow,  to  us  it  is  not  without  significance 
that  the  risen  Christ  in  His  message  through  His  servant 
John  to  the  Church  in  Philadelphia,  in  allusion  to  the 
words  addressed  to  Eliakim,  claims  to  be  the  one  who  is  in 
possession  of  the  key  of  the  house  of  David — "  These  things, 
saith  He  that  is  holy,  He  that  is  true,  He  tJiat  hath  the  key  of 
David,  He  that  openeth  and  none  shall  shut,  and  that  shutteth 
and  none  openeth."  z 

The  reference  in  Isa.  xxii.,  and  in  our  passage  in 
Zechariah  which  is  based  upon  it,  is  not  to  the  "  nail,"  or 
pin,  or  stake,  to  which  the  ropes  of  the  tent  are  fastened, 
but  to  the  strong  peg  inside  the  tent,  or  built  into  the  wall 
of  the  house. 

(a)  The  "  nail,"  or  peg,  when  thus  fastened  in  a  sure 
place,  was  used  to  hang  burdens  upon.  This  we  see  from 
Isa.  xxii.  25,  where,  speaking  of  the  overthrow  of  the 
unfaithful  Shebna,  the  treasurer  of  the  king's  house,  who 
thought  himself  quite  safe  in  his  position,  as  a  nail  in  a  sure 
place,  the  Lord  says,  "  And  the  burden  upon  it "  (Nfrsn, 
hammassa — "  the  heavy  weight,"  used  here  figuratively  of 
the  weight  of  office  and  responsibility  as  governor  of  the 
king's  house)  "  shall  be  cut  off." 

In  the  light  of  this  fact  we  easily  perceive  the  applica 
bility  and  preciousness  of  this  figure  as  applied  to  the 
Messiah.  He  is  not  only  the  Foundation  of  the  mystical 
temple,  and  the  uniting  "  Corner-stone "  in  whom  all 
believers,  either  Jew  or  Gentile,  are  made  one,  but  to  those 
inside  the  spiritual  house  He  is  the  Nail  in  a  sure  place,  upon 
whom  they  may  hang  their  "  burdens."  Ah,  how  many 

1  Isa.  ix.  7.  2  Rev.  iii.  7. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  353 

:here  be  among  God's  people  who  know  Christ  as  the 
Foundation  of  their  hopes  for  eternity,  but  little  as  their 
Burden-bearer,  "  who  bears  their  grief  and  carries  their 
sorrows  "  !  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  O  Christian, 
vhatever  it  may  be,  "  and  He  will  sustain  thee." 

(£)  But,  secondly,  the  chief  purpose  of  the  nail,  or  peg 
astened  in  a  sure  place,  is,  that  upon  it  may  hang  all  the 
rtory  of  the  house,  "  all  vessels  of  small  quantity,  from  the 
vessels  of  cups  (or  '  goblets ')  even  to  all  the  vessels  of 
iagons."  A  great  portion  of  the  wealth  of  the  ancient 
Orientals  (and  the  same  is  still  true  in  measure)  consisted 
in  gold  and  silver  vessels  and  in  changes  of  raiment. 
These,  as  well  as  shields,  swords,  and  suits  of  armour  taken 
n  battle,  they  were  wont,  with  Eastern  ostentation,  to  hang 
)n  the  "  pegs  "  in  their  tents  or  houses  for  the  admiration  of 
ill  who  entered. 

And  this,  to  pass  from  the  figure  to  the  great  truth  it 
s  meant  to  represent,  is  what  God  expects  us  to  do  with 
Christ.  When  it  is  said,  "  They  shall  hang  upon  Him  all 
he  glory  of  His  Father's  house,"  it  means  that  Israel  shall 
'et  render  to  Him  that  honour  and  glory,  that  joyful 
.llegiance  and  willing  consecration  of  themselves  and  their 
>ossessions,  to  which  He  is  entitled  as  the  true  heir  of  the 
Davidic  "  house,"  and  Lord  of  the  theocratic  kingdom. 
\nd  it  is  our  privilege  also  even  now,  during  the  period  of 
flis  rejection,  to  "  hang  upon  Him,"  that  is,  consecrate  to 
iim  and  His  service  all  that  which  we  may  regard  as  "  our 
;lory."  Nor  is  there  any  one,  even  the  least  and  the 
weakest  of  His  redeemed  people,  who  can  say  that  he  has 
lothing  which  he  can  dedicate  to  Him,  for  that  which  is 
nost  precious  in  His  sight  is  a  loving,  confiding  heart  and 
.n  adoring  spirit.  But  next  to,  and  together  with,  the 
'ffering  of  ourselves,  we  are  to  "  hang  upon  Him  "  whatever 
lossessions  or  gifts  or  talents  which  He  may  have 
ntrusted  to  us.  And  it  is  precious  and  beautiful  to  note 
hat  there  is  a  place  on  the  peg  for  "  the  cup  or  goblet "  as 
/ell  as  for  the  "  flagon  "  :  and  "  the  vessel  of  small  quantity," 
/hen  fully  consecrated  to  the  Master's  use,  is  of  greater  use, 
23 


354     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  brings  more  "  glory  "  to  Him,  than  the  "  vessel  of  large 
quantity "  when  not  so  fully  surrendered.  And  as  with 
our  persons,  so  with  our  gifts.  The  "  small  offerings  "  from 
those  who  have  but  little,  and  to  whom  the  giving  implies 
real  sacrifice  for  His  blessed  Name's  sake,  are  at  least  equally 
if  not  more  precious  in  His  sight  than  the  "  large  offerings  " 
from  those  who  have  much.  Above  all,  it  is  the  motive 
which  Jehovah,  "by  whom  actions  are  weighed"  (not 
counted  or  measured),  takes  into  account. 

III.   The  Battle  Bow 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  every  one  of  the  four  terms 
used  in  this  verse  (phinnah,  "  corner "  ;  yathed,  "  nail  "  ; 
qesheth  milchamah,  "  battle  bow  "  ;  and  noges,  "  ruler "  or 
"  exactor  ")  are  all  used  metaphorically,  and  denote  persons, 
or,  as  I  verily  believe,  one  Person,  who  Himself  fulfils  these 
different  functions.  The  last  two  terms  bring  before  us  an 
aspect  of  the  Messiah's  character  which  will  be  manifest  at 
His  Second  Coming.  Then  He  will  be  the  "  Battle  bow  " 
— the  mighty  and  skilful  Archer,  who  shall  send  forth  His 
"  sharp  arrows  "  in  the  heart  of  the  king's  enemies,  "  whereby 
the  people  shall  be  made  to  fall  under  Him."  * 

This  is  an  aspect  of  Christ's  character  on  which  men  do 
not  like  to  dwell ;  but  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  the  same 
prophet,  Isaiah,  who  pictures  Him  in  the  5  3rd  chapter  as 
the  suffering  Lamb  of  God,  who  "  as  a  sheep  before  her 
shearers  is  dumb,  openeth  not  His  mouth,"  describes  Him 
in  the  63rd  chapter  as  clothed  in  majesty,  marching  forth 
in  the  greatness  of  His  strength  to  take  vengeance  on  the 
nations  :  "  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine  apparel,  and  thy 
garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in  tJie  winefat?  I  have 
trodden  the  winepress  alone,  and  of  the  peoples  there  was  no 
man  with  Me  :  yea,  I  trod  them,  in  Mine  anger,  and  trampled 
them  in  My  fury  ;  and  their  lifeblood  is  sprinkled  upon  My 
garments,  and  I  have  stained  all  My  raiment'"2- — an  Old 
Testament  vision  which  will  be  fulfilled  at  "  the  revelation 

1  Ps.  xlv.  5.  -  Isa.  Ixiii.  2-4  (R.V.). 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  355 

of  the  Lord  Jesus  from  heaven  with  the  angels  of  His 
power,  in  flaming  fire,  rendering  vengeance  on  them  that 
know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus,  .  .  .  when  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  His 
saints,  and  to  be  marvelled  at  in  all  them  that  believe."  l 

"  A  nd  I  saw  the  heaven  opened ;  and  behold,  a  "white 
horse,  and  He  that  sat  thereon,  called  Faithful  and  True ; 
and  in  righteousness  He  doth  judge  and  make  war.  And 
His  eyes  are  a  flame  of  fire,  and  upon  His  head  are  many 
diadems  ;  and  He  hath  a  name  written,  which  no  one  knoweth 
but  He  Himself.  And  He  is  arrayed  in  a  garment  sprinkled 
with  blood :  and  His  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God.  A  nd 
the  armies  which  are  in  heaven  followed  Him  upon  white 
horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  pure.  And  out  of  His 
mouth  proceedeth  a  sharp  sword,  ttiat  with  it  He  should  smite 
the  nations :  and  He  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  : 
and  He  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath 
of  Almighty  God.  And  He  hath  on  His  garment  and  on 
His  thigh  a  name  written,  KING  OF  KINGS  AND  LORD  OF 
LORDS."  2 

IV.    The  Autocratic  Ruler,  or  " Exactor" 

It  is  not  possible  to  speak  with  absolute  certainty  of 
the  exact  meaning  of  the  last  clause  in  the  verse  which  we 
are  considering,  as  the  construction  of  the  sentence  in  the 
original  is  unusual  and  peculiar,  and  has  led  to  conflicting 
translations  and  interpretations.  In  rendering  the  words 
Virp  tPJia  72,  khol  noges  yachdav — "  every  ruler  together,"  or, 
"  he  that  will  exercise  all  rule," — I  am  guided  more  by  the 
context  and  obvious  sense  than  by  strict  principles  of 

Hebrew  grammar.3     It  seems  to  me  that,  as  the  first  terms 

i 

1  2  Thess.  i.  7-10  (R.V.).  2  Rev.  xix.  11-16  (R.V.). 

3  It  is  capable  also  of  the  following  renderings,  for  which  some  have  con 
tended  :  "  Out  of  him  (Judah)  shall  come  (or  'go')  forth  every  exactor  (in  the 
sense  of  absolute  ruler)  together."  But,  even  if  this  be  the  most  correct  reading, 
it  would  still  apply  to  the  Messiah,  inasmuch  as  He  embraces  in  Himself  a 
variety  of  different  functions.  Thus,  for  instance,  He  is  represented  by  the 
prophets  as  being  "a  Priest  upon  His  throne"  (Zech.  vi.),  and  not  only  as 


356     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

in  this  verse  undoubtedly  refer  to  the  Messiah  in  allusion 
to  utterances  about  His  person  and  mission  by  the  "  former 
prophets,"  so  must  this  last  clause  also.  Certain  it  is  that 
the  Messiah  at  His  Second  Coming  shall  gather  up  in 
Himself  all  authority  and  rule.  He  shall  be  then  not  only 
the  Nasi — the  chosen  Prince  from  among  the  people ;  not 
only  the  Moshel,  God's  Viceroy  or  Deputy  Ruler  on  the 
earth ;  not  only  a  constitutional  King,  who  reigns  but  does 
not  rule — but  He  shall  be  the  Noges,  the  absolute  Ruler,  or 
"  Exactor " — the  most  absolute  and  autocratic  King  the 
world  has  yet  seen. 

In  Messiah's  reign  on  the  earth  God's  sovereignty  will 
be  fully  manifested,  but  it  is  blessed  to  remember  that  it 
will  be  sovereignty  exercised  by  One  who  is  not  only 
"  glorious  in  holiness,"  infinite  in  wisdom  and  power,  but  by 
Him  who  is  also  infinite  in  compassion,  and  whose  very 
nature  is  love.  His  absolute  autocratic  rule,  therefore, 
though  a  terror  to  the  ungodly,  is  a  thought  full  of  comfort 
to  the  righteous,  for  it  will  mean  righteousness,  peace  and 
joy  to  this  long-afflicted  earth,  and  the  very  consummation 
of  blessedness  to  His  own  people.  But  there  is  truth  in 

Israel's  King,  but  as  the  Prince  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  24,  25).  The  Messiah  was  to  be 
like  unto  Moses  (Deut.  xviii.  15),  who,  in  himself,  united  the  different  offices 
of  prophet,  priest,  and  king ;  so  that  the  phrase  is  quite  applicable  to  Him  on 
that  account.  Just  as  His  atoning  death  can  be  spoken  of  in  the  plural  (see 
Hebrew  of  Isa.  liii.  9),  on  account  of  the  various  sacrifices  receiving  their 
fulfilment  in  His  own  body,  which  He  offered  once  and  for  all— so,  in  a  sense, 
He  is  many  also  in  His  reign,  because  all  authority  will  meet  in  Him  as  the 
Centre.  Aaron  Pick,  formerly  Hebrew  Professor  at  the  University  of  Prague,  in 
his  Literal  Translation  of  the  Twelve  Minor  Prophets,  renders  our  text  thus : 
"  From  Him  the  Corner,  from  Him  the  Nail,  from  Him  the  Battle  Bow,  yea, 
from  Him  shall  come  forth  He  that  conquereth  all  together." 

The  last  sentence  may  also  be  understood  as  gathering  up  the  ideas  in  the 
first  three  terms,  Pkinnah,  Yathed,  and  Qesheth  milchamah.  From  him  (Judah) 
the  Corner,  from  him  the  Nail,  from  him  the  Battle  Bow  ;  yea,  from  him  shall 
proceed  He  who  shall  unite  in  Himself,  not  only  all  that  is  implied  in  these  three 
terms,  but  every  power  and  authority  "together."  Yet  another  rendering,  but 
in  the  sense  just  suggested,  is  given  by  George  Adam  Smith  in  his  Book  of  the 
Twelve  Prophets,  namely,  "From  him  the  Corner-stone,  from  him  the  Stay  (or 
'  Tent-pin  '),  from  him  the  War-bow,  from  him  the  Oppressor — shall  go  forth 
together."  That  B'Ji:,  noges,  is  here  used  in  a  good  sense,  is  pretty  generally 
admitted  by  lexicographers  and  commentators.  Hitzig  renders  it  "  Feldhe rr " 
(commander).  The  cognate  word  in  Ethiopic,  Negus,  signifies  king. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  357 

the  suggestion  that  the  title  noges  (absolute  ruler  or 
"  exactor  ")  is  applied  here  to  Israel's  ideal  king  or  absolute 
ruler  in  His  relation,  not  to  His  own  people,  but  to  their  and 
His  enemies,  from  whom  He  will  "  exact  submission  and 
allegiance  with  a  rod  of  iron,"  and  who  will  make  down 
trodden  Israel  to  rule  over  those  who  have  long  oppressed 
and  ruled  over  them. 

"  Now  therefore  be  wise,  O  ye  kings  : 
Be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth. 
Serve  Jehovah  with  fear, 
And  rejoice  with  trembling. 
Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  in  the 

way, 

When  His  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little. 
Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  Him" 

In  the  5th  verse  the  line  of  thought  unfolded  in  the 
first  three  verses  of  this  chapter  is  resumed,  and  the  change 
which  will  come  over  the  people  after  Jehovah  of  hosts,  in 
the  person  of  the  Messiah,  shall  "  visit  His  flock,  the  house 
of  Judah  "  (ver.  3),  is  now  fully  described. 

Instead  of  being  like  a  troubled  and  helpless  flock  of 
sheep  (ver.  2),  they  shall  suddenly  be  transformed  into  His 
"  goodly  horse  "  (or  "  the  horse  of  His  Majesty  ")  in  battle, 
and  instead  of  being  "  afflicted  "  and  at  the  mercy  of  their 
adversaries,  they  shall  be  as  "  mighty  men  "  treading  upon 
;  their  enemies.  The  "  mire  of  the  streets  "  is  used  here  as 
a  figure  of  their  enemies,  and  is  parallel  to  chap.  ix.  15, 
where  it  is  said,  "  they  shall  trample  on  the  sling  stones  " 
(which  is  the  figure  of  contempt  used  there  to  describe 
their  adversaries),  while  they  themselves  are  likened  to  the 
abhnei  nezer,  "stones  of  a  crown"  (or  jewels  set  in  a  con 
secrated  crown),  lifted  on  high  over  the  land.  The  figure 
is  found  elsewhere  in  the  prophetic  Scriptures.  Thus 
•  Micah  says,  "  Mine  eyes  shall  behold  her  ('  mine  enemy  ')  ; 
now  shall  she  be  trodden  down  (or,  a  '  treading  down '),  as 
the  mire  of  the  street " ; *  but  Zechariah,  by  a  yet  bolder 

1  Mic.  vii.  IO. 


358     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

image,  "  pictures  those  trampled  upon  as  what  they  had 
become — the  mire  of  the  streets — as  worthless,  as  foul."  l 
But  not  in  their  own  strength  shall  they  prevail,  they  shall  | 
be  and  "  fight  "  as  heroes,  "  because  Jehovah  is  with  them" 
the  source  and  secret  of  their  strength — therefore,  "  the 
riders  upon  horses  " — the  enemies'  cavalry,  the  most  formid 
able  arm  of  the  hostile  forces — shall  be  put  to  shame,  or  j. 
confounded. 

Yes,  Israel   in   that  day  shall  experience  the  truth  of  j 

the  words  of  their  sweet  Psalmist : 

j 

"  Some  trust  in  chariots  and  some  in  horses  ; 
But  we  will  make  mention  of  the  Name  of  Jehovah  our  \ 

God  ; 

They  are  bowed  down  and  fallen  ; 
But  we  are  risen  up  and  stand  upright." 

And  the   great  deliverance  which    Jehovah    shall    then 
accomplish  for  Israel  will   embrace  the  entire  nation,  which 
in  Zechariah's  prophecies  are  regarded  as  no  longer  divided 
into   two   separate    kingdoms,   but  as   one  people,  with    a 
common  and  inseparable  destiny.     "  And  I  will  strengthen 
the  house  of  Judah  ;  and  I  will  save  the  house  of  Joseph  ;  and  \ 
I  will  bring  them  again,   and  make  them  dwell  (or  '  settle  \ 
them ')  /  for  I  have  mercy  upon  them,  and  they  shall  be  as  \ 
though  I  had  not  cast  them  off ;  for  I  am  Jehovah  their  God,  i 
and  I  will  hear  them" 

In  keeping  with  Zechariah's  very  terse  style,  and  the 
summaries  which  we  find  sometimes  in  single  words  and 
expressions,  both  in  the  first  and  second  parts  of  his  book, 
of  utterances  by  the  "  former  prophets,"  we  have  here 
embodied  in  the  one  word  DTiUKTii  (which  the  Authorised 
Version  has  translated,  "  I  will  bring  them  again  to  place 
them  "),  the  promise  uttered  fully  by  Jeremiah,  namely  :  "  / 
will  bring  them  again  into  this  place,  and  I  will  cause  them  to 
dwell  safely" 2  for  the  most  satisfactory  grammatical 
explanation  of  the  Hebrew  word  is  that  it  is  a  blending  of 
two  verbs  which  have  the  respective  meanings  of  "  I  will 

1  Pusey.  2Jer.  xxxii.  37. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  359 

make  them  dwell,"  and  "  I  will  bring  them  back  " — both 
ideas,  as  already  the  Jewish  commentator  Kimchi  points 
out,  being  expressed  in  the  one  word,  namely,  "  He  will 
cause  them  to  return  to  their  own  land,  and  will  cause 
them  to  dwell  there  in  peace  and  security." 

And  He  will  do  all  this — strengthen,  save,  restore,  and 
establish  them,  because  "  He  shall  have  mercy  upon  them" 
for,  "  The  goodness  and  loving-kindness  of  God,  and  not 
any  merit  of  theirs,  is  the  first  and  principal  cause"  of 
Israel's  whole  salvation  and  grace,  and  the  words  of  the 
inspired  Psalmist :  "  They  got  not  the  land  in  possession  by 
their  own  sword,  neither  did  their  own  arm  save  them "  ; 
but— 

"  Thy  right  hand,  and  Thine  arm,  and  the  light  of  Thy 

countenance, 
Because  Thou  hadst  a  favour  unto  them  " — 

will  be  true  of  the  future  restoration,  as  it  was  true  of  their 
original  possession  of  the  land  ! 

And  His  mercy  and  loving-kindness  will  blot  out  all 
the  past  of  sin  and  sorrow.  "  And  they  shall  be,"  He  says, 
"  as  though  I  had  not  cast  them  off"  (or,  literally,  "  as  though 
I  had  not  loathed  them,"  the  word  being  expressive  of 
God's  strong  abhorrence  of  sin,  and  of  sinners  when  they 
become  wedded  to  it) — which  reminds  us  of  the  greater 
promise  of  the  new  covenant :  "  /  will  forgive  their  iniquity, 
and  their  sin  will  I  remember  no  more  "  ; *  and  of  the  promise 
in  Ezekiel :  "And  7  will  settle  you  as  in  your  old  estates,  and 
I  will  do  better  unto  you  than  at  your  beginnings"  2 

The  5th  verse  ends  with  a  beautiful  glimpse  of  the 
restored  relationship  between  Jehovah  and  His  long- 
wandering  people : 

"  For  I  am  JeJwvah" — that  is,  the  everlasting,  un 
changeable,  covenant-keeping  God — which  is  the  reason 
why  the  sinful  sons  of  Jacob  have  not  been  consumed. 
And  He  is  now  "  their  God"  for  the  Lo-ruhamah  and  Lo- 
ammi  period  of  Israel's  history  shall  then  be  ended,  and  no 

1  Jer.  xxxi.  34.  2  Ezek.  xxxvi.  II. 


360     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

longer  shall  He  say :  "  Ye  are  not  My  people,  and  I  will 
not  be  your  God."  1  No  ;  then  He  "  will  hear  them  " — or, 
as  we  read  more  fully  in  the  I  3th  chapter,  "  They  shall  call 
on  My  name,  and  I  will  hear  them  ;  and  I  will  say  it  is  My 
people  ;  and  they  shall  say  Jehovah  is  my  God," 2  which 
reminds  us  of  many  similar,  if  more  general,  promises  in 
the  prophetic  Scriptures,  as,  for  instance :  "  Then  shalt  thou 
call,  and  Jehovah  shall  answer  ;  thou  shalt  cry,  and  He  shall 
say,  Here  I  am  "  ;  and  again  :  "  /,  Jehovah,  will  hear  them, 
I  the  God  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them''  3 

And  the  joy  and  blessing  and  victory  here  promised  is 
henceforth  to  be  shared  alike  by  the  whole  nation,  which 
the  prophet,  in  keeping  with  the  peculiarity  of  his  style, 
designates  by  the  separate  names,  "  House  of  Judah,"  and 
"  House  of  Joseph,"  or  "  Ephraim,"  which  together  include 
the  whole  people  which  had,  indeed,  previous  to  the  Exile, 
been  for  a  long  time  divided  into  two  frequently  hostile 
kingdoms,  but  are  from  the  time  of  the  partial  restoration 
from  Babylon  regarded  as  one  nation,  with  one  common 
hope  and  destiny. 

"  And  they  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man,  and 
their  hearts  shall  rejoice  as  tJirough  wine  ;  yea,  their  children 
shall  see  it  and  rejoice ;  their  hearts  shall  rejoice  (or  '  be  glad ') 
in  the  Lord" — which  is  in  effect  a  repetition  more  parti 
cularly  in  reference  to  "  Ephraim "  of  what  is  stated  in 
chaps,  ix.  1 5  and  x.  5  of  Judah.  And  the  reason  why 
"  Ephraim,"  or  those  previously  belonging  to  the  northern 
kingdom,  are  specially  mentioned  as  included  in  the  word 
of  promise,  is  probably  to  be  found  (as  suggested  by  Calvin 
and  Hengstenberg)  "  in  the  circumstances  of  the  times,"  or 
in  the  historic  foreground  of  this  prophecy.  If  the  predic 
tions  of  the  earlier  prophets  in  reference  to  Judah  were  now 
(that  is,  in  Zechariah's  time)  only  beginning  to  be  fulfilled, 
and  therefore  needed  to  be  renewed  lest  the  nation  should 
think  itself  deceived,  much  more  was  this  the  case  with 
regard  to  Ephraim. 

The  great  body  of  the  people  belonging  to  the  northern 

1  IIos.  i.  8.  -  /ech.  xiii.  9.  3  Isa.  xli.  17,  Iviii.  9. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  361 

kingdom  was  still  in  exile,  though  a  small  fraction  of  them 
had  joined  the  children  of  Judah  on  their  return,  and  there 
was  outwardly  but  little  in  existing  circumstances  to 
support  the  hope  of  that  grand  restoration,  which,  according 
to  the  declaration  of  the  former  prophets,  was  one  day 
to  occur. 

They  of  the  "  house  of  Joseph,"  as  being  in  an  appar 
ently  even  more  hopeless  condition,  are  therefore  especially 
assured  that  under  the  true  son  of  David,  the  Redeemer- 
King,  whose  advent  to  "  Zion  "  and  "  Jerusalem  "  the  prophet 
had  jubilantly  announced  in  the  9th  chapter,  and  who,  in  the 
4th  verse  of  the  I  oth  chapter  is  spoken  of  as  coming  forth  out 
of  Judah,  would  fully  share  in  all  the  blessings  promised  to 
the  "  house  of  Judah."  They  too  would  be  brought  back 
and  made  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His 
might  for  the  final  conflict  with  their  adversaries,  so  that 
they  "  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man"  or  hero  (that  is,  in  "  tread 
ing  down  their  enemies  in  the  mire  of  the  streets,"  ver.  5), 
"  and  their  hearts  shall  rejoice  as  through  ^vine " — which 
exhilarates  and  "  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man "  with  a 
gladness  which  is  not  natural,  and  is  a  fit  emblem,  therefore, 
of  the  strength  and  exhilaration  which  are  imparted  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.1 

And  it  will  not  be  an  evanescent  joy  which  will  soon 
fade  away.  No ;  "  their  children  (also)  shall  see  it"  that  is, 
the  great  things  which  God  shall  then  do  unto  them — and 
be  glad.  "  Their  heart  shall  rejoice  in  Jehovah  " — as  the 
highest  and  only  lasting  source  of  joy  "  to  whom,"  as  an  old 
writer  puts  it,  "  is  to  be  referred  all  gladness  which  is  derived 
from  created  things — that  whoso  glorieth  may  glory  in  the 
Lord,  in  whom  alone  the  rational  creature  ought  to  take 
delight." 

Most  commentators  suppose  that  ver.  8  to  the  end  of 
the  chapter  still  speak  of  Ephraim  ;  but  the  supposition  is,  I 
think,  without  sufficient  warrant.  Having  spoken  of  the 
"house  of  Judah"  and  the  "house  of  Joseph"  separately, 
the  prophet  now  proceeds  to  set  forth  the  purpose  of  God 

1  Eph.  v.  18. 


362     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

in  reference  to  both  parts  of  the  nation  who  constitute  one 
people  with  one  common  destiny : 

"  /  will  hiss  for  them,  and  gather  them ;  for  I  have 
redeemed  them" 

This  verb  P?B>,  sharaq,  to  "  hiss,"  or  "  whistle,"  or  "  pipe," 
is  used  several  times  in  the  earlier  scriptures  to  describe 
God's  signal  in  calling  together  nations  and  peoples  to 
accomplish  His  purposes.  Thus,  in  Isaiah  He  uses  this 
word  when  He  threatens  to  gather  the  Gentile  nations  to 
chastise  His  people :  "  //  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that 
Jehovah  shall  hiss  (or  '  whistle ')  for  the  fly  that  is  in  the 
uttermost  part  of  the  rivers  of  Egypt,  and  for  the  bee  tJiat  is  in 
the  land  of  Assyria.  And  they  shall  come  and  rest  all  of  them 
in  the  desolate  valleys,  and  in  the  holes  of  the  rocks,  and  upon 
all  thorns,  and  upon  all  bushes"  And  again  :  "  He  will  lift 
up  an  ensign  to  the  nations  from  far,  and  will  hiss  (or 
'  whistle'}  unto  them  from  the  end  of  the  earth.  And  behold 
they  shall  come  with  speed  swiftly ;  none  shall  be  weary  or 
stumble  among  them." l  That  is,  He  would  gather  the 
hostile  nations  against  them  "  like  the  countless  numbers 
of  the  insect  creation,  which,  if  united,  would  irresistibly 
desolate  life.  He  would  summon  them  as  the  bee-owner 
by  his  shrill  call  summons  and  unites  his  own  swarm." 
But  now  the  time  to  favour  Zion  having  come,  this  same 
word  is  used  in  our  passage  in  Zech.  x.  for  the  signal  which 
He  will  use  for  the  gathering  together  of  His  own  dis 
persed  people  from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth. 

The  word  sharaq,  however,  describes  not  only  the  shrill 
noise  used  to  call  together  a  swarm  of  insects — it  means 
also,  as  already  suggested  above,  to  "  pipe,"  z  and  is  used  of 
the  shepherd  signal  for  the  gathering  of  his  scattered  flock. 

This,  indeed,  is  the  picture  presented  to  our  minds  in 
this  chapter.  At  present,  because  they  have  given  heed  to 
false  dreamers,  "  they  go  on  their  way  (or  wander  about) 

1  Isa.  v.  26,  27,  vii.  18,  19. 

2  In  the  Song  of    Deborah,  Judg.  v.   16,  translated   in   the  A.V.  :    "Why 
abodest  thou   among   the   sheepfolds   to   hear   the  bleatings  of  the  flocks?"  is 
properly  rendered  in  the  R.V. :  "Why  safest  thou  among  the  sheepfolds  to  hear 
the  pipings  for  the  flocks  ?  D"ny  nip-ip  (shtriqoth  'adarim)." 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  363 

like  sheep  ;  they  are  troubled  (or  '  afflicted  ')  because  there 
is  no  shepherd  "  (ver.  2) ;  but  when  Jehovah  of  hosts,  in 
the  person  of  the  Messiah,  again  "  visits  His  flock,"  namely, 
"  the  house  of  Judah  "  (ver.  3)  and  "  the  house  of  Joseph  " 
(ver.  6),  He  "  will  pipe  for  them  and  gather  them." 

If  I  may  digress  for  a  moment,  and  mention  incidents 
of  personal  experience,  I  would  say  that  on  more  than  one 
occasion  I  have  had  the  figure  referred  to  in  this  passage 
illustrated  before  my  eyes.  On  one  occasion  (it  was  in 
1891)  while  camping  for  a  few  days  with  missionary  friends 
in  a  wild  part  high  up  on  the  Lebanon,  a  picturesque-looking 
young  Bedouin  shepherd  was  leading  a  small  flock  of  sheep 
to  some  distant  part  in  search  of  pasturage.  Passing  our 
encampment  he  stopped  for  a  while  to  converse  with  us, 
and  in  the  meantime  his  flock  got  scattered  among  the 
rocks  ;  but  by  and  by,  when  he  was  ready  to  start,  he  pulled 
out  from  under  his  burnoose  a  reed  pipe,  and  began  to  play 
on  it  a  not  very  melodious  tune ;  and  it  was  interesting  and 
beautiful  to  notice  how,  as  he  was  playing,  his  scattered 
sheep,  some  of  which  had  wandered  off  to  some  distance, 
collected  closer  and  closer  around  him,  and  formed  into  a 
flock  ;  and  when  they  were  all  there  he  started  off  again  at 
their  head.  Involuntarily  this  passage  from  Zechariah  came 
to  my  mind  :  "  /  will  pipe  for  them  and  gather  them"  On 
another  occasion,  when  travelling  in  1889  one  whole  night 
in  a  diligence  in  inland  Algeria,  we  stopped  about  dawn  at 
an  inn  in  a  small  Arab  village  to  change  horses.  While 
this  was  being  done,  an  Arab  who  stood  near  began  to 
play,  or  whistle,  on  one  of  the  same  kind  of  rough  reed  or 
bamboo  pipe.  At  first  I  thought  he  was  playing  for  our 
benefit  in  order  to  get  baksheesh,  but  I  soon  observed  that 
as  he  continued  "  piping,"  sheep  and  cows  and  goats  came 
toward  him  from  all  directions.  It  was  the  village  shepherd 
gathering  his  flock  to  lead  them  forth  to  pasture. 

Thus  also  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  is  going  to  gather  His 
flock  and  lead  them  into  their  own  pastures.  "  If  any  of 
thine  outcasts  be  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  heaven"  He  says, 
"  thence  will  Jehovah  thy  God  gather  theey  and  from  thence 


364     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

will  He  f etc/i  tJiee  ;  and  Jehovah  thy  God  will  bring  thee  into 
the  land  which  thy  fathers  possessed,  and  thou  shaft  possess 
it ;  and  He  will  do  thee  good,  and  multiply  tJiee  above  thy 
fathers." *  « 

And  He  will  do  this,  He  says,  because  "  /  have  redeemed 
them  " — with  a  full  and  complete  redemption,  not  only  from 
outward  captivity,  but  "from  all  their  iniquities"  2  so  that 
they  shall  be  known  and  called  in  that  day  "  The  holy 
people,  the  redeemed  of  Jehovah  " — henceforth  to  serve  and 
glorify  Him,  "  Who  hath  ransomed  them  from  the  hand  of 
him  that  was  stronger  than  he."3 

And  when  thus  redeemed  and  gathered  in  their  own 
land  again,  "they  shall  increase  as  they  have  increased"  - 
which  latter  phrase,  as  already  Kimchi  in  his  commentary 
explains,  is  meant  to  remind  us  of  God's  wonderful  and 
gracious  dealings  with  them  during  the  last  days  of  their 
sojourn  in  Egypt,  where  "  the  children  of  Israel  were  fruit 
ful"  because  of  the  blessings  of  Jehovah  upon  them,  "  and 
increased  abundantly,  and  multiplied,  and  waxed  exceeding 
miglity  ;  and  the  land  ivas  filled  with  them."  4  And  thus, 
again  after  the  future  greater  redemption,  the  spared 
remnant,  who  shall  have  been  brought  through  the  fiery 
purging  ordeal  described  in  the  last  chapters  of  this  very 
prophecy,  shall  increase  mightily,  even  "  as  they  have 
increased "  (that  is,  in  Egypt),  and  become  a  mighty 
nation  on  the  earth. 

And  this  increase  will  characterise  the  seed  of  Israel 
in  a  striking  degree,  even  while  still  scattered  among  the 
nations.  This  I  believe  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  words 
which  follow  in  the  Qth  verse:  "And  I  vvill  sow  them 
among  the  peoples ;  and  they  shall  remember  Me  in  far 
countries :  and  they  shall  live  with  their  children,  and  sJiall 
return!'  The  controversy  among  commentators  as  to 
whether  the  expression,  "  /  will  sow  them  among  the 
peoples"  is  to  be  understood  as  a  prediction  of  a  scattering 
of  the  people  among  the  nations  subsequent  to  the  partial 

1  Deut.  xxx.  4,  5.  2  Ps>  cxxx    g 

3  Isa.  Ixii.  12  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  u.  4  Ex.  i.  7. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  365 

restoration  from  Babylon,  is,  according  to  my  judgment, 
settled  by  the  fact  that  the  verb  JHT  (zarcf]t  which  is 
employed,  is  never  used  of  scattering,  or  dispersing,  in  a 
bad  sense,  but  always  "  to  sow  " ;  and  the  prediction  in  this 
verse  cannot  therefore  refer  to  a  dispersion  of  the  Jewish 
people  to  be  inflicted  as  a  punishment.  It  is  most  probable 
that  this  passage  in  Zechariah  is  based  on  two  utterances 
of  the  former  "prophets."  The  first  is  Hos.  ii.  23,  where 
we  read  :  "  And  I  will  sow  her  unto  Me  in  the  earth  ;  and  I 
will  have  mercy  upon  her  that  had  not  obtained  mercy  ;  and 
I  will  say  to  them  which  were  not  My  people,  Thou  art  My 
people ;  and  they  shall  say,  Thou  art  my  God"  And  the 
second  is  Jer.  xxxi.  27:  "Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
Jehovah,  that  I  will  sow  the  house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of 
Judah  with  the  seed  of  man,  and  with  the  seed  of  beasts" 

It  is  not  necessary  then  to  understand  the  words  in 
Zachariah  as  referring  to  a  future  act  of  dispersion  (though, 
as  a  matter  of  history,  a  dispersion  subsequent  to  the 
partial  restoration  from  Babylon — or  rather,  a  new  and 
more  terrible  and  universal  phase  of  the  dispersion  which 
was  inaugurated  by  the  Babylonian  Captivity,  did  take 
place  after  Israel's  national  apostasy  from  God  was  com 
pleted  in  the  rejection  and  crucifixion  of  their  Messiah),  but 
rather  as  a  prediction  first  of  all  that  in  the  dispersion 
which  had  already  begun  with  the  destruction  of  the  city 
and  Temple  by  the  Babylonians,  and  which  would  last  till 
the  full  and  final  restoration  of  the  whole  nation  (Judah 
and  Israel)  to  their  own  land,  which  is  still  in  the  future — 
God  would  cause  them  to  multiply.  This  increase  (to 
judge  from  the  analogy  of  their  experience  in  Egypt,  to 
which  allusion  is  made  more  than  once  in  this  chapter) 
would  take  place  toward  the  end  of  the  time  of  their 
sojourning  among  the  nations,  and  would  be  a  precursor 
of  their  national  restoration.1 

1  The  marvellous  increase  of  the  Jewish  people  since  their  so-called 
"emancipation"  in  the  nineteenth  century,  is,  indeed,  a  striking  sign  of  the 
times.  The  statement  of  a  recent  writer  in  the  Jewish  Chronicle,  that  at  the 
commencement  of  the  sixteenth  century  there  could  scarcely  have  been  more 
than  a  million  Jews  left  in  the  entire  world  after  the  untold  sufferings,  dispersions, 


366     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

And  not  only  would  they  be  preserved  even  in  dis 
persion,  and  increase  and  multiply  even  as  they  did  during 
the  last  days  of  their  sojourn  in  Egypt,  but  in  those  "  far 
countries  "  where  they  shall  be  found  "  they  shall  remember 
Me"  saith  Jehovah — which  is  perhaps  an  inspired  echo  by 
Zechariah  of  the  words  of  Ezekiel :  "And  they  that  escape 
of  you  shall  remember  Me  among  the  nations  whither  they 
shall  be  carried  captive,  and  they  shall  loathe  themselves  for 
the  evil  which  they  have  committed  in  all  their  abominations. 
And  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord"  x 

The  next  sentence  in  the  pth  verse,  "  They  shall  live 
with  their  children,  and  turn  again"  must  be  connected  with 
the  words  which  immediately  precede.  Because  they  shall 
remember  Jehovah  "  in  the  far  countries "  they  shall  live, 
Here  we  probably  have  an  allusion  (as  Hengstenberg 
suggests)  in  one  word  (in  the  Hebrew)  "  to  the  figure 
which  Ezekiel  has  so  beautifully  carried  out  in  chap, 
xxxvii."  They  who,  while  dispersed  among  the  nations, 
are  seen  by  the  prophet  as  dry  bones  scattered  over  the 
valley  of  vision,  are  to  live  again,  for  :  "  Behold,  I  will  open 
your  graves,  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves,  O 

and  massacres  which  they  had  to  endure  in  the  dark  and  middle  ages — is  prob 
ably  true.  The  historian  Basnage,  in  his  History  of  the  Jews  from  Jesus  Christ 
to  the  Present  Time,  calculated  that  in  his  time  (end  of  the  seventeenth  and 
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century)  there  were  three  million  Jews  in  the  world. 
Since  then,  however,  the  growth  of  Jewry  has  been  phenomenal.  At  the  com 
mencement  of  the  nineteenth  century  there  were  said  to  be  five  millions.  Half 
a  century  later  the  numbers  reached  six  or  seven  millions ;  and  at  the  end  of 
another  half  a  century  —  in  1896  —  the  greatest  living  authority  on  Jewish 
statistics  gave  their  number  as  eleven  millions.  And  now  after  this  short 
interval  it  is  officially  established  that  there  are  over  thirteen  million  Jews  in  the 
world.  And  the  surprising  feature  of  this  latest  calculation  is  the  officially- 
authenticated  fact  that,  in  the  country  where  they  are  most  persecuted,  and 
which  during  the  past  three  decades  has  driven  forth  millions  to  seek  an  asylum 
in  other  countries,  there  are  more  Jews  to-day  than  ever  before  ;  and  this  in 
spite  of  pogroms,  and  baptisms,  and  overcrowding,  and  starvation,  and  the 
pursuance  of  a  merciless  policy  of  repression  which  led  Pobiedonostsef  to  prog 
nosticate  that,  in  the  end,  a  third  of  Russia's  Jews  would  emigrate,  a  third 
would  die,  and  a  third  would  join  the  dominant  faith.  The  old  story  of  Israel 
in  Egypt  renews  itself  to-day  in  Russia:  "The  more  they  afflicted  them,  the 
more  they  multiplied." 
1  Ezek.  vi.  9. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  367 

My  people  ;  .  .  .  and  I  will  put  My  Spirit  in  you,  and  ye 
shall  live,  .  .  .  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah'' x 
Neither  shall  this  new  national  and  spiritual  life  be 
transient  in  its  character.  No ;  not  only  shall  they  live, 
but  "  their  children  "  also,  the  thought  expressed  in  these 
words  being  the  same  as  "their  children  also  shall  see  it," 
in  the  gth  verse.  "  And  shall  return  "  (or  "  turn  again  ") — 
not  only  to  their  land  but  to  their  God,  the  word  being  the 
same  which  the  prophets  constantly  used  when  calling  to 
Israel  to  repent — as,  for  instance :  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  from 
your  evil  ways  :  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ?  "  2 

In  the  loth  verse  the  gathering  and  leading  back  by 
the  Shepherd  of  Israel  of  His  scattered  flock  are  more 
minutely  described  : 

"  /  will  bring-  them  back  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and 
from  Assyria  will  I  gather  them " ;  which  two  Powers,  to 
quote  another  writer,  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  "  standing 
here  as  of  old,  for  the  two  conflicting  empires  (Egypt  to 
the  south  and  Assyria  to  the  north)  between  which  Israel 
lay,  at  whose  hand  she  had  suffered,  and  who  represent  the 
countries  which  lay  beyond."  But  there  is  no  need  to 
allegorise  the  names  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  as  almost  all 
the  commentators  do,  as  used  only  typically  of  the  lands  of 
Israel's  oppression.  I  believe  it  to  be  a  prophecy  which 
merges  into  the  most  distant  future  (from  the  prophet's 
then  point  of  view),  and  will  be  literally  fulfilled  at  the 
final  restoration,  "when  Jehovah  shall  lift  up  His  hand 

1  Ezek.  xxxvii.  11-14. 

2  This  is  one  of  those  scriptures  which  seem  to  speak  of  a  turning  of  Israel  to 
God  while  still  in  the  "  far  countries"  of  their  dispersion,  and  may  appear  to  be 
in  conflict  with  the  many  prophecies  which  predict  a  restoration  of  Israel  in 
unbelief,  and  their  conversion  in  the  land  at  the  visible  appearing  of  Christ. 
But  there  is  no  real  conflict  or  contradiction  between  these  various  scriptures, 
the  solution  of  the  apparent  difficulty  being  in  the  fact  that  while  a  large  repre 
sentative  section  of  the  nation  will  be  in  Palestine  in  a  condition  of  unbelief 
when   the   Lord   appears,    and  will  be  converted  there,  the  remaining  part  of 
the   nation  will  still  be  in  the  dispersion,  and  upon  them  the  spirit  of  grace 
and  supplication  will  come  in  the  "far  countries "  where  they  shall  be  found. 
The   subject  is  fully  dealt  with  in    Types,    Psalms,   and  Prophecies,   pp.    364- 
377- 


368     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

again  the  second  time  to  recover  the  remnant  of  His  people, 
and  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and  gather 
together  the  dispersed  of  Judah  from  Assyria  and  from 
Egypt,  .  .  .  and  from  the  four  corners  of the  earth.* '* 

It  is  a  fact  that  there  are  now  many  Jews  scattered  in  the 
regions  which  formed  the  "Assyrian"  or  Babylon  empire2 
as  well  as  in  Egypt,  and  with  the  revival  and  progress  of  the 
East  their  numbers  in  those  countries  will  greatly  increase. 

And  when  Jehovah  thus  gathers  them  and  leads 
them  back,  He  will  bring  them  "  into  the  land  of 
Gilead  and  Lebanon"  which  probably  represent  the  whole 
promised  land  east  and  west  of  the  Jordan.  But  even 
there  "place  will  not  be  found  for  them"  which  reminds  us 
of  Isa.  xlix.  20,  21,  where  we  read:  "  The  children  of  thy 
bereavement  shall  yet  say  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too  strait 
for  me :  give  place  to  me  that  I  may  dwell.  Then  shalt 
thou  say  in  thine  heart,  Who  hath  begotten  me  these,  seeing  I 
have  been  bereaved  of  my  children,  and  am  solitary,  an  exile, 
and  wandering  to  and  fro  ?  Who  hath  brought  up  these  ? 
Behold,  I  was  left  alone  ;  these,  where  ivere  they  ?  "  — which 
again  reminds  us  of  the  jubilant  exclamation  in  Isa.  liv. : 

"  Sing  \exult\  O  barren,  thou  that  didst  not  bear  ; 
Break  forth  into  singing,  and  cry,  thou  that  didst  not 

travail : 

For  more  are  the  children  of  the  desolate 
Than  of  the  married  wife,  saith  Jehovah" 

1  Isa.  xi.  II,  12. 

2  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  other   writers   who  deny  the  post-exilic  origin  of  the 
second  half  of  Zechariah,  have  argued  from  the  mention  of  "  Assyria  (and  not 
Babylon)  that  these  chapters  must  have  been   written   before  the  Babylonian 
Captivity  and  soon  after  the  overthrow  of  the  northern  kingdom  of  Israel "  ;  but 
it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  post-exilic  times  the  King  of  Babylon  was 
sometimes  styled  "  the  King  of  Assyria  "  (Ezra  vi.  22  ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  29  ;  Judith 
i.  7,  ii.  I  ;  comp.  Herod,  i.  178,  188),  inasmuch  as  his  authority  extended  over 
Assyria,     In  later  books  the  expressions,  "King  of  the  Persians "  and  "  King  of 
Assyria"  are  interchanged.     Compare  Ezra  (i  Esdr.  ii.  30)  with  vii.  15.     The 
King  of  Persia  is  also  styled  King  of  Babylon  (Ezra  v.  13  ;  Neh.  xiii.  6),  and 
references  are  sometimes  made  to  Assyria  when  Babylon  is  really  signified,  or 
when,  as  in  this  passage,  allusion  is  made  to  the  enemies  of  the  covenant  people 
north  and  south  of  their  land  (comp.  Lam.  v.  6;  Jer.  ii.  18). 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  369 

The  words  are  addressed  to  Jerusalem,  the  counterpart 
of  Sarah,  in  her  barrenness  at  first  and  her  fruitfulness 
afterwards.  She  is  barren  now — not,  indeed,  because  she 
had  never  borne  children,  but  because  in  her  captivity  and 
exile  she  had  been  robbed  of  her  children,  and  as  a  holy 
city  had  all  this  time  given  birth  to  none.  But  she  is  to 
awake  and  sing,  because  the  children  that  shall  gather 
around  her  after  her  long  period  of  desolateness  would  be 
more  than  when  in  the  time  before  her  calamity  came  upon 
/  her  she  had  as  a  married  wife — yea,  so  great  will  be  the 
e  increase  of  Zion's  future  population,  that,  instead  of  bewail- 
i]  ing  her  lonely  and  desolate  condition,  she  shall  even  hear 
s  her  children  say  "in  her  own  ears"  that  the  place  is  too 
v  strait,  and  the  call  to  the  surrounding  nations  :  "  Give  place 
(literally,  '  give  way,'  or  '  fall  back '),  that  I  may  be  able 
to  settle  down." 

I  have  elsewhere  pointed  out l  that  the  land  which  God 
by  oath  and  covenant  promised  to  the  fathers  is  about  fifty 
times  as  large  as  the  part  which  hitherto  the  Jews  actually 
possessed,  and  that  it  is  only  pitiable  ignorance  which  made 
the  superficial  Voltaire  utter  the  blasphemy  that  the  God 
of  the  Jews  must  have  been  a  little  God,  because  He  gave 
His  people  a  land  no  larger  than  Wales,  and  called  it "  a 
good  land  and  a  large  "  (Ex.  iii.  8).  Surely  a  land  which 
includes  within  its  boundaries  an  area  at  least  one-third 
more  than  the  whole  of  France  may  with  right  be  called 
"  a  large  land  "  ;  but  it  is  possible  that  even  the  larger  land, 
with  its  desert  parts  transformed  into  fruitful  fields,  will  not 
suffice  to  hold  the  whole  of  blessed  Israel  in  the  millennial 
period,  so  great  and  rapid  will  be  the  increase  of  the  saved 
remnant. 

In  the  iith  verse  God's  wonderful  works  on  behalf  of 
His  people  in  the  past  are  again  alluded  to  as  the  basis 
and  illustration  of  what  He  will  do  for  them  in  the  yet 
greater  deliverance  of  the  future.  When  He  brought  them 
out  of  Egypt,  He  went  before  them  in  the  pillar  of  cloud  ; 
and  when  pursued  by  Pharaoh  and  his  host,  and  there 

1  See  The  Jewish  Problem. 
24 


370     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

seemed  no  way  of  escape,  He  made  a  way  in  the  sea,  and 
a  path  in  the  deep  waters  for  His  redeemed  to  pass  over.1 
Now,  "  as  in  the  days  of  thy  coming  forth  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt,"  He  says,  "  will  I  show  him  marvellous  things."  2 
Once  again  He  Himself  will  march  at  their  head,  and  no 
obstacle  shall  be  allowed  to  hinder  the  progress  of  His 
redeemed  people  on  their  way  back  to  Zion.  Should  any 
hindrance  present  itself,  even  if  it  be  as  formidable  as  the 
Red  Sea  at  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  "  He  shall  pass  through 
the  sea  of  affliction  (or  straitness),  and  shall  smite  the  waves 
in  the  sea,  and  all  the  depths  of  the  river  (or  Nile)  shall  dry 
up  (even  as  the  Jordan  did  before  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant)  : 
and  the  pride  of  Assyria  (Israel's  former  oppressor  from  the 
north)  shall  be  brought  down,  and  the  sceptre  of  Egypt  (Israel's 
enemy  from  the  south)  shall  depart" 

But  these  two  empires  may  also  represent  Gentile 
world-power  in  general,  which  will  then  give  way  to  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  which  the  God  of  heaven  shall  set 
up,  Whose  blessed  rule  shall  extend  from  Mount  Zion  even 
unto  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

And  not  only  will  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  gather  them 
and  lead  them  back  to  their  own  habitation,  removing  by 
His  Almighty  power  and  grace  every  obstacle  out  of  the 
way,  but  there  in  their  own  land,  when  the  Spirit  shall  have 
been  poured  upon  them  from  on  high,  they  shall  be  "  strong 
in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might,"  and  ready  to 
do  exploits  in  His  name.  "  I  will  strengthen  them,  in 
Jehovah"  we  read  in  the  last  verse  of  our  chapter,  "  and  in 
His  Name  shall  they  walk  up  and  down  " — which  last  ex 
pression  may  denote  first  their  life,  or  walk  and  conversation, 
which  shall  all  be  rooted  in  God,  and  be  in  full  accord  with 
"  His  Name"  which  stands  for  His  revealed  character,  which 
shall  then  be  fully  and  gloriously  manifested  in  their  midst 
in  the  person  of  their  Messiah,  the  image  of  the  invisible 
God.  But  the  phrase  ^rw  toPM,  u-bhistimo  yithallakhu, 
probably  means  also  that  they  shall  walk  up  and  down  in 
His  Name,  as  His  messengers  and  representatives,  dispensing 

1  Isa.  li.  10.  -  Mic.  vii.  15. 


THE  SHEPHERD-KING  371 

the  blessings  of  Messiah's  gospel  among  the  nations  by 
whom  they  shall  be  known  as  the  "  priests  of  Jehovah,"  and 
be  welcomed  as  "  the  ministers  of  our  God,"  1  njpp  DXJ,  neum 
Yehovah — "  the  saying,  or  '  utterance,'  of  Jehovah." 

These  are  the  last  words  of  the  chapter,  and  form,  so 
to  say,  the  signature  which  stands  pledged  to  the  fulfilment 
of  the  contents  of  the  prophecy. 

And  yet  even  evangelical  writers  and  commentators 
deny  that  there  ever  will  be  a  literal  fulfilment  of  these 
plain  and  solemn  predictions,  and  see  in  them  at  the  most 
only  forecasts  of  the  gradual  spread  of  Christianity  and  of 
the  absorption  of  a  certain  number  of  Jews  into  the  Church. 
Thus,  one  German  scholar,  after  summarising  the  contents 
of  the  whole  prophecy  from  chap.  ix.  1 1  to  the  end  of  chap, 
x.,  says  :  "  The  principle  of  fulfilment  is  of  a  spiritual  kind, 
and  was  effected  through  the  gathering  oi  the  Jews  into  the 
Kingdom  of  Christ,  which  commenced  in  the  times  of  the 
Apostles,  and  will  continue  till  the  remnant  of  Israel  is 
converted  to  Christ  its  Saviour."  2 

And  another,  to  whose  elaborate  and,  in  some  respects, 
useful  work  reference  has  often  been  made  in  these  "  notes," 
says :  "  In  the  remarkable  position  occupied  by  Israel  in 
the  early  Christian  Church — for  our  Lord  and  His  apostles 
were  Jews,  and  the  majority  of  the  early  evangelists  were 
men  of  this  nation — in  the  wonderful  fact  that  the  Jews, 
though  politically  crushed  beneath  the  Gentile  yoke,  con 
quered  the  nations  of  the  earth  by  means  of  that  religion 
which  sprang  from  their  midst — in  such  facts  this  prophecy, 
and  other  similar  prophecies,  found  a  most  glorious  and 
real  fulfilment.  The  nations  have  been  enlightened  by  the 
Jews,  and  books  written  by  Jewish  pens  have  become  the 
laws  and  oracles  of  the  world."  3 

But,  as  I  have  had  occasion  to  remark  more  than  once, 
such  method  of  interpretation  turns  the  great  prophetic 
utterances  in  the  Bible  into  mere  hyperbole,  and  substitutes 
an  unnatural  and  shadowy  meaning  for  what  is  plain  and 
obvious,  thereby  throwing  a  vagueness  and  uncertainty  over 
1  Isa.  Ivi.  6.  -  Keil.  J  Wright. 


372     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

all  Scripture.  No,  no ;  just  as  the  scattering  of  Israel  was 
literal,  so  the  gathering  also  will  be  literal ';  and  it  is  not  in 
the  absorption  of  a  remnant  of  the  Jewish  people  into  the 
Church,  and  in  the  gradual  spread  of  "  Christianity  "  that 
"  these  prophecies  find  a  most  glorious  and  real  fulfilment," 
but  in  a  yet  future  nationally  restored  and  converted  Israel, 
which  shall  yet  be  the  centre  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  and 
of  His  Christ,  and  the  channel  of  blessing  to  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth. 


• 


CHAPTER    XVI 
A   DARK   EPISODE 

THE  REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD 
AND  THE  RULE  OF  THE  FALSE 

(CHAPTER  xi) 


373 


Open  thy  doors,  O  Lebanon,  that  the  fire  may  devour  thy  cedars.  Wail,  O 
fir-trees,  for  the  cedar  is  fallen,  because  the  goodly  ones  are  destroyed  :  wail,  O 
ye  oaks  of  Bashan,  for  the  strong  forest  is  come  down.  A  voice  of  the  wailing 
of  the  shepherds  !  for  their  glory  is  destroyed :  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young 
lions !  for  the  pride  of  the  Jordan  is  laid  waste.  Thus  said  Jehovah  my  God : 
Feed  the  flock  of  slaughter ;  whose  possessors  slay  them,  and  hold  themselves 
not  guilty ;  and  they  that  sell  them  say,  Blessed  be  Jehovah,  for  I  am  rich  :  and 
their  own  shepherds  pity  them  not.  For  I  will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of 
the  land,  saith  Jehovah  :  but,  lo,  I  will  deliver  the  men  every  one  into  his 
neighbour's  hand,  and  into  the  hand  of  his  king  :  and  they  shall  smite  the  land, 
and  out  of  their  hand  I  will  not  deliver  them.  So  I  fed  the  flock  of  slaughter, 
verily  the  poor  of  the  flock.  And  I  took  unto  me  two  staves  :  the  one  I  called 
Beauty,  and  the  other  I  called  Bands,  and  I  fed  the  flock.  And  I  cut  off  the 
three  shepherds  in  one  month  ;  for  my  soul  was  weary  of  them,  and  their  soul 
also  loathed  me.  Then  said  I,  I  will  not  feed  you  ;  that  which  dieth,  let  it  die ; 
and  that  which  is  to  be  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut  off;  and  let  them  that  are  left  eat 
every  one  the  flesh  of  another.  And  I  took  my  staff  Beauty,  and  cut  it 
asunder,  that  I  might  break  my  covenant  which  I  had  made  with  all  the  peoples. 
And  it  was  broken  in  that  day ;  and  thus  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  gave  heed 
unto  me  knew  that  it  was  the  word  of  Jehovah.  And  I  said  unto  them,  If  ye 
think  good,  give  me  my  hire  ;  and  if  not,  forbear.  So  they  weighed  for  my  hire 
thirty  pieces  of  silver.  And  Jehovah  said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the  potter,  the 
goodly  price  that  I  was  prised  at  by  them.  And  I  took  the  thirty  pieces  of 
silver,  and  cast  them  unto  the  potter,  in  the  house  of  Jehovah.  Then  I  cut 
asunder  mine  other  staff,  even  Bands,  that  I  might  break  the  brotherhood 
between  Judah  and  Israel.  And  Jehovah  said  unto  me,  Take  unto  thee  yet 
again  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd.  For,  lo,  I  will  raise  up  a  shepherd 
in  the  land,  who  will  not  visit  those  that  are  cut  off,  neither  will  seek  those  that 
are  scattered,  nor  heal  that  which  is  broken,  nor  feed  that  which  is  sound  ;  but 
he  will  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat  sheep,  and  will  tear  their  hoofs  in  pieces.  Woe 
to  the  worthless  shepherd  that  leaveth  the  flock !  the  sword  shall  be  upon  his 
arm,  and  upon  his  right  eye  :  his  arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up,  and  his  right  eye 
shall  be  utterly  darkened. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

'    •    AHE  iith  chapter  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  the 
verbal  prophecies  which  make  up  the  second  part 
of  Zechariah,  as  the   $th  does  in  relation  to  the 
first  part  of  the  visions. 

"  All  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth"  .  .  . 
And  again,  "  /  will  sing  of  mercy  and  of  judgment :  unto 
Thee,  O  Lord,  will  I  sing"  x 

These  words  of  the  inspired  Psalmist  may,  as  an  old 
writer  well  observes,  be  written  over  the  whole  Book  of 
Zechariah. 

In  the  first  part  we  have  first  a  series  of  five  visions 
which  in  various  symbols  set  forth  "  the  good  and  comfort 
able  words "  2  of  promise  concerning  restoration,  enlarge 
ment,  and  temporal  and  spiritual  blessing  which  God  has 
yet  in  store  for  the  land  and  the  people  of  Israel.  But  to 
complete  the  prophetic  forecast  of  the  future,  and  also  (to 
borrow  an  expression  from  another  writer)  "  to  prevent  an 
abuse  of  the  proclamation  of  salvation,"  the  obverse  side  of 
the  picture,  which  sets  forth  a  yet  future  apostasy  and 
judgment,  had  to  be  presented.  This  is  done  in  the  visions 
of  the  Flying  Roll  and  the  Ephah,  in  the  first  of  which  we 
hear  God's  great  curse  pronounced  against  sin  ;  and  in  the 
second  we  see  its  banishment  from  His  own  land  and 
presence  "  to  the  land  of  Shinar  " — the  original  place  of 
rebellion  and  apostasy  against  God — where  it  shall  meet 
with  its  final  doom. 

In  the  6th  chapter,  however,  we  emerge  again  from  the 
dark  valley  of  sin  and  apostasy,  and   we  are  shown  in  the 
symbolical  transaction  there  set  forth  how,  in  spite  of  it  all, 
1  Ps.  xxv.  10,  ci.  i.  2  Chap.  i.  13. 


376     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Israel's  Messiah  will  yet  be  crowned,  and  sit  and  rule  upon 
His  throne,  and  be  a  Priest  upon  His  throne ;  and  how, 
not  only  Israel,  but  "  they  that  are  far  off,"  shall  find  a 
place  in  the  glorious  Temple  which  He  shall  build. 

And  thus  it  is  also  with  the  second  part.  First,  we 
have  a  series  of  verbal  prophecies,  which  are  full  of  promise 
of  future  restoration  and  blessedness ;  and  then,  in  order  to 
prevent  a  carnal  misuse  of  the  promises  of  salvation  on  the 
part  of  the  godless  majority  in  the  nation,  and  also  as  a 
hint  that  the  full  realisation  of  the  promises  was,  from  the 
prophet's  point  of  view,  in  the  yet  distant  future — we  are 
suddenly  in  the  I  ith  chapter  brought  to  the  precipice  of 
a  tremendous  gulf  of  national  apostasy  and  consequent 
judgment. 

But  even  from  this  deep  abyss  we  shall  emerge  again 
in  the  last  three  chapters,  where  Israel's  national  repentance 
and  mourning  over  Him  whom  they  have  sold  for  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,  and  "  pierced,"  are  depicted  for  us  in 
inspired  language,  which  reads  almost  like  history  instead 
of  prophecy.  And  the  end  and  blessed  issue  of  Israel's 
national  conversion  and  reunion  with  their  Messiah  will  be, 
that  "  Jehovah  will  be  King  over  all  the  earth  :  in  that  day 
shall  Jehovah  be  One,  and  His  Name  One."  1 

The  first  brief  section  into  which  our  chapter  is  divided, 
consisting  of  vers.  1-3,  may  be  regarded  as  the  prelude  of 
what  follows.  In  dramatic  style  the  prophet  announces  the 
desolating  judgment  which  will  sweep  over  the  whole  land  : 

"  Open  thy  doors,  O  Lebanon,  that  the  fire  may  devour 
thy  cedars. 

"  Howl,  O  fir-tree,  for  the  cedar  is  fallen,  because  the 
goodly  ones  are  spoiled :  howl,  O  ye  oaks  of  Bashan,  for  the 
strong  forest  is  come  down. 

"  A  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  shepherds  !  for  their  glory 
is  spoiled :  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young  lions  !  for  the 
pride  of  Jordan  is  spoiled'.' 

There  is  a  blending  of  the  literal  with  the  figurative  in 
these  verses.  The  primary  reference  is  very  probably  to 

1  Chap.  xiv.  9. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      377 

the  physical  desolation  which  is  to  befall  the  land  in  con 
sequence  of  its  being  invaded  by  an  enemy.  The  progress 
of  the  devastating  scourge  which  is  here  depicted  has  been 
graphically  described  by  another: 

"  Lebanon  is  bidden  to  open  its  doors ;  that  is,  its 
steep  mountain  paths,  in  order  that  the  fire  of  the  enemy 
imight  consume  its  cedars.  The  firs,  or  cypresses,  are  called 
upon  to  howl  or  lament  because  the  cedars  are  fallen  ;  for  if 
the  more  excellent  and  valuable  trees  were  felled  without 
mercy,  the  poor  firs  and  cypresses  must  needs  expect  a 
similar  fate. 

"  From  the  heights  of  Lebanon  the  destructive  storm 
sweeps  down  on  the  land  of  Bashan,  and  the  oaks — the 
pride  of  the  land  (with  their  kindly  shade  from  the  burning 
heat) — are  likewise  felled  by  the  enemy  to  meet  the  wants 
of  the  invading  army,  and  to  construct  his  means  of  offence 
and  defence.  Thus,  the  wood  hitherto  practically  inaccess 
ible  is  brought  low.  The  desolating  storm  sweeps  from 
the  high  lands  to  the  low  lands.  The  very  shepherds  are 
forced  to  howl,  because  their  splendour  is  laid  waste ; 
namely,  the  pasture  lands  in  which  they  were  wont  to  feed 
and  tend  their  flocks  in  the  day  of  peace  and  quiet.  The 

f  conflagration  extends  even  to  the  south  of  the  land.  Judah 
is  wrapped  in  flames.  The  close  thickets  which  fringed 
the  Jordan  river,  as  it  ran  along  through  the  territory  of  the 

<  southern  kingdom,  are  consumed  by  the  fire.  The  thickets 
which  shut  in  that  stream  so  closely  that  its  waters  could 
not  be  seen  till  the  traveller  was  close  on  its  banks,  which 
were  wont  to  be  the  abode  of  lions  and  other  beasts  of  prey 
in  those  days,  are  likewise  described  as  destroyed.  '  The 
pride  of  Jordan '  is  rendered  desolate,  and  hence  the  voice 
of  roaring  of  lions  is  heard  wailing  over  the  general  ruin." 

But  while  the  physical  desolation  of  the  land  is  that 
which  is  primarily  set  forth  in  this  brief  opening  section  of 
the  chapter,  there  is  also  contained  in  it,  if  not  directly,  at 
least  indirectly,  an  announcement  of  a  destructive  judgment 
of  the  people,  "  inasmuch  as  the  desolation  of  the  land  also 
involves  the  destruction  of  the  people  living  in  it." 


378     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Most  interpreters,  indeed,  both  Jewish  and  Christian 
regard  the  language  as  figurative.  Thus,  the  "  cedars  "  ar 
taken  to  mean  the  highest  and  noblest  in  the  land,  while0 
the  "  cypresses,"  or  "  firs,"  represent  the  common  people, 
who  are  commanded  to  "  howl,"  because  since  the  "  cedars  " 
have  fallen  there  is  no  hope  of  their  being  spared. 
Certainly  in  Ezek.  xvii.  3  the  family  of  David  is  repre- 
sented  by  a  lofty  cedar,  and  in  Isa.  xiv.  8  and  Jer.  xxii. 
6-7  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  stand  as  "  the  emblem  of  the 
glory  of  the  Jewish  State."  But  even  though  "  the  scientific 
expositor  "  may  regard  the  allegorical  interpretation  of  this 
particular  passage  as  "  fanciful,"  l  and  we  ourselves  would  by 
no  means  wholly  commit  ourselves  to  it,  it  is  none  the  less  of 
interest  that  a  very  ancient  Jewish  interpretation  identifies 
Lebanon  here  with  the  Temple  "  which  was  built  with 
cedars  from  Lebanon,  towering  aloft  upon  a  strong  summit 
— the  spiritual  glory  and  eminence  of  Jerusalem,  as  the 
Lebanon  was  of  the  whole  country."  Thus  Kimchi,  after 
explaining  these  verses  as  a  prophecy  of  the  destruction  of 
the  kings  of  the  Gentile  nations,  in  accordance  with  the 
interpretation  of  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  who  paraphrases, 
"  A  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  shepherds  because  their 
glory  is  spoiled"  (ver.  3),  as:  "The  voice  of  the  crying  of 
the  kings  because  their  provinces  are  desolated,"  he  says  : 
"  This  interpretation  is  according  to  the  Targum,  but  our 
Rabbis  of  blessed  memory  have  interpreted  the  chapter  of 
the  desolation  of  the  Second  Temple,  and  Lebanon  is  the 
Holy  Temple."2 

1  Dr.  Wright. 

2  The  remarkable  tradition  which  Kimchi  here  quotes,  is  found  in  the  Talm. 
Bab.,    Treatise  Yoma  (fol.   39,  col.   2),   and  is  as  follows:  "Our   rabbis  have 
handed  down  the  tradition,  that  forty  years  before  the  destruction  of  the  Temple, 
the  lot  (for  the  goat  that  was  to  be  sacrificed  on  the  Day  of  Atonement)  did  not 
come   out  on  the  right  side,  neither  did  the  scarlet  tongue  (that  used  to  be 
fastened  between  the  horns  of  the  scapegoat)  turn  white  (as,  according  to  tradi 
tion,  it  used  to  do,  to  signify  that  the  sins  of  the  people  were  forgiven),  neither 
did  the  western  lamp  burn  ;  the  doors  of  the  sanctuary  also  opened  of  their  own 
accord,  until  R.  Johanan,  the  son  of  Zacchai,  reproved  them.     He  said  :   '  O 
sanctuary,  sanctuary!  why  dost  thou  trouble  thyself?'     R.   Isaac,  the  son  of 
Tavlai,  says  :   '  Why  is  the  Temple  called  Lebanon  (white  mountain)  ? '     Answer  : 


IB1 


pre- 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      379 

But  whether  literal  or  figurative,  the  passage  announces 
;.  judgment  which  would  embrace,  as  already  stated,  the 
and  and  the  people,  and  not  stop  short  of  the  holy  city, 
>r  sanctuary. 

In  the  next  and  longest  section  of  the  chapter  (vers. 
[—  1 4),  the  prophet  proceeds  to  set  forth  the  causes  and  the 
nanner  of  the  judgment  which  in  the  first  three  verses  had 
Deen  announced  in  general  terms. 

Let  us  first  take  the  briefest  possible  glimpse  at  the 
main  contents  of  this  paragraph :  "  Israel,  prophetically 
viewed  as  given  over  to  judgment,  is  called  ""^"iLJL1  i&&  (tson 
ha-haregah),  "  sheep  of  slaughter,"  or,  "  of  slaughtering." 

As  a  manifestation  of  God's  mercy,  however,  an  effort 
is  to  be  made  to  save  them.  The  prophet,  representing 
the  Lord  as  the  True  Shepherd  of  Israel,  is  commanded  to 
feed  them,  and  he,  in  obedience  to  the  command,  takes  upon 
himself  the  office  of  the  shepherd  and  endeavours  to  rescue 
them  from  the  wicked  shepherds  who  are  leading  them  to 
certain  destruction.  The  obstinacy  of  the  majority  of 
those  whom  he  seeks  to  save,  however,  compels  him  to  give 
up  the  office  and  leave  the  flock  to  their  utter  misery  and 
ruin.  Then  (in  order  to  make  manifest  the  ingratitude,  as 
well  as  the  wickedness,  of  those  on  whom  such  care  had  in 
vain  been  bestowed)  the  shepherd  asks  for  his  wages,  and 
they  in  mockery  offer  him  thirty  pieces  of  silver — the  sum 
which,  according  to  the  law,  was  to  be  paid  in  compensa 
tion  for  a  slave  who  had  been  killed  (Ex.  xxi.  22).  This 
j  money  the  prophet,  by  God's  command,  throws  down  con- 
i  temptuously  in  the  Temple,  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
people,  "  to  the  potter,"  after  which  he  breaks  the  last 
emblem  of  his  relation  to  them  as  shepherd. 

This  is  the  briefest  outline  which  we  shall  endeavour  to 
fill  in  when  we  come  to  the  exposition,  but  before  doing 
this  one  or  two  further  preliminary  remarks  are  still 
necessary. 

'  Because  it  makes  white  the  sins  of  Israel.'  Rav.  Zutra,  the  son  of  Tobiah, 
says:  '  Why  is  the  Temple  called  "  forest "'  (Zech.  xi.  2)?  Answer:  Because 
it  is  written,  '  The  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  '  (l  Kings  vii.  2),  etc." 


380     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

(i)  As  just  stated,  the  prophet  must  be  viewed  a 
acting  in  this  chapter  not  in  his  own  person,  but,  in  a  verj 
special  sense,  as  the  representative  of  God.  This  is  clea 
from  such  expressions  as,  "  I  cut  off  three  shepherds  in  ont 
month  "  (ver.  8),  "  that  I  might  break  my  covenant  which 
have  made  with  all  the  peoples  "  (ver.  10),  etc.  ;  whicl 
neither  Zechariah  nor  any  other  prophet  did,  or  could  do 
but  the  Lord  only. 

Hengstenberg,  Pusey,  and  others  think  that  the  prophe 
acts  here  directly  as  the  type,  or  representative,  of  the  Ange 
of  Jehovah  or  the  Messiah  ;  but  to  this  most  modern  com 
mentators  object,  on  the  ground  that,  while  in  the  visions 
recorded  in  the  first  part  of  Zechariah  the  Angel  of  Jehovah 
is  indeed  spoken  of  as  an  actor,  "  no  intimation   whatever 
is  given   in  this  chapter  that  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  is  to  be 
regarded  as  the  doer  of  the  things  which  are  here  related 
and  we  have  no  right  to  assume  that  the  prophecy  is  a 
continuation  of  the  visions  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  book." 

But    it    practically  comes   to    much    the    same    thing 
whether   we    regard    the    prophet    as    representing  in    hi 
actions  as  shepherd,  Jehovah,  or  more  directly  the  Messiah 
for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  is  often  spoken  of  in  the  Old 
Testament  as  the  coming  of   Jehovah.      In   Ezek.  xxxiv. 
for  instance,  Jehovah   Himself  is  represented,  in   His  cap> 
acity  as  the  true  Shepherd   of  Israel,  as  seeking,  saving 
strengthening,  healing,  and  satisfying   His  people ;  but  ? ' 
we  read  on  in  that  chapter  we  become  aware  that  it  is  nc 
Jehovah  directly  who   is  going  to  do  all  this,  but  mediate 
through  the  Messiah.     "  And  I  will  set  them  up  one  shephe, 
over  them,  and  He  shall  feed  them,  even  My  servant  Davia  > 
He  shall  feed  them,  and  He  shall   be    their   shepherd"  - 
namely,  the  true  David,  the  Messiah,  as  the  Jews  themselv 
have  always  rightly  interpreted  this  passage. 

And  so  it  is  always :  in  all  His  relations  and  dealing  , 
with  men,  both  in  mercy  and  in  judgment,  it  is  God 
Christ  who  acts.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  prophecy  (as  i 
admitted  by  one  who  is  not  inclined  to  see  many  reference1 
to  Christ  in  the  Book  of  Zechariah)  "  is  one  of  a  peculiarl) 


B  - 
V:  . 
liiid 

..:: 

:•/ 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      381 

vlessianic  character,  and  (as  we  shall  see  more  clearly 
arther  on)  what  Jehovah  is  said  here  to  perform  was  done 
n  very  deed  by  the  Messiah." 

(2)  The  second  preliminary  question  to  be  settled  is 
he  time  to  which  this  prophecy,  and  more  especially  the 
ymbolical  action  described  in  vers.  7-14,  is  to  be  referred. 
Two  or  three  Jewish  commentators,  who  are  influenced 
n  their  interpretations  by  their  hostility  to  Christianity,  and 
ome  of  the  "  modern  "  rationalistic  Christian  theologians, 
o  whom  Christ  and  the  New  Testament  are  non-existent, 
r  of  no  account  in  their  interpretations  of  the  Old  Testa- 
Clls  ment,  refer  it  to  some  event,  or  events,  which  they  imagine 
'®  occurred  in  the  time  of  the  First  Temple  before  the  Baby- 
ver  Ionian  Exile.1 

A  full  and  lengthy  refutation  of  this  view  is,  however, 
supplied  by  another  Jewish  commentator,  namely,  Abar- 
banel.  One  argument  of  his  is,  of  itself,  quite  sufficient. 

"  To  what  purpose,"  he  asks,  "  should  God  show  the 
"^'prophet  past  events,  which  he  had  seen  with  his  own  eyes 
"'and  with  the  eyes  of  his  father;  and  what  necessity  was 

*  rthere  to  make  known  to  him  the  captivity  of  the  tribes  and 
'c  !the  desolation  of  the  first  house,  which  had  occurred  but  a 
V short  time  before;  and  (above  all)  to  do  this  in  parables, 
?'•;  which  are  only  employed   in    reference  to    the    future,  to 
?  i  make  events  known  before  they  happen  ?      But  with  regard 

>to  the  past,  information  is  not  conveyed  in  parables.      It  is 

*'not  possible    to  suppose  that  God   would  communicate  a 

plain    matter  of  recent    history  in    obscure  symbols,  and, 

*  therefore,  the  symbolical  representation  cannot  refer  to  the 
'    past,  and  must  predict  what  was  to  happen  during  the  time 

of  the  Second  Temple." 2 

1  I  may  quote  as  an  instance,  Professor  Driver,  who  says  that  this  scripture 
"  is  to  be  interpreted  in  all  probability,  not  as  a  prediction,  but  as  a  symbolical 
•5    description  of  events  which  had  happened  recently  when  the  prophet  wrote." 
L          a  It  is  of  interest  to  observe  that  as  far  as  the  "Jewish  interpretation"  is 
concerned,  not  only  Abarbanel,  but  the  Talmud  (both  the  Jerusalem  and  the 
1     Babylonian),   Joseph  Ben   Gorion   (Breithaupt's  edition,   p.    889),  Aben   Ezra, 
Abraham  "the  Levite,"  Alshech,  and  even  R.  Isaac  of  Troki  in  his  polemical 
work  against  Christianity — all  agree  with  Christians  in  applying  this  prophecy 
to  the  time  of  the  Second  Temple. 


382     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  even  among  those  who  rightly  apply  this  prophecy 
to  the  time  of  the  Second  Temple,  there  is  still  a  difference 
of  opinion.  According  to  some,  the  whole  of  the  dealings 
of  God  with  Israel  during  the  time  of  the  Second  Temple 
are  alluded  to.  This  is  the  view  of  most  of  the  Jewish 
interpreters  and  of  eminent  Christian  commentators. 
Thus,  according  to  Calvin,  "  the  Lord  discharged  the  duties 
of  a  shepherd  by  means  of  all  His  faithful  servants  in  the 
time  of  the  Second  Temple,  but  most  perfectly  of  all  by 
Christ "  ;  and  Koehler  sees  in  this  scripture  "  a  representa 
tion  of  the  mediatorial  work  in  the  plan  of  salvation,  of 
which  Daniel  was  the  first  representative,  and  which  was 
afterwards  exhibited  on  the  one  hand  by  Haggai  and 
Zechariah,  and  on  the  other  hand  by  Zerubbabel  and  his 
successors  as  the  civil  rulers  of  Israel,  and  by  Joshua  and 
those  priests  who  resumed  the  duties  of  their  office  along 
with  him."  But  the  ground  on  which  this  view  is 
chiefly  based — namely,  that  because  the  prophecy  in 
chaps,  ix.  and  x.  embraces  the  whole  period  of  the  Second 
Temple,  from  Alexander  the  Great  to  the  coming  of  Christ, 
and  even  merging  into  the  time  of  the  end — therefore,  this 
one  in  chap.  xi.  must  be  equally  comprehensive,  and  start 
from  the  same  historical  point  of  time,  is,  to  say  the  least,  a 
very  uncertain  one. 

For  my  own  part,  I  believe  that  the  more  carefully  we 
look  into  this  solemn  scripture,  the  more  manifest  it 
becomes  that  the  state  of  things  which  it  prophetically 
depicts  answers  exactly  to  the  condition  of  the  Jewish 
nation  immediately  preceding  the  final  catastrophe  at  the 
destruction  of  the  Second  Temple,  and  the  dissolution  of 
the  Jewish  polity  by  the  Romans,  and  does  not  correspond 
to  their  condition  and  experience  during  the  whole,  or 
even  greater  part,  of  their  history  after  the  partial  restora 
tion  from  Babylon. 

For  this,  and  other  reasons  which  for  lack  of  space  I 
cannot  enter  here,  I  must  confess  myself  on  the  side  of 
those  who  view  this  1 1  th  chapter  as  restricted  to  the 
principal  object  of  the  preceding  great  prophecy  (chaps,  ix. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     383 

and  x.),  namely,  the  prediction  concerning  the  coming  of 
the  Messiah  (ix.  9—10),  which  is  in  this  iith  chapter  pre 
sented  from  another  point  of  view,  in  order  that  the  mean 
ing  may  be  fully  understood,  and  "  not  be  so  perverted 
by  a  one-sided  and  worldly  interpretation  as  to  become 
pernicious  instead  of  salutary " ; 1  or,  in  other  words,  that 
this  prophecy  refers  particularly  to  the  office  of  shepherd 
which  was  to  be  filled  by  the  Messiah,  and  to  His  blessed 
labours  and  experience  in  seeking  to  save  the  "  lost  sheep 
of  the  house  of  Israel." 

Let  us  now  examine  the  scripture  itself.  There  is  dis 
cussion  among  commentators  whether  the  phrase  njnnn  JNtf, 
tson  ha-haregah  —  "  sheep  of  slaughter,"  describes  the 
Jewish  nation  as  a  flock  which  is  already  being  slaughtered, 
or  as  one  which  is  marked  out  for  slaughter  at  a  future 
time.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  condition  of  the  people 
was  deplorable  enough  in  the  time  of  the  prophet,  for 
already  in  the  loth  chapter  he  describes  them  as  those 
who  "  go  their  way  (or  '  wander ')  like  sheep,"  and  "  are 
'  afflicted  '  (or  '  oppressed  ')  because  there  is  no  shepherd."  2 

Already  they  were  a  prey  to  false  shepherds,  and  sub 
ject  to  the  abuse  and  oppression  of  their  own  unfaithful 
civil  and  religious  rulers  and  foreign  tyrants  ;  but,  as  may 
be  gathered  from  the  introductory  remarks,  I  regard  it  as  a 
special  prophetic  designation  of  the  people  during  the  time 
to  which  this  prophecy  has  particular  reference  when  it 
became  more  terribly  and  literally  true. 

The  5th  verse  illustrates  the  truth  of  the  designation  in 
the  4th  verse.  They  may,  indeed,  be  described  as  sheep  of 
slaughter,  for  "  their  possessors  (literally,  '  buyers  ')  slay  (or 
'  strangle  ')  them,  and  hold  themselves  not  guilty  ;  and  they  that 
sell  them  say,  Blessed  be  Jehovah,  for  I  am  rich" 

The  buyers  and  sellers  are  those  into  whose  hands  the 
nation  is  delivered,  and  who  do  with  them  as  they  please, 
namely,  the  Gentile  powers.  They  are  represented  as 
thinking  themselves  "  not  guilty  "  in  all  their  cruel  actions 
in  relation  to  the  Jewish  people.  This  reminds  us  of 
1  Hengstenberg.  '-  Chap.  x.  2. 


384     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Jer.  1.  6-7,  which  was  most  probably  before  the  mind  of 
Zechariah.  "  My  people  hath  been  lost  sheep  :  their  shepherds 
have  caused  them  to  go  astray :  .  .  .  all  that  found  them 
have  devoured  tJiem  :  and  their  adversaries  say  we  offend  not 
(are  '  not  guilty  '  *),  because  they  have  sinned  against  Jehovah, 
the  habitation  of  justice,  Jehovah,  the  hope  of  their  fathers." 

But,  though  it  is  true  that  Israel  on  account  of  their 
most  terrible  sins  have  been  handed  over  by  God  as  a 
righteous  punishment  into  the  hands  of  the  Gentile  world- 
powers,  they  are  not  held  innocent  for  their  cruel  deeds 
towards  them.  This  we  see  from  the  same  5oth  chapter 
of  Jeremiah,  where  God  says  :  "  Israel  is  a  scattered  sheep  ; 
the  lions  (the  Gentile  world-powers  who  are  likened  to 
ferocious  wild  beasts}  have  driven  him  away :  first,  the 
king  of  Assyria  hath  devoured  him  ;  and  last  this  Nebuch 
adnezzar  king  of  Babylon  Jiath  broken  his  bones.  TJtere- 
fore  thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel :  Behold, 
I  will  punish  the  king  of  Babylon  and  his  land,  as  I  have 
punished  the  king  of  Assyria"  2 

And  what  God  did  to  Assyria  and  Babylon,  He  did 
also  to  Medo-Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome,  and  still  will  do  to 
nations  and  individuals  whom  He  uses  as  a  scourge  against 
His  own  people,  for  His  word  in  another  part  of  Jeremiah 
still  holds  true  :  "  Therefore  all  they  that  devour  thee  shall  be 
devoured ;  and  all  thine  adversaries,  every  one  of  them,  shall 
go  into  captivity ;  and  they  that  spoil  thee  shall  be  a  spoil  ; 
and  all  they  that  prey  upon  thee  will  I  give  for  a  prey"  3 

But  to  return  more  directly  to  our  scripture.  Not  only 
will  they  be  thus  abused  and  "  slain  "  by  Gentile  oppressors, 
but  "  their  own  shepherds"  by  which  we  must  understand 
their  own  civil  and  religious  rulers,  those  who  ought  to 
have  fed  and  defended  them — "pity  them  not" 4 — thus 
proving  themselves  false  shepherds,  who  only  sought  their 
own,  and  were  the  chief  cause  of  the  sheep  becoming  a  prey. 

1  o$>w  K1? — the  same  verb  as  in  Zech.  xi.  5. 

2 Jer.  1.  17,  18.  -Jer.  xxx.  16. 

4  V'nrr  &  -\r}K'—yo>nar  lo-yadimol — the  verbs  "sayeth"  and  "hath  no  pity" 
are  singular  —  an  emphatic  mode  of  expression,  by  which  each  individual  is 
represented  as  doing  or  not  doing  the  action  of  the  verb. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      385 

There  is  a  sad  gradation  in  the  wretchedness  of  the 
people  thus  given  over  to  judgment,  as  described  in  vers. 
5-6.  First,  the  Gentile  nations  pity  them  not,  but  buy 
and  sell  and  slay  them  as  "  sheep  of  slaughter."  Secondly, 
their  own  shepherds,  from  whom  something  different  might 
have  been  expected,  have  no  compassion  for  them  ;  and 
thirdly,  and  most  terrible  of  all,  "  I  will  no  more  pity  the 
inhabitants  of  the  land,  saith  Jehovah"  for  long-continued 
obduracy  exhausts  even  the  patience  of  Jehovah ;  and  there 
comes  a  time  in  the  history  of  nations  and  of  individuals 
when  the  long-suffering  God  has  to  say  "  there  is  no  more 
remedy  "  (or  "  healing  " 1),  and  His  righteous  anger  has  to 
manifest  itself  in  judgment. 

In  the  solemn  words  of  the  6th  verse  we  have  a  fore 
cast  of  what  would  take  place  after  the  rejection  of  the 
Good  Shepherd,  and  the  care  and  protection  of  God  over 
His  people  would  be  withdrawn.  God's  anger  will  show 
itself,  not  only  in  a  negative  manner  ("  I  will  no  more  pity  "), 
but  also  in  a  positive  way. 

"And,  lo"  (or  "behold  "),  this  is  God's  way  of  calling 
attention  to  something  great  which  He  is  going  to  do  either 
with  nations  or  individuals — "  /  will  deliver  the  men  every 
one  into  the  hands  of  his  neighbour,  and  into  the  hand  of  his 
king :  and  they  shall  smite  (literally,  '  break  down,'  i.e.,  lay 
waste}  the  land" — solemn  and  awful  words  which  well 
describe  in  advance  the  confusion,  captious  strife,  hatred, 
and  mutual  destruction,  which  followed  soon  after  the 
rejection  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  their  true  Messiah  and  Shepherd, 
the  detailed  accounts  of  which  may  be  read  in  Josephus, 
and  even  in  the  Talmud. 

A  parallel  passage  is  found  in  Jer.  xix.  9,  which  was 
fulfilled  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  First  Temple:  "And  I  will  cause 
them  to  eat  the  flesh  of  their  sons  and  the  flesh  of  their 
daughters,  and  they  shall  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  his  friend 
,.  '  in  the  siege  and  in  the  straitness,  wherewith  their  enemies, 
and  they  that  seek  their  lives,  shall  straiten  them  " — where 

1  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16. 
25 


386     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

also  a  twofold  cause  of  their  ruin  is  given,  namely,  strife 
among  themselves,  which  is  heightened  by  sufferings  and 
oppression  inflicted  by  the  foe  without.  Contention  within, 
and  the  enemy  without,  are  not  only  mentioned  in  the 
passage  just  quoted  from  Jeremiah,  but  they  are  linked 
together  by  Zechariah  himself  in  chap.  viii.  10,  as  the  two 
chief  methods  of  punishment  employed  by  God  for  the 
chastisement  of  His  people.  "  There  was  no  peace  to  him 
that  went  out  or  came  in  because  of  the  adversary,  and  I  set 
all  men  every  one  against  his  neighbour  " — "  which  miserable 
state  of  things  existed  before  the  Babylonian  Captivity  and 
is  represented  in  the  1 1  th  chapter  as  returning  with  still 
greater  force  on  account  of  the  base  ingratitude  and  relapse 
into  apostasy  on  the  part  of  the  people."  x 

The  phrase,  "  into  the  hand  of  his  king"  must  be  under 
stood  as  referring  to  the  king  of  "  his,"  i.e.,  Judah's  own 
choice.  That  it  is  of  a  foreign  oppressor,  and  not  of  a 
native  ruler,  that  the  prophecy  speaks,  is  evident,  among 
other  things,  from  the  fact  that  the  Jews  had  no  king  at 
the  time  of  Zechariah,  and  that  this  prophet  never  (either  in 
the  first  or  second  half  of  the  book),  even  in  his  descriptions 
of  the  future,  speaks  of  any  king,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Messiah. 

When,  on  that  fateful  eve  of  the  Passover,  Pilate  brought 
Jesus  out  before  the  Jews,  and  half  in  mockery  said,  "  Be 
hold  your  king,"  they  cried,  "  Away  with  him,  crucify 
him  !  "  and  when  he  again  appealed,  "  Shall  I  crucify  your 
king  ? "  the  chief  priests,  who  constituted  themselves  the 
leaders  of  the  people,  answered  :  "  We  have  no  king  but 
Caesar ! "  and,  having  thus  deliberately  made  this  terrible 
choice,  they  were  "  delivered  "  into  Caesar's  hand ;  and  soon 
after  the  Roman  armies,  under  Vespasian  and  Titus,  laid 
waste  the  land  and  destroyed  the  people.  How  terrible 
was  the  retribution.  "  If  we  let  this  man  thus  alone,"  said 
the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  in  council, "  all  men  will 
believe  on  him,  and  the  Romans  will  come  and  take  away 
both  our  place  and  our  nation."  So  they  decided  to  carry 

1  Hengstenberg. 


\ 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      387 

out  the  wicked  counsel  of  Caiaphas,  who  said :  "  It  is 
expedient  for  you  that  one  man  die  for  the  people,  and  that 
the  whole  nation  perish  not,"  and  handed  Him  over  to  the 
Romans.  But  the  very  thing  they  feared,  and  on  account 
of  which  they  decided  on  committing  the  great  national 
crime  of  betraying  their  Kinsman-Redeemer  into  the  hands 
of  the  Gentiles,  came  upon  them,  for  these  very  Romans 
did  come,  "  and  take  away  both  their  place  and  their 
nation." 

But,  terrible  as  is  the  punishment  which  came  upon 
the  Jewish  nation  in  consequence  of  their  rejection  of  the 
Good  Shepherd,  we  must  beware  of  wrong  conclusions, 
and  of  perverting  Scripture  by  false  interpretation.  Thus, 
Hengstenberg,  Pusey,  and  other  commentators — who  are 
great  literalists  as  far  as  the  threatenings  and  curses  are 
concerned  in  applying  them  to  the  Jewish  people,  but 
"spiritualise"  and  misapply  all  the  promises — lay  great 
stress  on  the  last  words  of  the  6th  verse  :  "  I  will  not  deliver 
them,"  in  proof  that  the  captivity  of  the  Jewish  nation 
brought  about  by  the  Romans  "  shall  be  without  remedy  or 
end."  Pusey,  for  instance,  quotes  with  great  approval  the 
words  of  Jerome  :  "  Hear,  O  Jew,  who  holdest  out  to  thyself 
hopes  most  vain,  and  hearest  not  the  Lord  strongly  assert 
ing,  '  /  will  not  deliver  them  out  of  their  hands,'  that  thy 
captivity  among  the  Romans  shall  have  no  end." 

But  this  is  a  one-sided  perversion  of  the  truth.  As 
far  as  the  generation  which  is  contemplated  in  this  pro 
phecy  is  concerned,  there  was  "  no  remedy,"  or  "  deliver 
ance,"  as  was  the  case  also  with  the  generation  of  the  time 
of  the  first  Captivity  and  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  by 
the  Babylonians,  of  which  similar  expressions  are  used  ; 
and  as  is  the  case  in  every  generation  with  those  who  prove 
themselves  obdurate,  and  persistently  harden  their  hearts 
and  refuse  God's  gracious  call :  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  from 
your  evil  ways :  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel." 

But,  as  far  as  the  purpose  of  God  with  the  Jewish 
nation  is  concerned,  it  ever  abides  unchanged  and  unalter 
able,  for  the  unchangeable  God  remains  true  and  faithful. 


388 

though  all  men  prove  liars.  This  same  prophet,  who  in 
the  iith  chapter  predicts  Israel's  rejection  of  the  Good 
Shepherd,  and  their  consequent  rejection  of  God  for  a  time, 
graphically  describes  in  the  last  three  chapters,  which  deal 
with  the  last  events  of  this  age,  Israel's  restoration  and 
conversion  when  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication  shall 
be  poured  upon  them,  and  they  shall  bitterley  lament  and 
repent  of  their  great  national  sin,  and  look  upon  Him 
whom  they  have  pierced. 

And  this  is  in  accord  also  with  the  clear  statements  of 
the  New  Testament,  which  tells  us  that  "  all  Israel  shall  be 
saved,  even  as  it  is  written  :  There  shall  come  out  of  Zion 
the  Deliverer,  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob  ; 
for  this  is  My  covenant  unto  them  when  I  shall  take  away 
their  sins." 

And  even  in  the  generation  of  which  the  terrible  words 
are  written,  "  I  will  not  deliver  them  out  of  their  hands," 
there  were  "the  poor  of  the  flock"  (vers.  7,  11)  who  did 
"  give  heed  "  and  "  knew  the  word  of  Jehovah,"  who  (as  we 
shall  see)  are  none  other  than  the  remnant,  according  to 
the  election  of  grace,  which,  blessed  be  God  !  has  never 
been  wanting  even  in  the  darkest  period  of  Israel's  history. 

We  proceed  to  what  may  be  said  to  constitute  the 
heart  of  this  remarkable  prophecy,  namely,  the  actual 
"  feeding,"  or  shepherding,  of  the  flock  which,  through  their 
own  obstinacy,  became  "  the  flock  of  slaughter." 

"  So  I  fed  the  flock  of  slaughter,  verily  the  poor  of  the 
flock.  And  I  took  unto  me  two  staves :  the  one  I  called 
Beauty,  and  the  other  I  called  Bands,  and  I  fed  the  flock. 
And  I  cut  off  the  three  shepherds  in  one  month ;  for  my 
soul  was  weary  of  them,  and  their  soul  also  loathed  me. 
Then  said  I,  I  will  not  feed  you  :  that  that  dieth,  let  it  die  ; 
and  that  that  is  to  be  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut  off;  and  let  them 
which  are  left  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  another.  And  I 
took  my  staff  Beauty,  and  cut  it  asunder,  that  I  might  break 
my  covenant  which  I  had  made  with  all  the  peoples.  And  it 
was  broken  in  that  day ;  and  thus  the  poor  of  the  flock 
that  gave  heed  unto  me  knew  that  it  was  the  word  of  the 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      389 

Lord.  And  I  said  unto  them,  If  ye  think  good,  give  me 
my  hire ;  and  if  not,  forbear.  So  they  weighed  for  my  hire 
thirty  pieces  of  silver.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Cast 
it  unto  the  potter,  the  goodly  price  that  I  was  prised  at  of 
them.  And  I  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them 
unto  the  potter,  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Then  I  cut 
asunder  mine  other  staff,  even  Bands,  that  I  might  break 
the  brotherhood  between  Judah  and  Israel "  (Zech.  xi. 

7-14). 

We  may  pause  for  a  moment  to  ask  whether  the 
symbolical  transaction  which  is  here  described  was  an 
inward  or  outward  one.  Most  of  the  Jewish  commentators 
take  the  latter  view.  Thus  Abarbanel,  for  instance,  says : 
"  God  commanded  the  prophet  to  perform  a  real  action, 
and  in  a  waking  state,  which  action  was  to  be  an  intima 
tion  and  a  sign  of  that  which  was  to  happen  in  God's 
dealings  with  Israel,"  and  adds :  "  By  attending  to  the 
affairs  of  the  prophets  thou  mayest  know  that  God,  blessed 
be  He,  sometimes  commanded  them  to  perform  real  actions, 
and  in  a  waking  state,  and  afterwards  explained  to  them 
the  reason  of  the  command  according  to  the  sign  that  was 
in  them.1  .  .  .  But  sometimes  the  blessed  God  commanded 
the  prophets  to  do  things  foreign  to  their  character,  and  un 
necessary  for  them  to  do ;  which  things  were  also  to  be  a 
sign  and  a  type  of  coming  events,  and  did  not  expound  the 
meaning,  because  He  knew  that  the  thing  itself  could  be 
understood"  (as,  for  instance,  Isa.  viii.  1-2  ;  Ezek.  iv.  1-2, 
v.  i).  But,  as  has  been  observed,  the  narrative  in  this 
chapter  differs  in  some  respects  from  the  symbolical  actions 
of  the  prophets  and  from  Zechariah's  own  visions. 

"  The  symbolical  actions  of  the  prophets  are  actions  of 
their  own  :  this  involves  acts  which  it  would  be  impossible 
to  represent,  except  as  a  sort  of  drama.  Such  are  the  very 
central  points,  the  feeding  of  the  flock,  which  yet  are 
intelligent  men  who  understand  God's  doings  :  the  cutting 
off  of  the  three  shepherds ;  the  asking  for  the  price ;  the 
unworthy  price  offered  ;  the  casting  it  aside.  It  differs 

1  He  quotes  Isa.  xx.  2,  viii.  4  ;  Jer.  xiii.  I,  etc.,  and  Ezekiel  as  examples. 


390     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

from  Zechariah's  own  visions,  in  that  they  are  for  the  most 
part  exhibited  to  the  eye,  and  Zechariah's  own  part  is 
simply  to  inquire  their  meaning  and  to  learn  it,  and  to 
receive  further  revelation.  In  one  case  only  (chap.  iii.  5) 
he  himself  interposes  in  the  action  of  the  vision  ;  but  this, 
too,  as  asking  that  it  might  be  done,  not  as  himself  doing 
it.  Here  (in  chap,  xi.)  he  is  himself  the  actor,  yet  as 
representing  Another,  Who  alone  could  cut  off  shepherds, 
abandon  the  people  to  mutual  destruction,  annulling 
the  covenant  which  He  had  made."  1  Maimonides,  then, 
seems  to  say  rightly :  "  This,  '  I  fed  the  flock  of  the 
slaughter,'  to  the  end  of  the  narrative,  where  he  is  said  to 
have  asked  for  his  hire,  to  have  received  it,  and  to  have 
cast  it  into  the  Temple,  to  the  treasurer — all  this  Zechariah 
saw  in  prophetic  vision.  For  the  command  which  he 
received,  and  the  act  which  he  is  said  to  have  done,  took 
place  in  prophetic  vision  or  dream.  This,"  he  adds,  "  is 
beyond  controversy,  as  all  know  who  are  able  to  distinguish 
the  possible  from  the  impossible." 

Let  us  bear  in  mind  also  that,  as  has  been  well  observed 
by  an  old  writer,  the  actions  of  the  prophets  are  not 
always  to  be  understood  as  actions,  but  as  predictions — as, 
for  instance,  when  God  commands  Isaiah  to  "  make  the 
heart  of  the  people  fat  and  their  ears  heavy  "  ; 2  or  when  He 
says  that  He  appointed  Jeremiah  over  the  nations,  'to 
root  out,  and  to  break  down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to  over 
throw,  and  to  build,  and  to  plant  "  ; 3  or  when  He  com 
manded  the  same  prophet  to  cause  the  nations  to  drink 
the  cup  whereby  they  should  be  bereft  of  their  senses.4 
Neither  Isaiah  nor  Jeremiah  actually  did  this,  but  foretold  in 
advance  in  this  manner  what  would  be.  So  it  is  here. 

But  to  proceed  to  the  exposition.  And,  first,  I  will 
deal  with  what  I  believe  to  be  a  parenthetical  sentence  in 
the  7th  verse,  which  occurs  again  in  the  iith  verse,  and 
which  has  greatly  puzzled  the  commentators,  and  of  which 
all  sorts  of  explanations  have  been  given  :  "  So  I  fed,"  we 

1  Pusey.  -  isa.  vi.  IO. 

a  Jer.  i.  10.  <  Jer.  xxv.  15-27. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      391 

read,  "  the  sheep  of  slaughter "  ;  after  which  there  follow 
the  three  Hebrew  words,  |NVn  "3JJ  137,  lachen  aniyye  hatson, 
which  the  Authorised  Version  has  rendered,  "  Even  you,  O 
poor  of  the  flock  "  ;  and  the  Revised  Version,  "  Verily,  the 
poor  of  the  flock " ;  and  the  explanation  usually  given  is 
that  "  the  poor  of  the  flock "  is  practically  only  another 
name  for  "  the  sheep  of  slaughter."  But  this  is  very 
unsatisfactory,  for,  first,  the  primary  and  natural  meaning  of 
the  adverb  i?^,  lachen,  is  not  "  even "  or  "  verily,"  but 
"  therefore  "  ;  and  secondly,  the  designation  "  aniyye  ha-am" 
"  the  poor  of  the  people,"  or.  as  the  word  also  means,  "  the 
needy,"  "  the  weak,"  "  the  afflicted,"  is  almost  invariably 
used  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  of  the  pious  or  godly  in  the  nation 
who  are  persecuted  and  oppressed  by  the  godless — of  those 
whom  the  wicked  in  his  pride  "  hotly  pursue,"  or  persecute, 
but  who,  knowing  God  to  be  their  refuge,  can  look  up  to 
Him  and  say:  "  But  I  am  poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord 
thinketh  upon  me."1 

Certainly  in  the  iith  verse  the  "aniyye  katson"  who 
"  observed  "  the  prophet,  and  knew  that  it  was  the  word  of 
Jehovah,  must  refer  to  the  God-fearing  portion  of  the  nation. 
In  brief,  I  believe  that  the  sentence  should  be  rendered, 
"  therefore  (on  this  account)  the  poor  of  the  flock," 2  and 
that  in  these  three  words  in  the  Hebrew  there  is  summed 
up  the  result,  or  blessed  fruit  of  the  labours  of  the  Good 
Shepherd.  Not  altogether  in  vain,  or  fruitless,  would  His 
self-sacrificing  effort  to  save  the  lost  sheep  of  the  House  of 
Israel  prove.  The  mass  would  indeed  prove  obstinate, 

1  Compare  Ps.  x.  2-9,  xiv.  6,  liii.  6,  xxxv.  10,  xxxvii.  14,  xl.  17,  Ixx.  5, 
Ixxii.  4,  Ixxxvi.  I,  cix.  16-22 ;  Isa.  x.  2,  xiv.  32,  xli.  17  ;  and  many  other 
places  where  'J^,  ant,  is  used. 

2  The  LXX  has  evidently  made  a  great  blunder  over  these  sentences,  for  in 
ver.  7  it  has  for  |Niin  ':«;  J?^ — eZs  rr\v  'KavaaviTiv,  "in  the  land  of  Chanaan"  (or 
Canaan),  leaving  out  the  word  for  "  sheep"  or  "  flock"  altogether  ;  and  in  ver. 
II  it  has  got  ol  Xavavaioi — the  Canaanites,  or  "merchants."  And  yet  some 
modem  scholars  adopt  these  evident  misreadings  as  the  basis  of  emendations  of 
their  own  of  the  Hebrew  text — as,  for  instance,  Sir  George  Adam  Smith,  who 
has  translated  the  sentence  in  ver.  7  "for  the  sheep  merchants,"  and  in  ver.  II, 
"  the  dealers  of  the  sheep."  But  the  Hebrew  text  in  this  place  needs  no 
emendation  or  alteration  when  properly  understood. 


392     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  by  rejecting  Him  choose  death  rather  than  life,  and 
thus  experience  the  truth  of  the  awful  designation,  tson 
]ia-haregaJi,  "  sheep  of  slaughter " ;  but,  as  has  been  the 
case  even  in  the  very  darkest  periods  of  Israel's  history, 
God  would  leave  in  the  midst  of  them  "  an  afflicted  and 
poor  people,"  who  would  trust  in  the  Name  of  Jehovah,1 
the  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace,  in  and 
through  whom  the  purposes  of  God  would  be  carried  for 
ward.  The  New  Testament  parallel  and  ultimate  fulfilment 
is  in  John  i.  1 1  :  "  He  came  unto  His  own,  and  they  that 
were  His  received  Him  not.  But  as  many  as  received  Him, 
to  them  gave  He  the  right  (or  ' power ')  to  become  children  of 
God,  even  to  them  that  believe  in  His  Name" 

"  The  elect  are  the  end  of  all  God's  dispensations," 
observes  another  writer.  "  He  fed  all  ;  yet  the  fruit  of  His 
feeding,  His  toils,  His  death,  the  travail  of  His  soul,  was  in 
those  only  who  are  saved.  So  also  the  apostle  says : 
'  Therefore,  I  endure  all  things  for  the  elects'  sake,  that 
they  also  may  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
with  eternal  glory.'  He  fed  all ;  but  the  poor  of  the  flock 
alone,  those  who  were  despised  of  men  because  they  would 
not  follow  the  pride  of  the  high  priests  and  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  believed  on  Him." 

On  entering  his  office  as  shepherd,  the  prophet  "  took 
two  staves."  The  Eastern  shepherd,  to  quote  from  Dr. 
Thomson's  The  Land  and  the  Book,  "  invariably  carries 
a  staff  or  rod  with  him  when  he  goes  forth  to  feed  his  flock. 
It  is  often  bent,  or  hooked,  at  one  end,  which  gave  rise  to 
the  shepherd's  crook  in  the  hand  of  the  Christian  bishop. 
With  this  staff  he  rules  and  guides  the  flock  to  their  green 
pastures,  and  defends  them  from  their  enemies.  With  it, 
also,  he  corrects  them  when  disobedient,  and  brings  them 
back  when  wandering.  This  staff  is  associated  as  in 
separably  with  the  shepherd  as  the  goad  is  with  the 
ploughman." 

That  on  certain  occasions,  at  any  rate,  it  was  customary 
for  the  shepherd  to  have  not  only  one  but  two  staves — one 

1  Zeph.  iii.  12. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      393 

for  keeping  off  wild  beasts  and  thieves,  and  the  other  for 
feeding  the  flock — is  manifest  from  the  reference  so  familiar 
to  us  in  the  23rd  Psalm:  "  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff,  they 
comfort  me" 

The  names  of  the  staves,  like  everything  else  in  this 
symbolical  transaction,  were  significant.  One  he  called  DV'3, 
noam,  which  means  "  beauty,"  "  pleasantness,"  "  favour " 
— and  had  reference,  as  we  see  from  the  loth  verse,  to  the 
grace  and  loving-kindness  of  God  in  keeping  off  their 
enemies  from  destroying  them  ;  and  the  other  he  called 
Dy3fy  hobhlim,  "  bands,"  or  literally  "  binders,"  and  sym 
bolised,  as  we  see  from  the  I4th  verse,  that  part  of  the 
shepherd's  rule  by  which  the  sheep  were  kept  united  among 
themselves  as  one  flock.  "  And  so "  (thus  equipped),  he 
says  again  at  the  end  of  the  7th  verse,  "  I  fed  the  flock." 

There  is,  perhaps,  not  another  scripture  in  the  Old 
Testament  which  has  been  more  variously  interpreted  than 
the  first  part  of  the  8th  verse  of  this  chapter:  "  And  I cut 
off  tJie  three  shepherds  in  one  month''  Who  are  the  three 
shepherds,  and  what  are  we  to  understand  by  the  expression, 
"  in  one  month  "  ? 

The  following  are  a  few  out  of  the  many  answers  which 
have  been  given  to  these  questions:  (i)  Von  Hoffmann, 
Koehler,  Keil,  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  W.  H.  Lowe,  and  others 
understand  by  the  three  shepherds  Gentile  rulers,  in  whose 
power  the  Jews  were,  and  who  ought  to  have  acted  to  them 
as  "  shepherds " ;  but  they  differ  as  to  who  these  rulers 
were,  and  also  in  their  interpretation  of  the  "  one  month." 
Thus,  Von  Hoffmann  identifies  the  three  shepherds  with 
three  empires,  namely,  the  Babylonian,  the  Medo- Persian, 
and  the  Macedonian.  According  to  him  the  "  one  month  " 
signifies  a  prophetic  period  of  thirty  prophetic  days,  each  of 
seven  literal  years'  duration.  This  would  be  equivalent  to 
2  i  o  years.  The  three  empires  named  actually  lasted  215 
years,  reckoning  from  the  Babylonian  Captivity  to  the  death 
of  Alexander  the  Great ;  but  the  slight  discrepancy  of  five 
years  is  considered  of  little  consequence  in  reckoning 
sabbatic  periods. 


394     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  chief  objection  to  this  interpretation  is  that  it  can 
not  be  shown  that  "  a  day "  is  ever  used  in  the  prophetic 
Scriptures  to  represent  seven  years.  His  reference  to  Dan. 
ix.  24,  in  support  of  his  theory,  does  not  apply,  for  there 
the  "  seventy  weeks "  (or  "  seventy  sevens ")  are  seventy 
weeks  of  years,  i.e.,  490  years,  and  on  that  principle  the 
"  one  month  "  could  only  signify  thirty  years.  "  Moreover," 
as  Wright  observes,  "  it  is  not  in  accordance  with  fact,  or 
with  Daniel's  prophecy  in  chap,  viii.,  to  view  the  death  of 
Alexander  as  the  destruction  of  the  Macedonian  empire, 
which  continued  to  exist,  though  no  longer  as  a  united 
empire,  under  the  rule  of  the  Diadochi,  or  successors  of 
Alexander." 

Koehler,  Kliefoth,  and  Keil  also  identify  the  three 
shepherds  with  the  Babylonian,  Medo-Persian,  and  Mace 
donian  empires ;  but,  according  to  them,  the  only  way  in 
which  the  expression  "  in  one  month  "  can  be  symbolically 
interpreted  is  by  dividing  the  month  as  a  period  of  thirty 
days  into  three  times  ten  days,  according  to  the  number  of 
the  shepherds,  and  taking  each  ten  days  as  the  time 
employed  in  the  destruction  of  a  shepherd.  "  Ten  is  the 
number  of  the  completion  or  the  perfection  of  any  earthly 
act  or  occurrence.  If,  therefore,  each  shepherd  were 
destroyed  in  ten  days,  and  the  destruction  of  the  three  was 
executed  in  a  month,  i.e.,  within  a  space  of  three  times  ten 
days  following  one  another,  the  fact  is  indicated,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  the  destruction  of  each  of  these  shepherds  followed 
directly  upon  that  of  the  other ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  this  took  place  after  the  full  time  allotted  for  his  rule 
had  passed  away."  I  agree  with  another  writer  that  this 
explanation  as  to  what  is  meant  by  the  "  one  month " 
appears  highly  artificial. 

Dr.  Wright  explains  the  "  one  month  "  on  the  year-day 
principle  ("  each  day  for  a  year,"  Ezek.  iv.  6),  and  identifies 
the  thirty  years  with  the  period  "between  B.C.  172,  when 
Antiochus  Epiphanes  desecrated  the  Temple,  and  B.C.  141, 
when  the  three  alien  shepherds,  Antiochus  Epiphanes, 
Antiochus  Eupator,  and  Demetrius  I.  were  cut  off,  and  the 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      395 

last  trace  of  Syrian  supremacy  was  removed  by  the  ex 
pulsion  of  the  Syrian  garrison  from  its  fortress  in 
Jerusalem." 

But  this  is  in  accord  with  his  general  interpretation  of 
the  chapter  (as  is  the  case  also  with  all  the  others  who 
seek  to  identify  the  shepherds  with  Gentile  rulers  or 
kingdoms);  by  which  also  the  "shepherds"  in  the  5th 
verse,  and  the  solemn  words  of  judgment  in  the  6th  verse, 
are  made  to  apply,  not  to  the  Jews,  but  to  their  Gentile 
oppressors — a  view  which  seems  to  me  untenable ;  for  first, 
there  is  no  mention  or  reference  to  the  Gentiles  in  the 
announcement  of  the  devastating  judgment  in  the  first 
three  verses  of  the  chapter,  which  I  regard  as  the  prelude 
to  the  whole  prophecy,  but  only  to  the  borders  of  the 
promised  land  from  the  north  to  the  south. 

Secondly,  the  awful  condition  of  things  depicted  in  the 
6th  verse  is  just  that  which,  according  to  vers.  g  and  1 1,  is 
to  happen  to  "  the  sheep  of  slaughter  "  after  their  rejection 
of  the  Good  Shepherd  ;  and  thirdly,  the  very  usage  of  the 
term  "  shepherds "  precludes,  it  seems  to  me,  the  inter 
pretation  which  makes  it  to  mean  Gentile  tyrants,  or 
oppressors — its  almost  exclusive  application,  when  used  in 
the  Hebrew  Bible  in  its  figurative  sense  in  relation  to  a 
flock  of  men,  being  to  native  Israelitish  rulers  or  leaders, 
whether  civil  or  religious,1  most  of  whom,  alas  !  proved 
themselves  to  be  only  false  shepherds  without  any  heart  for 
the  sheep. 

(2)  Maurer,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Bleek,  Bunsen,  S.  Davidson, 
and  other  writers  have  fastened  upon  this  passage  as  con 
taining,  according  to  them,  "  one  of  the  clearest  proofs  "  of 
the  pre-exilic  authorship  of  the  second  part  of  Zechariah, 
inasmuch  as  the  "  three  shepherds "  are  supposed  to  refer 
to  three  kings  of  the  northern  or  ten-tribed  kingdom  of 
Israel  who  were  "  cut  off  in  one  month "  (which  they  take 

1  The  only  exception  is  Isa.  xliv.  28,  where  God  says  of  Cyrus,  "  He  is  My 
shepherd  "  ;  but  there  he  is  so  called  because  he  is  raised  up  to  play  the  r&le, 
not  of  an  oppressor  of  Israel,  but  as  performing  God's  pleasure,  even  saying  to 
Jerusalem  she  shall  be  built,  and  to  the  Temple,  "Thy  foundations  shall  be 
laid." 


396     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

in  its  literal  significance),  and,  therefore,  contend  that  this 
prophecy  must  have  been  written  before  the  destruction  of 
that  kingdom  by  the  Assyrians  in  721  B.C.,  and  not,  as  is 
generally  accepted,  before  the  restoration  from  Babylon. 

The  historical  event,  or  events,  to  which  our  passage  is 
made  by  these  writers  to  refer,  is  2  Kings  xv.  8—14,  where 
we  read  of  the  assassination  of  Zechariah,  son  of  Jeroboam 
II.,  by  Shallum,  who  very  shortly  was  himself  smitten  by 
Menahem.  But  we  need  only  look  into  this  passage  in 
2  Kings  to  see  the  baselessness  of  this  interpretation  and 
of  the  theory  based  upon  it.  Shallum,  who  murdered 
Zechariah,  himself  reigned  "  a  full  month  "  before  he  was 
in  turn  murdered  by  Menahem,  who  was  not  killed  at  all, 
but  reigned  ten  years,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son 
Pekahiah.  Maurer,  Ewald,  Bunsen,  and  S.  Davidson,  in 
support  of  this  theory,  have  invented  "  a  third  unknown 
usurper,"  who  succeeded  Zechariah  for  a  very  brief  period 
before  Shallum  actually  reigned,  or  "  possibly  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Jordan,"  and  who  also  met  with  a  violent  end  ; 
but  such  inventions,  of  which  history  knows  nothing,  and 
for  which  there  is  no  place  in  the  historical  narrative  in  the 
Scriptures,  are  not  worthy  to  be  refuted.1 

(3)  There  remains  one  other  explanation  which,  though 
not  altogether  free  from  difficulties,  seems  to  me  the  correct 
one,  namely,  that  the  prophet  is  speaking,  not  of  three 
individuals,  but  of  three  orders,  or  classes,  of  shepherds. 
But  even  among  those  holding  this  view  there  have  been 

1  I  may  mention  a  few  other  interpretations,  or  rather  guesses  and  conjectures, 
respecting  the  three  shepherds.  Abarbanel  explains  them  to  mean  the  three 
Maccabees — Judas,  Jonathan,  and  Simon  ;  Kimchi  refers  them  to  Jehoahaz, 
Jehoiakim,  and  Zedekiah  ;  Jerome  (following  the  Talmud),  to  Moses,  Aaron, 
and  Miriam  ;  Grotius,  to  David,  Adonijah,  and  Joab ;  Burger,  to  Eli  and  his 
two  sons,  or  to  Samuel  and  his  two  sons ;  and  Kalmet  explains  them  of  the 
three  Roman  emperors — Galba,  Otho,  and  Vitellius.  Another  theory  contended 
for  is  that  the  three  shepherds  are  John,  Simon,  and  Eleazer,  the  three  desperate 
leaders  of  the  Jewish  factions  in  the  last  struggle  against  Rome  ;  but,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  John  of  Gischala  and  Simon  Bar  Giora  were  taken  alive  to  Rome,  and 
Simon  was  slain  in  Rome  during  the  triumphal  procession  of  Vespasian  and 
Titus  about  three  years  after  the  destruction  of  the  Temple ;  so  that  they 
certainly  could  not  be  the  three  shepherds  who  were  to  be  "cut  off  in  one 
month." 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      397 

differences  of  opinion.  Some,  among  them  Lightfoot, 
thought  the  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and  Essenes  are  referred 
to ;  others  have  imagined  that  the  civil,  ecclesiastical,  and 
military  authorities  are  meant.  But  I  agree  with  Hengsten- 
berg,  that  if  it  may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  the  three 
shepherds  represent  the  three  classes  of  shepherds  existing 
in  the  theocracy — in  other  words,  the  leaders  of  the  nation 
— then  "  Zechariah  could  not  possibly  have  thought  of  any 
others  than  the  civil  authorities  (the  rulers),  the  priests,  and 
the  prophets"  who  are  frequently  spoken  of  in  the  earlier 
scriptures  as  the  "  shepherds,"  or  leaders  of  the  people,  and 
to  whose  misguidance  is  attributed  the  ruin  of  the  nation.1 

"  The  only  difficulty  in  connection  with  this  view  is  to 
explain  the  fact  that  the  prophetical  order  should  be  intro 
duced  as  one  of  the  three,  seeing  that  this  had  been  extinct 
for  a  long  time  before  the  period  of  fulfilment.  We  reply 
that,  in  accordance  with  the  essential  character  of  prophecy, 
the  prophet  represents  the  future  by  means  of  the  analogous 
circumstances  of  his  own  time.  Just  as  the  order  of  the 
civil  shepherds  continued  to  exist  though  the  kings  had 
ceased  to  reign,  so  did  the  order  of  prophets  continue,  so 
far  as  everything  essential  was  concerned,  even  after  the 
suspension  of  the  gift  of  prophecy.  The  vocation  of  the 
prophet  was  to  make  known  to  the  people  the  word  and 
will  of  God  (Jer.  xviii.  1 8).  Before  the  completion  of  the 
canon  this  was  done  by  means  of  revelations  under  the 
guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  application  of 
the  results  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  age.  The 
place  of  the  prophets  was  occupied  by  the  scribes,  on 
whom,  according  to  the  Book  of  Ecclesiasticus  (chap, 
xxxix.),  the  Lord  richly  bestowed  the  spirit  of  under 
standing,  who  studied  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients,  investi 
gated  the  prophets,  delivered  instruction  and  counsel,  and 
who  were  noted  for  wise  sayings.  They  stood  in  the  same 
relation  to  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  the 
enlightened  teachers  of  the  Christian  Church  to  the 
prophets  of  the  New.  The  three  constituent  elements  of 
1  Comp.  Jer.  ii.  8-26,  xviii.  18. 


398     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  Jewish  Sanhedrim  answer  to  the  three  shepherds 
mentioned  here,  namely,  the  leading  priests,  the  scribes, 
the  elders,  apxiepets,  ypa(j,/j,aTel<;,  7rpeo-/3vTepoi  (Matt. 
xxvi.  3)." 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  among  Christian  inter 
preters  this  is  the  oldest  view.  Thus,  Theodoret 1  says : 
"  He  speaks  of  the  kings  of  the  Jews,  and  prophets,  and 
priests ;  for  by  the  three  orders  they  were  shepherded " ; 
and  Jerome,2  who,  himself  following  the  Talmud,  interprets 
the  three  shepherds  of  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Miriam,  says : 
"  I  have  read  in  some  one's  commentary  that  the  shepherds 
cut  off  in  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  are  to  be  understood 
of  priests,  and  false  prophets,  and  kings  of  the  Jews,  who, 
after  the  Passion  of  Christ,  were  all  cut  off  in  one  time." 

So  also  Cyril,3  who  says :  "  The  three  shepherds  were, 
I  deem,  those  who  exercised  the  legal  priesthood,  and  those 
appointed  judges  of  the  people,  and  the  interpreters  of 
Scripture,  z>.,  lawyers " ;  who,  as  shown  above  in  the 
quotation  from  Hengstenberg,  really  took,  at  the  time  of 
Christ,  the  place  of  the  prophets. 

As  will  have  been  already  inferred,  I  do  not  under 
stand  the  expression  "  in  one  month  "  in  a  literal  sense,  but 
as  a  period  of  time — long,  when  compared  with  that  which 
might  be  figuratively  expressed  by  "  one  day,"  as  in  chap, 
iii.  9  ;  but  brief,  as  contrasted  with  other  periods  of  time. 

In  short,  it  might  be  said  to  embrace  the  period  during 
which  our  Lord  Jesus  "  sought  by  repeated  efforts,  but 
without  avail,  to  deliver  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel  from  the  spiritual  tyranny  of  its  blind  and  corrupt 
guides." 

Anyhow,  this  is  an  historic  fact,  that  it  was  consequent 
on  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  the  Good  Shepherd,  that 
the  Jewish  polity  was  broken  up,  and  that  since  then,  and 
now  for  "  many  days,"  the  children  of  Israel  have  been  not 
only  without  a  king  and  without  a  prince,  but  also  without 
a  prophet  and  without  a  priest.  On  the  other  hand,  these 
three  offices  were,  on  the  testimony  of  the  prophets,  to  be 

1  Died  in  420  A.  D.  2  423-457  A.  D.  3  Died  444  A. D. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     399 

united  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  and  have  always  in 
the  consciousness  of  the  Church  been  associated  with  Christ. 
If  Israel  had  received  Him,  they  would  have  found  in  Hint 
their  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King ;  they  might  even,  as  Pusey 
suggests,  "  have  been  held  under  Him "  (i.e.,  by  human 
representatives  of  Him) ;  but  having  rejected  Him,  these 
three  offices,  which,  originally  appointed  by  God,  were 
mediatorial  in  their  character,  and  were  held  on  earth  by 
those  who  were  meant  to  represent  and  foreshadow  Him 
who  is  the  "  One  Mediator  between  God  and  man  " — were 
"  cut  off,"  that  is,  abolished,  as  an  outward  sign  that  through 
their  rejection  of  Christ  their  relations  with  God  were 
broken  off. 

The  second  half  of  the  9th  verse  describes  the  rupture 
between  the  Good  Shepherd  and  the  people  as  a  whole, 
including  those  who  ought  to  have  acted  as  shepherds,  but 
only  misled  and  devoured  the  flock.  It  also,  it  seems  to 
me,  indicates  the  reason  why  "  the  three  shepherds "  were 
cut  off. 

Commentators  generally  view  the  cutting  off  of  the 
three  shepherds  "  as  an  act  of  God's  loving-kindness  toward 
the  sheep  of  His  pasture," l  and  as  part  of  the  beneficent 
care  of  the  Good  Shepherd  for  the  flock.  So  it  might 
have  been,  if  delivered  from  their  false  shepherds,  the 
people  as  a  whole  had  turned  to  Him  Who  was  sent  to 
them  of  God  to  seek  and  to  save,  and  Who  in  His  one 
person  combined  the  offices  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King. 
But  as  not  only  the  leaders,  both  civil  and  religious,  but 
the  people  in  general,  took  up  more  and  more  an  attitude 
of  opposition  and  hostility  toward  Him,  the  "  cutting  off" 
of  the  three  "  shepherds,"  or  the  abolition  of  the  three 
mediatorial  offices,  which  is  the  outward  sign  of  the 
suspension  of  God's  covenant  relationship  with  them,  must 
certainly  be  regarded  also  as  an  act  of  judgment  on  the 
nation  as  a  whole. 

And,  if  it  be  asked,  what  other  expression  of  the 
beneficent  activity  of  the  Good  Shepherd  on  behalf  of  the 

1  Wright. 


400     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

sheep  of  slaughter  do  we  find  in  this  prophecy,  if  the 
cutting  off  of  the  shepherds  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  an 
effort  on  His  part  for  the  deliverance  of  the  flock,  my 
answer  is,  that  a  full,  though  compressed,  summary  of  the 
beneficent  character  of  the  activities  of  the  Good  Shepherd 
is  given  in  the  8th  verse.  There  we  see  the  Shepherd  fully 
equipped  with  the  two  staves  of  Beauty  (or  "  Favour "), 
and  "Bands"  (or  "Binders"),  feeding  the  flock.  "So  I 
fed  the  flock"  \  and  in  that  blessed  shepherding  everything 
was  included — protection  and  deliverance  from  without, 
and  safety,  guidance,  and  provision  within.  Oh !  that  my 
people  had  hearkened  unto  His  voice,  and  that  Israel  had 
walked  in  His  ways !  Then  would  it,  indeed,  have  been 
well  with  them.  Not  only  would  He  soon  have  subdued 
their  enemies  and  turned  His  hand  in  judgment  against 
their  adversaries,  but  their  peace  should  have  been  as  a 
river,  and  their  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea. 

But  the  frequent  complaint  of  God  of  the  attitude  of 
His  stiff-necked  people  in  the  time  of  the  prophets, 
culminated  in  their  spirit  of  opposition  and  hostility  to 
Him,  Who  was  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  prophets,  and 
the  very  image  of  God.  "  My  people  hearkened  not  to  My 
voice ;  Israel  would  none  of  Me.  So  I  let  them  go  (or 
'  sent  them  forth ')  after  the  stubbornness  of  their  heart, 
that  they  might  walk  in  their  own  counsels."  l 

This,  in  brief,  is  the  meaning  of  vers.  8  and  9:  "And 
my  soul  was  wearied  (lit.,  '  was  shortened'  i.e.,  became 
impatient) 2  with  them."  Oh  !  how  much  stubborn  dis 
obedience  on  the  part  of  the  flock  is  presupposed  in  this 
complaint  on  the  part  of  the  shepherd,  "  And  their  soul  also 
loathed  fas,  bachal — a  word  expressive  of  intense  disgust) 
me " :  sad  and  solemn  words  which  in  their  fulness  were 
\fulfilled  in  the  intense  loathing  which  the  leaders  of  the 
Jewish  nation  manifested  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

-The  terrible  consequence  was,  that  even  the  long- 
\ 

i  ps.  lipcxi.  12-16  ;  Isa.  xlviii.  18. 

11  The  expression  v$i  rnxiJ  is  the  same  as  in  Num.  xxi.  4,  where  it  is  rendered 
in  the  A.V.,  'sThe  soul  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged." 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     401 

suffering  of  God  as  manifested  in  Christ  was  exhausted ; 
"  Then  said  /,  /  will  not  feed  you  :  that  which  dieth,  let  it 
die  ;  and  that  which  perisheth  (or  '  is  cut  off'},  let  it  perish  ; 
and  those  that  remain,  let  each  one  eat  the  flesh  of  another  " 
— all  which  became  terribly  and  literally  true  when,  after 
the  rejection  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  the  terrible  calamities 
of  war,  famine,  pestilence,  intestine  strife,  and  mutual 
destruction  overtook  the  poor  deluded  people. 

The  first  outward  visible  sign  of  the  rupture  between 
the  Shepherd  and  the  sheep  was  the  breaking  of  one  of  the 
staves:  "  And  I took  My  staff '  Beauty'  (or  '  Favour'}  and 
cut  it  asunder^  that  I  might  break  My  covenant  which  I  had 
made  with  all  the  peoples'.' 

This  staff  was  called  DV3,  noam — "  Beauty,"  or 
"  Pleasantness,"  or  "  Favour " ;  because,  as  already  said 
above,  it  was  the  symbol  of  God's  protection  over  them  in 
keeping  off  the  nations  from  attacking  them  from  without. 

The  covenant  which  He  says  He  will  break  is  not  the 
covenant  which  He  made  with  the  people.  The  word  for 
people  in  the  original  is  in  the  plural,  and  refers  to  the 
Gentile  nations,  and  the  covenant  is  that  which  God,  so  to 
say,  made  with  the  Gentile  peoples  on  their  behalf.  When 
Israel  was  in  God's  favour  and  under  His  gracious  protec 
tion,  then  He  caused  even  their  enemies  to  be  at  peace 
with  them  ;  and  when  the  Gentile  nations  gathered  against 
them  ready  to  devour,  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  soon  broke 
the  arm  of  their  strength  and  prevented  them  doing  harm 
to  His  people.  But  when  He  ceased  to  be  their  defence, 
then  they  became  a  ready  prey  to  the  Gentile  world-powers, 
which  are  well  symbolised  in  the  Bible  by  wild  beasts — 
"  The  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth  waste  it,  and  the  wild 
beast  of  the  field  doth  devour  it." 

Again,  however,  it  is  declared  in  the  same  word  of 
prophecy  that  restored  and  converted  Israel  will  be  taken 
under  the  special  protection  of  God,  and  a  covenant  will  be 
made  by  Him  on  their  behalf,  not  only  with  the  nations, 
but  with  the  beasts  of  the  field.  "  In  that  day  will  I  make 
a  covenant  for  tJiem  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the 
26 


4O2 

fowls  of  heaven,  and  with  the  creeping  things  of  the  ground : 
and  I  will  break  tJie  bow  and  the  sword  and  the  battle  out  of 
the  land,  and  will  make  them  to  lie  down  safely.  And  I 
will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  for  ever  ;  yea,  I  will  betroth  thee 
unto  Me  in  righteousness,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  loving- 
kindness,  and  in  mercies.  I  will  even  betroth  thee  unto  Me 
in  faithfulness  :  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  the  Lord." * 

We  proceed  to  the  iith  verse:  ''•And  it  was  broken 
(namely,  '  the  covenant ')  in  that  day  ;  and  thus  tJie  poor  of 
t/te flock  that  watched  Me  (or  'gave  heed  unto  Me')  knew 
that  it  was  the  word  of  JehovaJi" 

The  manifest  proof  that  the  covenant  which  the 
Shepherd  of  Israel  had  made  with  the  nations  on  Israel's 
behalf  was  broken,  served  as  a  demonstration  to  the  poor 
of  the  flock  that  what  had  been  foretold  was  indeed  the 
Word  of  God. 

The  point  of  time  in  the  expression  "  in  that  day  "  is 
prophetic  from  the  prophet's  point  of  view,  and  refers  to  the 
time  and  events  following  the  breaking  off  of  the  relations 
between  the  True  Shepherd,  whom  the  prophet  represented, 
and  the  flock.  It  is  true  that  he  speaks  of  the  breaking  of 
the  covenant  with  the  nations  on  Israel's  behalf  as  past, 
because  in  the  vision  which  passed  before  his  mind  the 
things  described  had  actually  occurred.  "If  the  prophecy," 
remarks  Hengstenberg,  "  had  been  couched  in  literal  terms, 
instead  of  being  clothed  in  symbol,  it  would  have  run  thus : 
When,  therefore,  My  covenant,  or  treaty,  with  the  nations 
is  brought  to  an  end,  those  who  fear  Me  will  discern  in  the 
fulfilment  the  divine  character  of  this  sentence  of  Mine  upon 
Israel." 

By  the  IKJn  "W,  aniyye  hatson — "  the  poor  of  the 
flock  " — we  can  understand  (as  already  explained)  nothing 
else  than  the  believing  remnant  who  were  saved  out  of  the 
"  flock  of  slaughter."  They  are  described  as  "  HasJishomerim 
othi"  rendered  "  that  waited  upon  Me,"  in  the  Authorised 
Version ;  and,  "  they  that  gave  heed  unto  Me,"  in  the 
Revised  Version.  Literally,  it  is  those  that  "  watched  with 

1  Hos.  ii.  18-20. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     403 

Me,"  or,  "  those  that  observed  Me " — that  is,  "  kept  their 
eyes  constantly  fixed  on  Me,  ready  to  act  according  to  My 
direction  and  will " — a  beautiful  designation  not  only  of 
the  believing  remnant  of  Israel,  but  of  those  from  all 
nations  who  have  learned  in  truth  that  what  was  spoken 
by  prophets  and  apostles,  and  Christ  Himself,  was  indeed 
the  Word  of  the  living  God,  and  whose  eyes  are  fixed  upon 
Him  with  ready  obedience  to  do  His  will. 

We  come  now  to  vers.  12  and  13,  which  form  perhaps 
the  most  difficult  passage  in  the  whole  prophecy : 

"And  I  said  unto  them,  If  ye  think  good,  give  me  my 
hire ;  and  if  not,  forbear.  So  they  weighed  for  my  hire 
thirty  pieces  of  silver. 

"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the  potter,  the 
goodly  price  that  I  was  prised  at  of  them.      And  I  took  the 
thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them  unto  the  potter,  in  the 
j     house  of  the  Lord" 

As  an  indication  that  his  service  as  shepherd  was  coming 
is  to  an  end,  he  asks  his  wages.  I  need  not  again  remind  the 
reader  that  we  have  to  do  here  with  symbols  and  figures, 
)'  and  that  the  symbolical  transaction  in  the  vision  in  which 
^  i  the  prophet  was  himself  the  chief  actor  was  designed  to  set 
ie  !  forth  great  spiritual  truths. 

That  the  prophet  only  represented  Jehovah,  the  true 
is,  Shepherd  of  Israel,  who  in  fulness  of  time  was  especially  to 
s:  manifest  Himself  in  this  character  in  His  only-begotten 
ns  Son,  the  Messiah,  comes  out  very  clearly  in  these  verses, 
he  for  the  contemptible  wages  which  they  did  offer,  Jehovah 
on  says  (in  ver.  1 3),  ironically,  is  "  the  goodly  price  that  I  was 
prised  at  of  them" 

The  wages  ("9^,  sakhar,  "  hire,"  or  "  reward "),  which 
He  actually  sought  from  them  for  all  His  Shepherd  care, 
was,  as  the  commentators  rightly  understand,  the  spiritual 
fruit  of  His  labours — repentance,  faith,  true  heart  piety, 
humble  obedience  and  grateful  love.  This  is  brought  out 
clearly  in  the  Lord's  parable  of  the  Vineyard,  which  is 
Israel,  to  whom  He  first  sent  His  servants,  and  then  His 
own  Son,  "  that  He  might  receive  the  fruits  of  it." 


404     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

And  although  He  has  every  right  to  demand  this  "  hire," 
He  leaves  it  to  His  professed  people,  upon  whom  such 
bounteous  care  and  attention  has  been  lavished  by  Him,  to 
make  a  free  return  to  Him  of  their  love  and  gratitude  in  j  \ 
order  that  the  actual  condition  of  their  hearts  towards  Him 
may  be  thus  tested.  "  Give  me,"  He  says,  "  my  '  hire  '  or 
'  reward/  for  all  that  I  have  been  and  done  for  you,  if  you 
think  well  (lit.,  '  if  it  seem  good  in  your  eyes '),  and  if 
not,  forbear'.'  For,  as  has  been  well  expressed  by  another 
writer,  "  God  does  not  force  our  free  will  or  constrain  our 
service.  He  places  life  and  death  before  us,  and  bids  us 
choose  life.  By  His  grace  alone  we  can  choose  Him  ;  but 
we  can  refuse  His  grace  and  Himself." 

That  which  they  did  offer  the  prophet  in  return  for  His 
services  is  meant  to  express  the  black  ingratitude  of  their 
hearts  for  the  shepherd  care  of  Jehovah.  Instead  of 
"  wages,"  as  Keil  well  expresses  it,  they  offer  Him  an 
insult — "  so  they  weighed  for  My  hire  thirty  pieces  of  silver" 
which  was  exactly  the  amount  which,  according  to  the  law, 
was  to  be  paid  in  compensation  for  a  slave  gored  to  death 
by  an  ox.1  "  And  Jehovah  said  unto  me,  Cast  it"  (hishlikh 
— "  fling  it  "  with  contempt  as  a  thing  unclean  2)  "  unto 
the  potter,  the  goodly  price  (or,  '  the  magnificence  of  the 
price ')  that  I  was  prised  at  of  them :  so  I  took  the  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them,  in  the  Jwuse  of  Jehovah,  unto 
the  potter. 

There  are  two  or  three  important  points  in  this  passage 
which  need  explanation  : 

( i )  What  is  meant  by  casting  to  the  potter  ?  Many 
different  conjectures  have  been  advanced  in  answer  to  this 
question.  The  most  generally  accepted  explanation  by 
evangelical  writers  is  that  given  by  Hengstenberg,  namely, 
that  it  is  equivalent  to  casting  a  thing  into  an  unclean 
place.  This  explanation  rests  on  the  supposition  that  the 

1  Ex.  xxi.  32. 

-  The  verb  hishlikh  is  used  for  casting  torn  flesh  to  the  dogs,  Ex.  xxii.  31  ; 
of  u  corpse  which  was  cast  unburied,  Isa.  xiv.  19  ;  and  in  many  other  such 
connections  ;  and  of  idols  "  cast "  to  the  moles  and  bats,  Isa.  ii.  20. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     405 

potter  who  worked  for  the  Temple  had  his  workshop  in  the 
valley  of  Ben  Hinnom,  "  which  having  been  formerly  the 
scene  of  the  abominable  worship  of  Moloch,  was  regarded 
with  abhorrence  as  an  unclean  place  after  its  defilement  by 
Josiah,  and  served  as  the  slaughter-house  for  the  city.1 
But,  as  Keil  observes  with  truth,  "  It  by  no  means  follows 
from  Jer.  xviii.  2  and  xix.  2  (on  which  Hengstenberg  bases 
his  supposition),  that  this  potter  dwelt  in  the  valley  of  Ben 
Hinnom." 

On  the  contrary,  the  passages  in  Jeremiah  which  are 
referred  to  would  rather  lead  us  to  the  opposite  conclusion, 
for  when  we  read  that  God  said  to  the  prophet,  "  Go,  and  buy 
a  potter  s  earthen  bottle  (or  l pitcher  '),  and  take  of  the  elders 
of  the  people,  and  go  forth  unto  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  which 
is  by  the  entry  of  the  gate  Harsith  "  (or  "pottery  gate  "),z  it 
seems  pretty  clear  that  the  pottery  itself,  where  the  pitcher 
was  to  be  bought,  stood  inside  the  city  gate,  since  he  had 
to  "  go  forth  "  from  it  toward  the  valley.  But  even  if  the 
potter  had  had  his  workshop  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom, 
which  was  regarded  as  unclean,  he  would  not  necessarily 
have  become  unclean  himself  in  consequence ;  "  And  if  he 
had  been  looked  upon  as  unclean,  he  could  not  possibly 
have  worked  for  the  Temple,  or  supplied  the  cooking 
utensils  for  use  in  the  service  of  God — namely,  for  boiling 
the  holy  sacrificial  flesh." 

Without  stopping  to  analyse  here  other  unsatisfactory 
explanations,  I  would  briefly  state  that  the  reason  why  the 
thirty  pieces  of  silver  which  Jehovah  ironically  calls  the 
"  magnificence  of  the  price "  at  which  He  was  valued  by 
them,  were  to  be  flung  to  the  potter,  was  most  probably 
because  the  potter  was  one  of  the  lowest  of  the  labouring 
classes,  whose  labour  was  estimated  as  of  comparatively 
trifling  value,  and  "  whose  productions,  when  marred  by 
any  trifling  accident,  could  be  easily  replaced  at  an  in 
significant  expenditure."  The  phrase,  "  Throw  to  the 
potter,"  may  perhaps  have  been  "  a  proverbial  expression 
for  contemptuous  treatment " ;  but  this  also  is  only  a  con- 

1  2  Kings  xxiii.  10.  2  Jer.  xix.  I,  2. 


406     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

jecture.      That  it  is  meant  to  express  the  valuelessness  of 
a  thing  is  pretty  certain. 

(2)  In  the  command  that  the  prophet  should  cast  the  ;  ]* 
money  to  the  potter,  there  is  nothing  said  about  his  \v 
going  to  the  Temple,  but  in  the  performance  we  read,  jth 
"  And  I  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  and  cast  them,  J  sn 
in  the  house  of  Jehovah,  to  the  potter" 

Hengstenberg  understands  this  to  mean  that  the  money  >.  in 
was  thrown  there  that  it  might  be  taken  thence  to  the 
potter ;  but  I  agree  with  another  Bible  student  that,  "  as 
the  words  read  they  can  only  be  understood  as  signifying 
that  the  potter  was  in  the  Temple  when  the  money  was 
thrown  to  him ;  that  he  had  either  some  work  to  do  there, 
or  that  he  had  come  to  bring  some  earthenware  for  the 
Temple  kitchen."  *  And  the  reason  why  the  prophet  went 
to  the  house  of  Jehovah  was  not  merely  to  show  that  it 
was  as  the  servant  of  the  Lord  and  by  His  command  that 
he  was  acting,  but  because  "  the  Temple  was  the  place 
where  the  people  of  the  covenant  were  wont  to  assemble 
to  present  themselves  before  the  Lord.  In  that  holy  place 
the  awful  repudiation  on  the  part  of  the  nation  of  Him, 
who  was  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  was  to  be  publicly  made 
known.  The  base  transaction  (however  done  in  a  corner) 
was  to  be  proclaimed  upon  the  housetops.  In  the  place 
where  the  solemn  covenant  between  Jehovah  and  His  people 
had  so  often  been  ratified  by  sacrifices,  the  fearful  separation 
between  the  people  of  Israel  and  Himself  was  to  be 
declared.  What  was  done  in  the  Temple  was  done  in  the 
presence  of  both  parties  to  the  covenant :  in  the  presence 
of  Jehovah,  in  whose  honour  the  Temple  had  been  erected, 
and  in  the  presence  of  the  nation,  who,  by  its  erection  of 
that  Temple,  had  accepted  Jehovah  as  their  Lord  and  God. 
In  the  presence  of  both  parties  the  rejection  of  the  Lord  as 
the  Shepherd  of  Israel  was  to  be  announced,  and  the  dis 
solution  of  the  covenant  made  by  Jehovah  to  be  publicly 
proclaimed  by  the  act  of  His  representative."2 

1  In  chap.  xiv.  20  there  is  a  mention  of  earthenware  "pots"  as  being  used 
in  the  Temple.  -  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     407 

We  have  now  reached  the  place  where  we  must  refer 
more  fully  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  in  our  Lord 
Jesus.  As  regards  the  solemn  prediction  of  the  chapter  as 
a  whole  (when  viewed  in  the  light  of  other  prophecies  in 
the  Old  Testament),  its  chief  points  have  been  thus 
summarised : 

(1)  That  before  the  destruction   of  Jerusalem,  Jehovah, 
in  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  would  appear  as  the  Shepherd 
of  Israel. 

(2)  That  only  "  the  poor  of  the  flock  "  would  attend  to 
His  word ;  but  the  rest,  both  leaders  and  people,  would 
reject  and  abhor  Him. 

(3)  That  the  Good  Shepherd  should  be  valued  at  the 
price  of  a  common  slave. 

(4)  That  the  people  would   in   consequence  be   given 
over  to  be  the  prey  of  the  Gentile  powers  from  without, 
and  to  civil  feuds  within.      Now  even  the  most  superficial 
acquaintance   with   the  Gospel  narrative,   and  of  the  sub 
sequent  history  of  the  Jewish  people,  must  lead  one  to  see 
how    strikingly    all    this    has    been    fulfilled    in    Jesus     of 
Nazareth,  and  in  the  events  which  took  place  in  consequence 
of  His  rejection  by  His  own  nation. 

If  there  had  been  no  allusion  at  all  in  the  New  Testa 
ment  to  this  prophecy,  we  should  still,  from  the  mere 
Gospel  narrative,  be  led  to  see  its  true  and  full  fulfilment 
in  Christ.  But  the  New  Testament  does  cite  vers.  I  2  and 
i  3  as  a  direct  prophecy  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  After  describ 
ing  in  chap.  xxvi.  the  betrayal  of  Jesus  by  Judas,  to  whom 
the  chief  priests  weighed  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  His 
condemnation  to  death  by  Pontius  Pilate,  at  the  instigation 
of  the  high  priests  and  elders  of  the  Jews,  the  evangelist 
Matthew  proceeds : 

"  Then  Judas,  which  betrayed  Him,  when  he  saw  that 
He  was  condemned,  repented  himself,  and  brought  back  the 
thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priests  and  elders,  saying, 
I  have  sinned  in  that  I  betrayed  innocent  blood.  But 
they  said,  What  is  that  to  us  ?  see  thou  to  it.  And  he 
cast  down  the  pieces  of  silver  into  the  sanctuary,  and 


408     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

departed  ;  and  he  went  away  and  hanged  himself.  And 
the  chief  priests  took  the  pieces  of  silver,  and  said,  It  is  not 
lawful  to  put  them  into  the  treasury,  since  it  is  the  price  of 
blood.  And  they  took  counsel,  and  bought  with  them  the 
potter's  field,  to  bury  strangers  in.  Wherefore  that  field 
was  called,  The  field  of  blood,  unto  this  day.  Then  was 
fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremiah  the  prophet, 
saying,  And  they  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  the  price 
of  Him  that  was  priced,  whom  certain  of  the  children  of 
Israel  did  price ;  and  they  gave  them  for  the  potter's  field, 
as  the  Lord  appointed  me."  l 

It  has  been  objected  by  Jews  and  others  that  there  are 
certain  discrepancies  between  the  words  of  the  prophecy 
and  its  fulfilment  as  recorded  by  Matthew.  One  of  the 
alleged  discrepancies  is  contained  in  the  fact  that  "  in  the 
prophecy  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  were  weighed  as  wages 
for  the  shepherd,"  whereas  in  the  Gospel  narrative  they  are 
said  to  have  been  paid  to  Judas  for  the  betrayal  of  Jesus. 

"  But,  in  truth,  as  soon  as  we  trace  back  the  form  of  the 
prophecy  to  its  idea,  the  difference  is  resolved  into  harmony. 
The  payment  of  the  wages  to  the  shepherd  in  the  pro 
phetical  announcement  is  simply  the  symbolical  form  in 
which  the  nation  manifests  its  ingratitude  for  the  love  and 
fidelity  shown  towards  it  by  the  shepherd,  and  the  sign  that 
it  will  no  longer  have  him  as  its  shepherd,  and  therefore  a 
sign  of  the  blackest  ingratitude  and  of  hard-heartedness  in 
return  for  the  love  displayed  by  the  shepherd.  The  same 
ingratitude  and  the  same  hardness  of  heart  are  manifested 
in  the  resolution  of  the  representatives  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
the  high  priests  and  elders,  to  put  Jesus,  their  Saviour,  to 
death,  and  to  take  Him  prisoner  by  bribing  the  betrayer. 
The  payment  of  thirty  silverlings  to  the  betrayer  was,  in 
fact,  the  wages  with  which  the  Jewish  nation  repaid  Jesus 
for  what  He  had  done  for  the  salvation  of  Israel ;  and  the 
contemptible  sum  which  they  paid  to  the  betrayer  was  an 
expression  of  the  deep  contempt  which  they  felt  for  Jesus. 

"  There  is  no  great  importance  in  this  difference,  that 

1  Matt,  xxvii.  3-10. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     409 

here  the  prophet  throws  the  money  into  the  house  of 
Jehovah  to  the  potter;  whereas,  according  to  Matthew's 
account,  Judas  threw  the  silverlings  into  the  Temple,  and 
the  high  priests  would  not  put  the  money  into  the  Divine 
treasury,  because  it  was  blood-money,  but  applied  it  to  the 
purchase  of  a  potter's  field,  which  received  the  name  of  a 
field  of  blood.  For  by  this  very  fact  not  only  was  the 
prophecy  almost  literally  fulfilled  ;  but,  so  far  as  the  sense 
is  concerned,  it  was  so  exactly  fulfilled  that  every  one  could 
see  that  the  same  God  who  had  spoken  through  the  pro 
phet  had,  by  the  secret  operation  of  His  omnipotent  power, 
which  extends  even  to  the  ungodly,  so  arranged  the  matter 
that  Judas  threw  the  money  into  the  Temple,  to  bring  it 
before  the  face  of  God  as  blood-money,  and  to  call  down 
the  vengeance  of  God  upon  the  nation  ;  and  that  the  high 
priest,  by  purchasing  the  potter's  field  for  this  money, 
which  received  the  name  of  '  field  of  blood '  in  consequence 
'  unto  this  day,'  perpetuated  the  memorial  of  the  sin  com 
mitted  against  their  Messiah.  Matthew  indicates  this  in 
the  words  '  as  the  Lord  commanded  me,'  which  correspond 
to  '  and  Jehovah  said  unto  me,'  in  ver.  1 3  of  our  pro 
phecy  ;  on  which  H.  Aug.  W.  Meyer  has  correctly  observed, 
'  That  the  words,  "  as  the  Lord  commanded  me,"  express  the 
fact  that  the  application  of  the  wages  of  treachery  to  the 
purchase  of  the  potter's  field  took  place  in  accordance  with 
the  purpose  of  God,  whose  command  the  prophet  had 
received.  As  God  had  directed  the  prophet  how  to  proceed 
with  the  thirty  silverlings,  so  was  it  with  the  antitypical  ful 
filment  of  the  prophecy  by  the  high  priests,  and  thus  was 
the  purpose  of  the  Divine  will  accomplished.'  "  l 

There  remains,  however,  one  real  difficulty  in  the 
citation  of  this  prophecy  by  Matthew,  namely,  in  the  fact 
that  Matthew  quotes  the  words  of  Zechariah  as  that  which 
was  spoken  by  Jeremiah  the  prophet. 

It  was  the  attempt  to  justify  the  inerrancy  of  this 
quotation  in  Matthew,  which,  as  I  have  shown  in  my 
"  Introduction "  to  the  second  part  of  Zechariah,  led  the 

1  Keil. 


410     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

earliest  English  critics,  who  were  believing  men,  to  the  con 
clusion  that  these  chapters  in  Zechariah  were  not  attributed 
by  the  Jews  to  their  right  author,  who,  in  truth,  was  not 
Zechariah,  but    Jeremiah.      But,  as   I  have  tried  to  show, 
there  is  no  basis  in  fact  for  this  theory.      A  more  elaborate 
attempt  to  justify  the  occurrence  of  Jeremiah's  name  in  this 
passage  in  Matthew  was  first  made  by  Grotius,  and  after 
wards  developed  by  Hengstenberg.      Stated  in  the  briefest  j 
form,  the  reason  for  the  introduction  of  Jeremiah's  name  in    i 
the    place    of   that    of    Zechariah's    is,  according  to  these   I 
writers'    explanation,    "  because,    as    far    as    the    principal    } 
features  are  concerned,  Zechariah's  prophecy  in  chap.  xi.  is    | 
simply  a  renewal  and  repetition   of  the  prophecy  in    Jer. 
xix.  (or,  according  to  others,  of  chaps,  xviii.  and  xix.),  and 
Zechariah    announced    a    second    fulfilment    of    that    pro 
phecy."      Or,  to  quote  for  the  sake  of  elucidation  a  longer 
summary : 

St.  Matthew  intentionally  ascribed  the  words  of 
Zechariah  to  Jeremiah,  because  he  wished  to  impress  upon 
his  readers  the  fact  that  Zechariah's  prediction  was  a 
reiteration  of  two  fearful  prophecies  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xviii., 
xix.),  and  should,  like  them,  be  accomplished  in  the 
rejection  and  destruction  of  the  Jewish  people.  *  He  wished 
to  remind  them  that  "  the  field  of  blood,"  purchased  with 
the  money  that  testified  the  fulness  of  their  guilt,  was  a 
part  of  that  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom  which  their  fathers 
had  made  a  "  field  of  blood "  before  them,  and  where 
Jeremiah  had  twice  by  the  symbol  of  a  potter's  vessel, 
announced  their  coming  destruction.  The  words  of  the 
prophet,  "  Cast  it  to  the  potter,"  were  in  themselves 
sufficient  to  direct  the  attention  of  readers  acquainted  with 
the  prophecies  to  those  two  chapters  of  Jeremiah  ;  but  the 
manner  in  which  St.  Matthew  introduces  his  quotation 
makes  the  allusion  still  more  plain.  He  first  relates  the 
purchase  of  the  potter's  field,  thereby  pointing  out  the 
locality  of  Jeremiah's  prophecy ;  then  he  mentions  the  fact 
that  it  was  called  "  the  field  of  blood,"  thereby  referring  to 
a  very  similar  expression  in  that  prophet,  "  Behold  the  days 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     411 

come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  this  place  shall  no  more  be 
called  Tophet,  nor  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom,  but  the 
valley  of  slaughter  "  (Jer.  xix.  6) ;  and  then  cites  the  words 
of  Zechariah,  as  spoken  by  Jeremiah,  in  order  to  make 
all  mistake  impossible.  St.  Matthew  had,  therefore,  a  direct 
purpose  in  introducing  the  name  of  Jeremiah ;  it  was  to 
warn  the  Jews  against  the  coming  judgments.  They  fondly 
hoped  that,  as  the  chosen  people  of  God,  they  were  safe. 
St.  Matthew  points  them  to  the  potter's  field,  and  thus 
reminds  them  of  the  calamities  which  had  already  come 
upon  them  for  past  sins,  less  heinous  than  that  of  which 
the  potter's  field  now  testifies. a 

I  have  entered  somewhat  fully  into  this  explanation 
because  it  has  commended  itself  to  many  devout  and 
scholarly  Bible  students  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  I  must  con 
fess  that  I  myself  do  not  feel  at  all  positive  of  the  connection 
between  our  passage  in  Zechariah  and  the  particular  pro 
phecy  in  Jeremiah  to  which  reference  has  been  made.  The 
whole  rests  upon  the  presupposition  (i)  that  the  potter,  of 
whom  Jeremiah  purchased  the  pot,  had  his  workshop  in  the 
valley  of  Hinnom,  which  was  regarded  with  abhorrence  as 
an  unclean  place;  (2)  that  Zechariah  threw  the  thirty 
pieces  of  silver  at  the  spot  in  that  valley  where  the  potter's 
workshop  was,  with  evident  and  intentional  allusion  to 
Jeremiah's  prophecy  which  the  people  are  assumed  to  have 
had  in  their  minds.  But,  as  shown  above,  it  is  not  at  all 
proven  that  the  potter  in  Jeremiah  had  his  workshop  in  the 

1  Dr.  Alexander  McCaul.  This  seems  to  be  also  the  view  of  Dr.  Alfred 
Edersheim.  Speaking  on  "  the  potter's  field,"  in  the  passage  in  Matthew,  he 
says  :  "  The  very  spot  on  which  Jeremiah  had  been  Divinely  directed  to  prophesy 
;  against  Jerusalem  and  against  Israel,  how  was  it  now  all  fulfilled  in  the  light  of 
the  completed  sin  and  apostasy  of  the  people,  as  prophetically  described  by 
Zechariah  !  This  Tophet  of  Jeremiah,  now  that  they  had  valued  and  sold  at 
thirty  shekels  Israel's  Messiah-Shepherd — truly  a  Tophet — and  become  a  field  of 
blood  !  Surely,  not  an  accidental  coincidence  this,  that  it  should  be  the  place  of 
Jeremy's  announcement  of  judgment :  not  accidental,  but  veritably  a  fulfilment 
of  his  prophecy  !  And  so  St.  Matthew,  targuming  this  prophecy  in  form  as  in 
its  spirit,  and  in  true  Jewish  manner  stringing  to  it  the  prophetic  description 
furnished  by  Zechariah,  sets  the  event  before  us  as  the  fulfilment  of  Jeremy's 
prophecy." — Edersheim,  Life  and  7'imes  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  vol.  ii.  p.  5?6- 


412 

valley  of  Hinnom,1  and,  as  far  as  the  words  in  Zechariah 
are  concerned,  the  obvious  sense  of  the  words  is  that  the 
money  was  thrown  to  the  potter  "  in  the  house  of  Jehovah  " 
or  Temple. 

Failing  any  other  satisfactory  explanation,  we  shall 
have  to  assume  that  the  name  of  Jeremiah  has  crept  into 
the  passage  in  Matthew  by  error  in  one  of  the  following 
ways  :  By  a  simple  slip  of  memory,  according  to  Augustine, 
Luther,  Beza,  Koehler,  Keil,  and  almost  all  writers  of  the 
modern  school ;  or  secondly,  and  to  my  mind  much  more 
probable,  as  a  very  old  copyist's  error  more  ancient  than 
the  date  of  any  of  the  MSS  which  have  come  down  to  us. 2 

The  insult  to  the  Shepherd  of  their  offering  Him  for 
His  hire  nothing  more  than  the  price  of  a  dead  slave  is  fol 
lowed  by  the  completion  of  the  severance  of  the  relations 
which  existed  between  the  Shepherd  and  flock,  and  the 
final  giving  over  of  the  sheep  to  their  own  evil  devices  : 
"  And  I  cut  asunder  Mine  other  (or  'second'}  staff,  even 
Bands  (or  '  Binders '),  to  destroy  the  brotherhood  between 
Judah  and  between  Israeli 

The  retention  by  the  Shepherd  of  this  second  staff  for 
some  time  after  the  first  had  already  been  broken,  is 
probably  meant  to  indicate  His  reluctance  to  give  up  the 
flock  which  had  been  so  dear  to  Him,  and  His  waiting  to 
the  very  end  to  be  gracious  to  them  if  they  had  but  turned 
from  their  evil  ways.  His  very  request  for  His  "wages," 
or  "  hire,"  after  the  first  staff  was  broken,  was  really,  if  they 

1  It  is  clear,  however,  from  Matt,  xxvii.  etc.,  that  in  our  Lord's  time  there 
was  a  spot  in  that  valley  which  was  known  as  "the  potter's  field,"  probably 
because  of  the  accumulation  of  potsherds  and  debris  from  potteries,  or,  as  some 
suppose,  because  it  furnished  a  sort  of  clay  suitable  for  potters'  ware. 

2  In  connection  with  this  two  suggestions  have  been  made,  either  of  which  is 
quite  probable,     (a)  That  in  the  original   MS  the  name  Zax^plov  (Zechariah) 
stood  in  abbreviated  form  as  Zpiov,  which  a  very  early  copyist  mistook  for  'Ipiov 
(the  abbreviation  for  'Iepe/j.aiov — Jeremiah),  and  thus  the  error  was  afterwards 
perpetuated  ;  (3)  that  in  the  original  text  of  the  evangelist  there  was  no  name  at 
all,  but  simply  "as  was  spoken  by  the  prophet" — 5t&  rov  -irpo^Tov — a  formula 
which  Matthew  uses  again  and  again  (see  i.  22,  ii.  5-15,  xiii.  35,  etc.) ;  and  that 
the  early  copyist  made  a  double  error  of  inserting  a  name  which  was  not  in  the 
original,  and  that  a  wrong  one. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     413 

had  only  properly  understood  it,  a  call  to  repentance ;  but 
instead  of  "  fruit "  as  the  result  of  His  care  and  blessed 
labours,  they  brought  Him  forth  the  "  wild  grapes  "  of  con 
tempt  and  black  ingratitude.  And  thus  reluctantly  He 
had  to  give  over  "  the  dearly  beloved  of  His  soul,"  not 
only  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies  without,  which  was 
symbolised  by  the  breaking  of  the  first  staff  called  "  Noam" 
but  the  still  more  terrible  calamity  of  civil  strife  and 
destructive  feuds  among  themselves,  which  is  symbolised 
by  the  breaking  of  the  staff  called  ffobhlim  ("  Bands "  or 
"  Binders  "). 

The  ninx,  ac/iavah,  "  brotherhood,"  which  was  to  be  de 
stroyed  "  between  Judah  and  between  Israel,"  is  not  to  be 
understood  in  the  sense  "  that  the  unity  of  the  nation 
would  be  broken  up  again  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  in 
the  days  of  Rehoboam,  and  that  two  hostile  nations  would 
be  formed  out  of  one  people,"  although  the  disruption  of 
national  unity  which  took  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  may  be 
referred  to  as  an  illustration  of  that  which  would  occur 
again  in  a  more  serious  form.  "  The  schism  of  Jeroboam 
had  a  weakening  and  disintegrating  effect  on  the  nation  of 
the  twelve  tribes,  and  the  dissolution  of  the  brotherhood 
here  spoken  of  was  to  result  in  still  greater  evil  and  ruin  ; 
for  Israel,  deprived  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  was  to  fall  into 
the  power  of  the  '  foolish,'  or  '  evil,'  shepherd,  who  is  depicted 
at  the  close  of  the  prophecy." 

The  preposition  P?,  bein,  which  is  twice  repeated,  has 
the  meaning  not  only  of"  between"  but  also  of  "  among"  *  and 
the  formula,  House  of  Judah  and  House  of  Israel,  or  simply, 
"Judah  and  Israel,"  is,  as  we  have  had  again  and  again 
to  notice,  this  prophet's  inclusive  designation  of  the  whole 
ideally  (and  to  a  large  extent  already  actually)  reunited 
one  people.  I  think,  therefore,  that  we  may  rightly  render 
the  sentence  "  to  destroy  the  brotherhood  among  Judah  and 
among  Israel  " — that  is  to  say,  among  the  entire  nation.  The 
consequence  of  it  would  be  the  fulfilment  of  the  threat  in 
the  9th  verse :  "  Let  them  which  are  left  eat  every  one  the 

1  See,  e.g.,  Isa.  xliv.  4. 


414     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

flesh  of  another" — solemn  and  awful  words,  which,  as 
already  shown  above,  had  their  first  literal  fulfilment  in  the 
party  feuds  and  mutually  destructive  strife,  and  in  the 
terrible  "  dissolution  of  every  bond  of  brotherhood  and  of 
our  common  nature,  which  made  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by 
the  Romans  a  proverb  for  horror,  and  precipitated  its 
destruction." 

There  remains  yet  one  act  in  this  prophetic  drama  which 
sets  forth  the  terrible  fact  that  as  a  consequence  of  their 
rejection  of  the  Good  Shepherd  they  would  be  given 
over  to  the  domination  of  one  who  would  be  the  very 
opposite  of  Him  Who  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
which  was  lost. 

"  And  Jehovah  said  unto  me>  Take  unto  thee  yet  again 
the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd" 

The  word  liy,  od  ("  yet  again  ")  connects  this  action  with 
the  previous  one  (vers.  4—8),  for  it  implies  that  the  prophet 
had  already  acted  in  the  capacity,  and  had  had  in  his  hands 
the  emblems  of  the  shepherd's  office  once  before.  The 
adjective  y)X — evili  (the  sound  of  which  is  very  much 
like  the  English  word  evil) — expresses  more  than  the 
English  rendering  "foolish"  given  in  this  passage.  It 
may  almost  be  rendered  "  wicked." l  "  Folly  and  sin 
were  almost  identical  terms  in  the  eyes  of  the  sacred 
writers,"  and  the  word  is  frequently  used  as  the  synonym 
for  ungodliness?1 

What  the  instruments  of  the  foolish  shepherd  were,  and 
in  what  respects  they  differed  from  those  of  the  Good 
Shepherd,  are  matters  for  speculation,  since  we  are  not  told. 
Hengstenberg  supposes  that  the  "  instruments  of  the  foolish 
shepherd  consisted  of  a  strong  stick  mounted  with  iron, 
with  which  the  sheep  were  hurt  and  wounded,  whereas 
the  Good  Shepherd  was  wont  to  keep  the  sheep  in 
order  with  a  thin  staff  and  gentle  strokes "  ;  but  this  is 
only  conjecture. 

1  See  Job  v.  3,  where  the  same  word  is  used. 

2  See  Ps.  xiv.  I  ;  Prov.  i.  7,  etc. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD      415 

The  interpretation  of  this  symbolical  act  is  given  by 
God  Himself:  "  For  I  will  raise  up  a  shepherd  in  the  land, 
which  sJiall  not  visit  (or  '  observe]  or  '  care  for ')  that  which 
is  cut  off  (ex  '•perishing''},  neither  shall  he  seek  those  that  be 
scattered?-  nor  heal  that  which  is  broken  ;  neitJier  shall  he 
feed  that  which  is  sound  (lit.,  '  standethl  i.e.,  the  strong),  but 
he  sJiall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat,  and  shall  tear  their  hoofs  in 
pieces" 

The  heartlessness  and  cruelty  of  this  evil  shepherd  is 
strikingly  described — first  in  a  negative,  and  then  in  a 
positive,  manner.  Not  only  will  he  be  utterly  indifferent 
alike  to  the  needs  of  those  who  are  ready  to  perish  as  to 
those  who  are  still  sound,  but  he  will  positively  devour  the 
flock.  He  will  even  "  tear  their  hoofs  in  pieces,"  not  "  by 
driving  them  along  rough  and  stony  roads,"  as  Ewald  and 
others  explain,  but  "  so  that  when  he  consumes  the  sheep 
he  even  splits  or  tears  in  pieces  the  claws  to  seize  upon  and 
swallow  the  last  morsel  of  flesh  or  fat."  2 

And  the  most  solemn  fact  in  this  forecast  is  that  God 
says,  "  /  will  raise  up  "  such  a  shepherd  in  the  land.  Yes, 
He  will  raise  him  up  in  the  same  sense  as  He  raised  up 
the  Assyrians,  the  Babylonians,  and  the  Romans,  i.e.,  as 
His  scourge  upon  a  godless  generation. 

And  the  readiness  of  the  "  sheep  of  slaughter  "  to  follow 
such  a  shepherd  will  be  but  part  of  the  punishment  for  their 
rejection  of  the  Good  Shepherd. 

But  who  is  meant  by  this  foolish  or  wicked  shepherd  ? 

Jewish  commentators  interpret  it  of  Herod ; 3  some 
Christian  interpreters,  like  Hengstenberg,  apply  it  to  "  all 
the  evil  native  Jewish  rulers  collectively,"  who,  subsequent 

1  The  word  is  tyjn,  hanaar,  and  means  a  youth  or  young  man  (rendered  in 
the  A.  V.  "the  young  one  "),  but  it  is  never  used  of  the  young  of  animals. 

Moreover,  the  mention  of  the  young  of  the  flock  would  not  be  suitable  here, 
since  there  would  be  no  need  to  seek  them,  "for  lambs  which  feed  beside  their 
mothers  do  not  generally  go  astray." 

The  R.V.  and  modern  scholars  generally  have  adopted  the  explanation  of 
Gesenius,  that  na'ar  is  an  abstract  substantive  meaning  "  scattering,"  and  used 
here  for  the  concrete  "  that  which  is  scattered." 

2  Keil. 

*  So,  e.g.,  R.  Abraham  of  Toledo,  quoted  by  Kimchi. 


416     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

to  the  rejection  of  Christ,  oppressed  and  devoured  the  flock 
and  ultimately  brought  about  their  own  ruin  ;  others  again 
identify  him  with  the  imperial  Roman  power.  Thus,  in  the 
words  of  one  of  the  advocates  of  this  view,  "  the  Jews 
rejected  Christ,  the  King  of  Israel,  and  accepted  the  itheo 
Emperor  of  Rome.  In  the  madness  of  their  rage  against  !  Antk 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  they  cried  out :  '  We  have  no  king  but  sorro 
Caesar.'  They  obtained  their  choice,  and  found  it  bitterness  :  ;reat 
in  the  latter  end."  "The  description"  (in  ver.  16),  the  Ijth 
same  writer  proceeds,  "  is  given  in  language  suitable  to  the  |M, 
character  of  an  evil  shepherd  under  which  the  Roman  joarti; 
Empire  is  described.  It  is  strikingly  similar  in  meaning  to  jmi 
that  given  of  the  fourth,  or  Roman  word-empire  in  the  , 
Book  of  Daniel,  as  a  wild  beast  more  dreadful,  terrible,  and  i^i 
strong  than  those  beasts  that  were  before  it,  furnished  with  L  t 
great  iron  teeth  and  brazen  claws,  devouring,  breaking  in  Ifak 
pieces,  and  stamping  even  the  residue  of  its  prey  under  its  h^ 
feet  (Dan.  vii.  7,  19,  23).* 

I  have  set  forth  this  view  at  some  length,  because  I  p 
believe  that  a  reference  to  Rome  as  the  more  immediate  l^ 
scourge  of  God  in  the  punishment  of  Israel  after  their  j  a;r 
rejection  of  Christ  is  probably  included  in  this  prophecy, 
and  this  is  in  accordance  with  the  explanation  I  have  given 
of  the  words  in  the  6th  verse,  "  I  will  deliver  the  men 
every  one  .  .  .  into  the  hand  of  his  king." '  But  whatever 
partial  reference  to  Imperial  Rome  there  may  be  in  this 
scripture,  and  however  many  evil  and  foolish  shepherds 
there  have  already  arisen  since  the  words  were  uttered  who 
have  devoured  the  Jewish  flock,  the  full  and  final  fulfilment 
of  this  solemn  prophecy  will  take  place  in  the  final  phase  of 
the  development  of  the  fourth  great  world-power  (i.e.,  the 
Roman),  when  amid  the  ten  horns,  or  kingdoms,  there  shall 
come  up  "  a  little  horn  "  who  shall  be  master  of  them  all, 
and  in  whom  all  the  beast-like  qualities  of  apostate  anti- 
Christian  world-power  shall  be  concentrated  and  reach 
their  climax. 

1  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 

2  See  above  the  remarks  on  ver.  6. 


REJECTION  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD     417 

For  just  as  the  Good  Shepherd,  whose  part  the  prophet 

cted  in  the  first  part  of  the  chapter,  is  in  the  highest  and 

ruest  sense  none  other  than  the  Messiah,  so  the  "  foolish," 

r  wicked,  shepherd  is  in  the  last  resort  none  other  than 

he  one  who  is  in  every  sense  his  opposite — the  personal 

Antichrist,    under   whose   brief   reign   all    Israel's   previous 

orrows  and  sufferings  shall  reach  their  climax  in  the  final 

reat  tribulation  ;  even  though  it  may  be  granted  that,  as 

n  the  case  of  the  Christ,  so  of  the  Antichrist,  there  have 

seen,   so   to   say,   shadowy  precursors   in  whom  a   certain 

artial  historical  fulfilment   of  the   prophecy  may  be  dis- 

ernible. 

And  he  will  indeed  be  the  "  foolish  "  shepherd  ;  for  as 
he  Messiah  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  Wisdom  personified, 
o  the  Antichrist,  in  spite  of  his  being  wise  in  all  the 
wisdom  which  is  from  beneath,  will  be  the  very  embodi 
ment  of  folly ;  for  (to  quote  from  an  old  writer)  "  since  the 
^xtremest  folly  consists  in  the  extremest  wickedness,  he 
l  be  the  most  foolish  who  reacheth  the  highest  impiety, 
md  this  he  will  do  by  arrogating  to  himself  divinity,  and 
laiming  divine  honours." 

But  the  career  of  this  evil  shepherd  shall  be  short,  and 
lis  end  will  be  sudden  destruction — "  Woe  to  the  idol  (or 
worthless'}  shepherd" — the  prophecy  ends,  or,  as  some 
vould  render,  the  shepherd  of  "  nothingness?  or  "  useless- 
less."  *  This  is  God's  estimate  and  description  of  him,  even 
vhile  he  exalts  himself  unto  heaven  and  seeks  to  be  wor- 
hipped  as  God — "  that  leaveth  (or  '  forsaketh  ')  the  flock  " — 


tnd  thus  proves  himself  a  false  shepherd  and  hireling,2  "  the 
\word  shall  be  upon  his  arm  and  his  right  eye" 
the         The  arm  is  the  emblem  of  might  and  the  eye  of  intel- 
gence — the  two  things  in  which  the  one  who  will  sum 
p  in  himself  anti-Christian  world-power  will  trust,  and  in 
hich  he  will  boast  himself.     Very  well,  he  shall  be  smitten 

1  The  word  S'Sx,  eltl,  is  frequently  used  as  an  adjective  to  describe  idols  as 
ain  and  useless  (see  Lev.  xix.  4,  xxvi.  I ;  Ps.  xcvi.  5,  and  other  places).     In  the 
rophets  it  is  often  used  also  as  a  name  for  idols.     The  probable  underlying 
tymological  idea  is  that  of  vanity  or  nothingness. 
John  x.  12,  13. 
27 


4i 8     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

in  these  very  parts — "his  arm  (the  emblem  of  strength) 
shall  be  utterly  withered  up,  and  his  right  eye  (the  symbol 
and  instrument  of  intelligence)  shall  be  utterly  darkened? 
And  this  shall  be  the  end  of  him  who  shall  be  slain  with; 
the  breath  of  Messiah's  mouth,  and  be  destroyed  by  the: 
brightness  of  His  appearing. 


CHAPTER    XVII 

ISRAEL'S  FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  GREAT 
DELIVERANCE 

(CHAPTER  xn) 


419 


The  burden  of  the  word  of  Jehovah  concerning  Israel.  Thus  saith  Jehovah, 
who  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  and  layeth  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  and 
formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him  :  Behold,  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  of 
reeling  unto  all  the  peoples  round  about,  and  upon  Judah  also  shall  it  be  in  the 
siege  against  Jerusalem.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  I  will  make 
Jerusalem  a  burdensome  stone  for  all  the  peoples  ;  all  that  burden  themselves 
with  it  shall  be  sore  wounded  ;  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  gathered 
against  it.  In  that  day,  saith  Jehovah,  I  will  smite  every  horse  with  terror,  and 
his  rider  with  madness  :  and  I  will  open  Mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and 
will  smite  every  horse  of  the  peoples  with  blindness.  And  the  chieftains  of 
Judah  shall  say  in  their  heart,  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  are  my  strength  in 
Jehovah  of  hosts  their  God.  In  that  day  will  I  make  the  chieftains  of  Judah  like 
a  pan  of  fire  among  wood,  and  like  a  flaming  torch  among  sheaves ;  and  they 
shall  devour  all  the  peoples  round  about,  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left :  and 
they  of  Jerusalem  shall  yet  again  dwell  in  their  own  place,  even  in  Jerusalem. 
Jehovah  also  shall  save  the  tents  of  Judah  first,  that  the  glory  of  the  house  of 
David  and  the  glory  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  be  not  magnified  above 
Judah.  In  that  day  shall  Jehovah  defend  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  he 
that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day  shall  be  as  David  ;  and  the  house  of  David 
shall  be  as  God,  as  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  before  them.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
in  that  day,  that  I  will  seek  to  destroy  all  the  nations  that  come  against  Jerusalem. 
And  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication  ;  and  they  shall  look  upon  Me  whom  they 
have  pierced  :  and  they  shall  mourn  for  Him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son, 
and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  Him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  first-born. 
In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  great  mourning  in  Jerusalem,  as  the  mourning 
of  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon.  And  the  land  shall  mourn, 
every  family  apart  ;  the  family  of  the  house  of  David  apart,  and  their  wives 
apart ;  the  family  of  the  house  of  Nathan  apart,  and  their  wives  apart ;  the 
family  of  the  house  of  Levi  apart,  and  their  wives  apart  ;  the  family  of  the 
Shimeites  apart,  and  their  wives  apart ;  all  the  families  that  remain,  every 
family  apart,  and  their  wives  apart. 


CHAPTER    XVII 

IN  commencing  my  notes  on  the  last  section  of  Zechariah 
(chaps,  xii.— xiv.),  I  take  the  liberty  of  repeating  a 
brief  paragraph  from  my  introductory  remarks  to  the 
9th  chapter  to  which  I  would  again  draw  the  attention  of 
the  reader. 

The  overthrow  of  world-power,  and  the  establishment  of 
Messiah's  Kingdom,  may  be  given  as  the  epitome  of  the 
last  six  chapters  of  Zechariah.  The  two  oracles  which 
make  up  the  whole  of  the  second  half  of  the  book  (chaps. 
ix.-xi.  and  xii.-xiv.)  show  by  their  headings,  as  well  as  by 
their  contents,  and  even  by  their  formal  arrangement,  that 
they  are  corresponding  portions  of  a  greater  whole.  Both 
sections  treat  of  war  between  the  heathen  world  and  Israel, 
though  in  different  ways. 

In  the  first  (chaps,  ix.-xi.),  the  judgment  through  which 
Gentile  world-power  over  Israel  is  finally  destroyed,  and 
Israel  is  endowed  with  strength  to  overcome  all  their  enemies, 
forms  the  fundamental  thought  and  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
prophetic  description.  In  the  second  (chaps,  xii.-xiv.), 
the  judgment  through  which  Israel  itself  is  sifted  and  purged 
in  the  final  great  conflict  with  the  nations,  and  transformed 
into  the  holy  nation  of  Jehovah,  forms  the  leading  topic. 

The  foreground,  or  more  immediate  future  of  the  first 
main  section  of  the  second  half  of  the  book  (chaps,  ix.-xi.), 
were,  as  shown  in  my  notes  on  those  chapters,  the  victories 
of  Alexander  the  Great,  the  overthrow  of  the  Persian 
Empire,  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  and  His  rejection  by 
Israel — though  even  there,  as  we  had  occasion  to  observe 
more  particularly  in  connection  with  chap.  ix.  9,  10,  and 
chap.  x.  4— 12,  the  foreground  of  the  more  immediate  or 


422 

proximate  future,  and  the  events  which  were  to  precede 
and  accompany  the  First  Advent,  merge  into  the  great  and 
solemn  events  of  the  Second  Advent,  and  the  time  of  the 
end. 

The  second  or  last  section,  on  the  other  hand  (chaps, 
xii.— xiv.),  seems  to  me  to  carry  our  thoughts  altogether 
to  the  more  distant  future,  and  is  eschatological  and 
apocalyptic  in  its  character,  for  it  is  impossible  to  apply 
the  solemn  predictions  in  these  chapters  to  events  at  the 
time  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar, 
which  is  the  favourite  theory  of  those  who  assign  a  pre- 
exilic  origin  for  the  second  half  of  Zechariah,  and  who 
degrade  this  great  prophecy  to  the  level  of  a  mere 
"  political  divination  of  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah 
in  which  ardent  hopes  were  expressed  by  the  unknown 
prophet — hopes  destined,  however,  to  be  sadly  disappointed 
— respecting  the  final  result  of  the  struggle  of  the  Jewish 
kingdom  with  the  Babylonian  power."  l 

Neither  can   we,  without  doing  great  violence  to  the 
prophecy,    interpret    it    of    the    taking    of    Jerusalem    by 
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  as  some  do,  nor  to  the  destruction 
of  the  city  and  Temple  by  the  Romans ;  for  (to  quote  from 
words  of  my  own)  in   none  of  those  calamitous  events  in 
the  past  history  of  Israel  did   God  in  the   person  of  the 
Messiah  visibly  appear  on  the   Mount  of  Olives  with  His 
angelic    hosts    as   the    Deliverer    of    His    people    and    the 
destroyer  of    many    nations  which  were  gathered    against 
them  ;  nor  was  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  ever  yet 
poured  out  upon  the  Jewish  nation,  so  that  they  might  look 
upon   and  recognise  "  Him  whom  they  have  pierced  "  ;  nor 
has  the  Lord,  from  any  of  those  past  events  onward,  be 
come  "  King  over  the  whole  earth  "  (chap.  xiv.  9)  ;  not  to 
mention   many  other  great   and  solemn  events  which  are 
predicted  in  these  chapters  which  cannot  be  allegorised  or 
explained   away.      We  must  reject,  therefore,  the  view  of 
some  of    the    "  orthodox  "     commentators     that    this    last 
section  traverses  the  ground  already  trodden  in  the  previous 

1  Thus,  for  instance,  Ewald  in  Die  Propheten  des  alten  Bundes. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      423 

chapters,  and  "  refers  to  the  events  which  took  place  in  the 
period  between  the  time  of  the  prophet  and  the  day  of  the 
Messiah." 

The  mnn  Di\  yom  ha'hu,  the  "  that  day "  which  is 
mentioned  no  less  than  fourteen  times  in  these  last  three 
chapters,  is  indeed  "  the  day  of  the  Messiah,"  but  it  is  the 
day  not  of  His  first  advent  in  humiliation,  but  of  His 
manifestation  in  glory.  It  is,  therefore,  pre-eminently 
called  ffihv  Q\\yom  la-Yehovah — a  day  for  Jehovah — the 
day  set  apart  and  appointed  by  Him  not  only  for  the  dis 
play  of  His  majesty  and  vindication  of  the  holiness  and 
righteousness  of  His  character  and  ways,  but  it  is  "  the  day  " 
of  the  manifestation  of  His  Divine  might  and  glory  in  the 
destruction  of  Israel's  enemies,  and  the  salvation  of  His 
own  people. 

The  main  theme  of  the  first  nine  verses  of  chap.  xii.  is 
Israel's  sudden  deliverance  by  the  interposition  of  God  and 
the  destruction  of  the  armies  of  the  confederated  anti- 
Christian  world-powers  in  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem. 
But  inasmuch  as  this  siege,  or  "  straitness,"  and  the  solemn 
events  of  "  that  day  "  synchronise  with  "  the  time  of  Jacob's 
trouble,"  and  covers  the  period  of  unparalleled  sufferings 
and  "  tribulation  "  by  means  of  which  the  Jewish  nation 
is  itself  first  purged  as  in  a  fiery  furnace,  the  prophecy 
properly  begins  with  the  words  V>^  ^  ™*]  •>?!  *&?, 
massa  debhar  Yehovah  al  Israel — "  the  burden  of  the  word 
of  Jehovah  upon  (or  '  over ')  Israel " ;  the  word  massa,  as 
we  have  seen,  when  dealing  with  the  ist  verse  of  chap,  ix., 
being  as  a  heading  confined  entirely  to  prophecies  which 
contain  threatenings  and  announce  judgments. 

But  though  it  will  be  a  time  of  unspeakable  anguish 
for  Israel,  the  climax  of  all  their  sufferings  and  tribulations 
through  all  the  centuries  since  the  commencement  of  "  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles,"  they  "  shall  be  saved  out  of  it." 
Yea,  in  their  greatest  extremity,  and  in  the  time  of  their 
most  dire  need,  God  Himself  in  the  person  of  their  Messiah 
shall  interpose  on  their  behalf,  and  He  will  be  "jealous  for 
His  land,  and  have  pity  on  His  people,"  or,  in  the  words  of 


424     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  inspired  prophetic  song  which  Moses  was  commanded 
to  teach  the  children  of  Israel,  so  that  it  "should  not  be 
forgotten  out  of  the  mouth  of  their  seed,"  and  which  sets 
forth  in  advance  all  the  vicissitudes  of  their  history  to  the 
very  end — 

"  Jehovah  shall  judge  His  people, 
And  repent  Himself  for  His  servants  : 
When  He  sees  that  their  strength  is  gone, 
And  that  there  is  none  remaining,  shut  up  or  left  at 
large'' 

Then  He  will  "  lift  up  His  hand  to  heaven  "  and  swear, 
saying : 

"  As  I  live  for  ever. 
If  I  whet  my  glittering  sword,  and   Mine  hand  take 

hold  on  judgment ; 

I  will  render  vengeance  to  Mine  adversaries, 
And  will  recompense  them  that  hate  Me. 
I  will  make  Mine  arrows  drunk  with  blood, 
And  My  sword  shall  devour  much  flesh" J 

For  the  enemies  of  His  people  will  then  be  accounted  as 
His  enemies,  which  in  reality  they  are. 

But  to  return  to  our  chapter. 

To  remove  all  possibility  of  doubt  of  the  fulfilment  of 
the  great  and  wonderful  things  which  the  prophet  is  about 
to  announce  from  the  mouth  of  Jehovah,  we  are  reminded 
of  the  almighty-creative  and  sustaining  power  of  the  ever 
lasting  God.  This  surely  is  a  sufficient  basis  for  our  faith 
in  His  word,  however  great  the  human  improbabilities  and 
natural  impossibilities  of  their  ever  being  literally  fulfilled, 
may  appear  to  us. 

"  Thus  saith  (or  '  the  saying  '  of)  Jehovah,  which  stretcheth 
forth  the  heavens,  and  layeth  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  and 
formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him." 

A   similar  declaration  of   God's  almighty-creative  and 

1  Deut.  xxxii.  36-42. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      425 

sustaining  power  is  made  in  Isa.  xlii.  5,  and  with  the  same 
purpose,  namely,  to  remove  all  doubt  as  to  the  realisation 
of  the  great  and  mighty  things  which  the  prophet  there 
predicts:  "Thus  saith  God,  Jehovah,  He  tliat  createth  the 
heavens  and  stretcheth  them  forth ;  He  that  spread  abroad 
the  earth,  and  that  which  cometh  out  of  it;  He  that  giveth 
breath  (ni?F?>  nesJiamah — soul)  unto  the  people  upon  it ; 
and  spirit  (nn,  ruacJi)  to  them  that  walk  therein." 

The  participial  verbs  in  our  passage  in  Zech.  xii. — 
nob,  np«,  itf — noteh,  yosed,  yotzer — "  stretcheth,"  "  layeth  " 
(literally,  foundetli],  and  "  formeth " — are  intended  to 
remind  us  of  God's  omnipotence  and  the  continuous  active 
display  of  His  power  and  wisdom  in  the  universe  which 
He  has  created. 

Jehovah  is  altogether  a  different  being  from  the  god  of 
the  deist.  He  not  only  once  for  all  "  in  the  beginning " 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  appointed  certain 
"  laws  "  to  regulate  their  motions,  without  troubling  Himself 
further  about  them,  or  about  man,  who  is  admittedly  the 
goal  and  climax  of  His  creative  work  on  earth.  No. 
"  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,"  said  our  Lord  Jesus,  "  and 
I  work  "  ; 1  and  this  is  equally  true  in  the  sphere  of  creation, 
providence,  and  redemption.  According  to  the  Biblical 
view,  as  a  Bible  scholar  well  observes,  "  God  stretches  out 
the  heavens  every  day  afresh,  and  every  day  He  lays  the 
foundation  of  the  earth,  which,  if  His  power  did  not  uphold 
it,  would  move  from  its  orbit  and  fall  into  ruin."2  In  like 
manner,  when  it  is  said  that  "  He  formeth  the  spirit  of  man 
within  him,"  it  does  not  refer  merely  "  to  the  creation  of 
the  spirits  or  souls  of  men  once  for  all,  but  denotes  the 
continuous  creative  formation  and  guidance  of  the  human 
spirit  by  the  Spirit  of  God."  3 

Now  let  us  hear  what  Jehovah,  the  Author  of  all  being 
and  all  life,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  proceeds  to 
say,  and  be  assured,  without  any  shadow  of  doubt,  that 
what  He  hath  spoken  He  will  in  His  appointed  time  bring 
to  pass :  "  Behold,  I  (which  is  very  emphatic)  will  make 

1  John  v.  17.  2  Hengstenberg.  3  Keil. 


426     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Jerusalem  a  goblet  (or  '  basin  ')  of  reeling  (or  '  giddiness ') 
unto  all  the  peoples  round  about" 

The  cup  of  reeling,  or  giddiness,  is  frequently  used  in 
Scripture  as  a  symbol  of  the  judgment  of  God  which 
brings  man  into  a  condition  of  helplessness  and  misery 
like  unto  that  of  the  staggering,  intoxicated  man  who  is 
unable  to  stand,  or  walk.  "  For  in  the  hand  of  Jehovah" 
we  read  in  the  Psalms,  "  is  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red  (or 
'foametk ')  /  it  is  full  of  mixture,  and  He  poureth  out  of  the 
same  ;  surely  the  dregs  thereof,  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall 
wring  them  out,  and  drink  them"  * 

In  Isa.  li.  21—23  the  figure  is  used  of  the  judgments 
which  Israel  itself  first  experiences  :  "  Therefore  hear  now 
this,  thou  afflicted,  and  drunken,  but  not  with  wine :  thus 
saith  thy  Lord  the  Lord,  and  thy  God  that  pleadeth  the  cause 
of  His  people,  Behold,  I  have  taken  out  of  thine  hand  the  cup 
of  staggering  (or  '  reeling '),  even  the  bowl  of  the  cup  of  My 
fury  ;  thou  shalt  no  more  drink  it  again  :  and  I  will  put  it 
into  the  hand  of  them  that  afflict  thee  ;  which  have  said  to  thy 
soul,  Bow  down,  that  we  may  go  over :  and  thou  hast  laid  thy 
back  as  the  ground,  and  as  the  street  to  them  that  go  over" 

In  those  passages,  however,  it  is  the  D13,  kos  (cup), 
that  is  spoken  of,  but  here  in  Zech.  xii.  it  is  the  *!?,  saph? 
the  bowl,  or  "  basin  of  reeling  "  ;  the  thought  expressed  in 
this  instance  is  that  of  a  vessel  large  enough  for  all  nations 
to  drink  out  of  it,  "  either  together,  or  one  after  another  in 
succession."  And  they  shall  all  drink  of  this  intoxicating  cup 
of  God's  judgment  and  stagger  and  fall,  not  to  rise  again. 

The  structure  of  the  second  half  of  the  verse  presents 
some  difficulty,  and  has  been  variously  rendered  and 
interpreted  by  commentators.  Literally,  the  clause  in 
Hebrew  reads,  "And  also  upon  Judah  shall  be  in  the  siege 
against  Jerusalem? 

The  question  is,  What  subject  must  be  supplied  to  the 

1  Ps.  Ixxv.  8. 

2  ID,  saph,  has  also  the  signification  of  threshold,  and  the  LXX,  Vulgate, 
Calvin,  etc.,  have  translated  it  in  that  sense  ;  but  the  rendering  basin  is  the  only 
suitable  one  here.     It  is  used  of  the  vessel  containing  the  blood  of  the  Paschal 
Lamb  ;  also  in  2  Sam.  xvii.  28  and  I  Kings  vii.  50,  etc. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      427 

verb  "  shall  be "  ?  Ewald  and  others  have  rendered  it 
thus :  "And  also  upon  Judah  shall  it  be  (incumbent  to  be 
occupied]  in  the  siege  against  Jerusalem'.'  Similarly,  already 
the  Targum,  Kimchi,  Jerome,  and  many  of  the  modern 
commentators  have  explained  the  passage  as  "  containing 
a  prediction  that  the  people  of  Judah  should  be  arrayed 
among  the  hostile  forces  marshalled  against  Jerusalem, 
that  they  should  be  forced  to  assume  such  a  position  by 
reason  of  the  enemies  round  about,  but  that  after  a  certain 
time  the  people  should  be  able  to  break  away  from  the 
ranks  of  the  hostile  army,  and  would  ultimately  assist  the 
beleagured  citizens  of  Jerusalem." 

I  cannot  enter  on  a  minute  examination  of  the  critical 
grounds  on  which  this  view  has  been  advocated,  but  I 
believe  the  explanation  to  be  an  erroneous  one.  It  is 
asserted  that  it  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  context  that 
Judah  is  regarded  as  in  the  camp  of  the  enemy,1  but  I 
agree  with  Keil,  who  truly  observes  that  in  what  follows — 

"  There  is  no  indication  whatever  of  Judah's  having 
made  common  cause  with  the  enemy  against  Jerusalem  ; 
on  the  contrary,  Judah  and  Jerusalem  stand  together  in 
opposition  to  the  nations,  and  the  princes  of  Judah  have 
strength  in  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (ver.  5),  and 
destroy  the  enemy  to  save  Jerusalem  (ver.  6).  Moreover, 
it  is  only  by  a  false  interpretation  that  any  one  can  find 
a  conflict  between  Judah  and  Jerusalem  indicated  in 
chap.  xiv.  14.  And  throughout  it  is  incorrect  to  designate 
the  attitude  of  Judah  towards  Jerusalem  in  these  verses  as 
'  opposition,'  a  notion  upon  which  Ebrard  (Offenb.  Joh.} 
and  Kliefoth  have  founded  the  marvellous  view,  that  by 

'The  following  is  from  Kimchi's  commentary:  "The  sense  of  the  whole 
passage  is,  that  when  Gog  and  Magog  come  against  Jerusalem  after  the  redemp 
tion,  they  will  go  up  by  the  land  of  Judah,  for  the  desire  of  their  faces  will  be 
to  come  against  Jerusalem  first ;  and  they  will  not  be  anxious  first  to  subdue  the 
whole  land  of  Israel,  for  they  will  think,  when  we  have  subdued  Jerusalem,  the 
whole  land  will  fall  before  us.  But  they  will  go  up  to  Jerusalem  by  the  way  of 
the  land  of  Judah,  which  is  their  natural  route,  and  they  will  take  with  them  the 
children  of  Judah  against  their  will  to  go  with  them  to  besiege  Jerusalem  ;  and 
so  Jonathan  has  interpreted." 


428     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Jerusalem  with  its  inhabitants  and  the  house  of  David  we 
are  to  understand  the  unbelieving  portion  of  Israel  ;  and 
by  Judah  with  its  princes,  Christendom,  or  the  true  people 
of  God,  formed  of  believing  Israelites  and  increased  by 
believing  Gentiles.  Judah  is  not  opposed  to  Jerusalem, 
but  simply  distinguished  from  it,  just  as  the  Jewish 
kingdom  or  people  is  frequently  designated  by  the 
prophets  as  Jerusalem  and  Judah.  The  Dj>,  gam,  which 
does  not  separate,  but  adds,  is  of  itself  inapplicable  to  the 
idea  of  opposition.  Consequently,  we  should  expect  the 
words  '  also  upon  Judah '  to  express  the  thought  that 
Judah  will  be  visited  with  the  same  fate  as  Jerusalem— 
as  Luther,  Calvin,  and  many  others  follow  the  Peshito  in 
supposing  that  they  do." 

The  best  rendering  of  the  clause  in  my  view  is  that 
suggested  by  a  Hebrew  student,1  namely  :  "  And  also  on 
Judah  sJiall  be  (or,  fall,  this  reeling)  in  (or  '  during'}  the 
siege  (which  is  to  take  place]  against  Jerusalem  " — the  sense 
being  that  already  expressed  by  Keil,  that  Judah,  which 
stands  here  for  all  the  rest  of  the  people  of  the  land,  shall 
experience  the  same  ordeal  of  suffering  in  that  siege  as 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  ere  the  Lord  finally  interferes 
on  their  behalf  as  the  destroyer  of  their  enemies. 

The  prediction  of  judgment  against  the  nations  who 
will  be  gathered  against  Jerusalem  "  in  that  day,"  is 
strengthened  in  the  3rd  verse  by  the  use  of  another 
figure:  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  I  will 
make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome  stone  (lit.,  a  stone  for  lifting) 
for  all  the  peoples  ;  all  that  burden  themselves  with  it  (lit., 
all  tJiat  lift  if]  shall  be  sore  wounded  (or  '  lacerated!  or  '  tear 
rents  for  themselves ') ;  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall 
be  gathered  together  against  it,"  z 

1  W.  H.  Lowe,  M.A.,  in  his  Hebrew  Studenfs  Commentary.     Pusey  thinks 
that  the  "  Burden  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord"  is  the  subject  to  be  supplied,  i.e., 
the  burden  which  was  to  be,  or  should  be,  upon  Judah,  i.e.,  upon  all  great  and 
small  ;  but  that  phrase  is  too  remote  from  the  verb  to  admit  of  its  being  regarded 
as  the  "natural  subject." 

2  The   figure   of  the    "burdensome    stone"  is,  according   to  Jerome   (died 
420)  and  others,  based  on  a  custom  which  prevailed  in  Palestine.     That  "old 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      429 

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  there  is  a  gradation 
in  the  thought,  both  in  the  figure  of  the  "  burdensome 
stone,"  which  cuts  and  wounds  those  who  try  to  lift  it, 
whilst  the  "  reeling  cup "  in  the  2nd  verse  only  makes 
powerless ;  and  also  in  the  description  given  of  the  hosts 
gathered  for  the  attack.  In  the  2nd  verse  the  nations 
round  about  Jerusalem  are  spoken  of,  but  in  the  3rd 
verse  it  is  "  all  peoples  "  and  "  all  nations  of  the  earth." 

The  magnitude  of  the  danger  and  of  the  sufferings  of 
Jerusalem  are  brought  before  our  minds  in  the  last  clause 
of  the  3rd  verse,  and  are  to  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that 
"  all  nations  of  the  earth"  represented,  no  doubt,  by  the 
flower  of  their  armies,  "  will  be  gathered  against  it." 

"  The  gathering  of  these  hosts  is  not  unfrequently 
referred  to  in  the  Scripture,  and  always  in  language 
calculated  to  impress  the  mind  with  the  peculiar  magnitude 
of  the  power  to  be  displayed  in  this  last  great  effort  of  man 
under  Satan.  In  the  Revelation,  for  example  (chap.  xvi. 
14),  it  is  said  that  'spirits  of  devils,'  working  miracles, 
shall  go  forth  to  gather  the  kings  of  the  whole  world  to  the 
battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty." T  Joel  also 
speaks  of  the  same  mighty  confederation :  "  Proclaim  ye 
this  among  the  Gentiles,  prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty 

usage,"  he  says,  "is  kept  up  to  this  day  throughout  Judea,  that  in  villages, 
towns,  and  forts  round  stones  are  placed,  of  very  great  weight,  on  which 
young  men  are  wont  to  practise  themselves ;  and,  according  to  their 
varying  strength,  lift  them— some  to  the  knees,  others  to  the  navel,  others  to 
the  shoulders  and  head ;  others  lift  the  weight  above  the  head,  with  their  two 
hands  raised  up,  showing  the  greatness  of  their  strength.  In  the  Acropolis  at 
Athens  I  saw  a  brass  globe,  of  very  great  weight,  which  I,  with  my  little  weak 
body  could  scarcely  move.  When  I  asked  its  object,  I  was  told  by  the  inhabit 
ants  that  the  strength  of  wrestlers  was  proved  by  that  mass,  and  that  no  one 
went  to  a  match  until  it  was  ascertained,  by  the  lifting  of  that  weight,  who  ought 
to  be  set  against  whom." 

But,  as  it  has  been  observed,  the  stone  of  which  the  prophet  speaks  here  was 
not  such  a  round  stone,  but  one  with  sharp  edges  by  which  those  who  sought  to 
raise  it  were  lacerated.  Keil  may  be  more  correct  in  considering  that  the  figure 
is  taken  from  operations  connected  with  building.  Another  has  suggested  that 
the  reference  is  to  "  one  of  the  large  stones  half  buried  in  the  earth,  which  it  is 
the  effort  of  the  husbandman  to  tear  from  its  bed  and  carry  out  of  his  field  before 
he  ploughs  it." 

1  B.  W.  Newton. 


430     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

men,  let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near,  let  them  come  up  ; 
beat  your  ploughshares  into  swords  and  your  pruning-hooks 
into  spears ;  let  the  weak  say,  I  am  strong.  Assemble 
yourselves,  and  come,  all  ye  Gentiles,  and  gather  yourselves 
together  round  about"  (Joel  iii.  9-12). 

But  the  extremity  of  Israel's  need,  as  already  stated, 
will  be  God's  opportunity  for  the  display  of  His  power  in 
the  destruction  of  their  enemies,  and  His  grace  in  their 
deliverance,  It  is  to  "  that  day  "  that  the  prophetic  words 
in  Ps.  cxviii.  refer : 

"  Out  of  my  distress  l  I  called  upon  Jehovah  : 
Jehovah  answered  me  and  set  me  in  a  large  place. 
Jehovah  is  on  my  side  ;  I  will  not  fear  : 
What  can  man  do  unto  me  ? 

All  nations  compassed  me  about  : 

In  the  Name  of  the  Lord  I  will  cut  them  off. 

«*  -4/ 

They  compassed  me  about ;  yea,  they  compassed  me  about : 

In  the  Name  of  the  Lord  I  will  cut  them  off. 

They  compassed  me  about  like  bees  ;  they  are  quenched 

as  the  fire  of  thorns  : 
In  the  Name  of  the  Lord  I  will  cut  them  off" 

The  manner  of  God's  interposition  on  Israel's  behalf  is 
described  in  the  verses  which  follow :  "  In  that  day,  saith 
Jehovah,  will  I  smite  every  horse  with  astonishment  (lit.,  with 
'  bewilderment '  or  '  stupefaction  '),  and  his  rider  with  madness  : 
and  upon  the  house  of  Judah  will  I  open  Mine  eyes,  and  every 
horse  of  the  peoples  (i.e.,  of  their  attacking  cavalry]  will  I 
smite  with  blindness" 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  three  nouns  timmahon, 
"  astonishment "  or  "  bewilderment "  ;  shigga'on,  "  mad 
ness  " ;  and  'ivvaron,  "  blindness,"  which  here  describe 
God's  judgment  on  the  confederated  armies  of  the  anti- 
Christian  world-powers  which  will  be  gathered  against 
Jerusalem,  are  used  elsewhere  only  of  the  judgment  which 

1  i$sn  [p.     The  word  also  means  "  straitness,"  "  siege,"  and  is  the  same  as  is 
used  in  Zech.  xii.  2  of  the  "siege." 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      431 

was  to  come  upon  Israel  in  case  of  their  apostasy.  In 
the  2nd  verse  the  prophet  uses  the  symbol  of  the  cup,  or 
goblet,  of  reeling,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  had  also  been 
used  in  the  first  instance  of  Israel.  Among  the  other 
plagues  which  Israel  has  had  long  to  drink  out  of  that 
"cup"  are  those  enumerated  in  Deut.  xxviii.  28  :  "Jehovah 
shall  smite  thee  with  madness,  and  with  blindness,  and  with 
astonishment,  or  bewilderment?  But  when  Zion's  warfare 
shall  be  accomplished  and  her  iniquity  pardoned,  and  God's 
time  to  favour  Zion  comes,  He  says :  "  /  will  take  out  of 
thine  hand  the  cup  of  reeling,  even  the  bowl  of  the  cup  of  My 
fury  :  thou  shalt  no  more  drink  again,  and  I  will  put  it  into 
the  hand  of  them  that  afflict  thee"  and  they  shall  drink  to 
the  dregs  these  very  plagues. 

The  effect  of  the  enemies  of  Israel  being  smitten  with 
these  three  plagues  has  been  thus  described  :  "  The  terrified 
horses  of  the  cavalry  of  the  assembled  hosts  (being  thus 
suddenly  smitten  with  bewilderment,  or  terror,  are  repre 
sented  as  unable  any  longer  to  be  guided  by  bit  and  bridle. 
The  riders  in  their  madness  are  described  as  unable  to 
manage  their  steeds,  while  the  steeds  themselves  are 
portrayed  as  struck  with  blindness  (or  '  blind  staggers '), 
and  therefore  unable  to  escape  from  the  dangers  around 
them.  And  while  the  enemies  of  God's  people  will  find 
themselves  in  such  straits  at  the  very  moment  when  they 
imagined  that  they  had  gained  the  victory,  and  while, 
instead  of  chasing  the  vanquished  Jews  in  headlong  flight, 
they  themselves  are  described  as  rushing  upon  destruction, 
Jehovah  will  '  open  His  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah',  which 
stands  here  for  the  whole  covenant  nation." 

And  that  look  of  Jehovah,  through  the  eyes  of  their 
Messiah  Jesus,  upon  His  long  unbelieving  and  rebellious 
people — a  look  of  love  and  pity,  not  unmixed  with  tender 
reproach — will  have  something  of  the  same  effect  on 
stubborn  Israel  as  the  look  of  the  Lord  Jesus  on  Peter 
from  the  hall  of  Caiaphas  the  high  priest,1  when  that 
apostle  had  thrice  denied  Him.  It  will  at  last  soften  and 

1  Luke  xxii.  6l,  62. 


432     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

melt  their  hard  heart  to  true  repentance,  and  cause  them  to 
"  weep  bitterly."  But  this  is  set  forth  fully  in  the  last  part 
of  this  chapter,  and  for  the  present  we  must  return  to  the 
prophet's  description  of  their  outward  deliverance  and  the 
destruction  of  their  enemies. 

While  terror  and  confusion  seize  the  ranks  of  the 
assembled  hosts  as  the  result  of  the  plagues  with  which 
they  shall  be  smitten,  unity,  confidence,  and  assurance  of 
victory  take  possession  of  the  "  heart "  of  the  reduced,  and 
till  then  demoralised,  remnant  of  Judah,  from  the  moment 
that  they  become  conscious  that  the  eye  of  Jehovah  is  upon 
them  for  good,  and  that  the  "  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host " 
Himself  is  with  them  :  "And  the  governors  (or  'princes'^} 
of  Judah  shall  say  in  their  hearts,  The  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  are  my  strength  (or,  '  a  strength  to  me  ')  in  Jehovah 
of  hosts  their  God'.' 

"  The  princes  of  Judah,"  as  Keil  truly  observes, 
"  recognise  in  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  their  strength  or 
might — not  in  the  sense  that  Judah,  being  crowded  together 
before  Jerusalem,  expects  help  against  the  foe  from  the 
strength  of  the  city  and  the  assistance  of  its  inhabitants,  as 
Hoffmann  and  Koehler  maintain,  for  '  their  whole  account 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  being  shut  up  in  the  city '  (or 
crowded  together  before  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  covered 
by  them)  is  a  pure  invention,  and  has  no  foundation  in  the 
text — but  in  this  sense,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
are  strong  through  Jehovah  their  God,  i.e.,  through  the  fact 
that  Jehovah  has  chosen  Jerusalem,  and  by  virtue  of  this 
election  will  save  the  city  of  His  sanctuary "  (comp.  x.  i  2 
with  iii.  2,  i.  17,  ii.  16). 

It  is  the  fact  that  Jehovah  hath  chosen  Jerusalem,  and 
has  returned  to  her  with  mercies,2  which  makes  the  princes 
of  Judah  confident  in  her  invincibility.  "  God  is  in  the 
midst  of  her,"  sings  the  Psalmist,  looking  on  to  the  solemn 

1  'ijVx,  alluphei.     See  the  footnote  on  the   meaning  of  " alluph"  in  chap. 
ix.    7.     The   root-idea  is   expressed   in  the    LXX,  which  renders  "captain  of 
thousands." 

2  Chap.  i.  1 6. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      433 

events  of  "  that  day  "  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy — "  she  shall 
not  be  moved ;  God  shall  help  her "  (lit,  "  at  the  dawn  of 
the  morning" l  i.e.,  after  the  long  night  of  sorrow  and 
weeping. 

A  slight  alteration  in  the  original  text  of  this  verse 
has  been  suggested  already  in  the  Targum,  which  would 
read :  "  The  princes  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their  heart,  The 
strength  of  the  inhabitants  of  Judah  is  in  Jehovah  their 
God."  But  the  "  correction  "  is  not  needed,  for  this  is  not 
the  only  instance,  even  in  Zechariah,  where  a  collective 
body  is  represented  as  speaking  in  the  singular  as  one  man. 
Thus,  the  inhabitants  of  Bethel  speak  to  the  prophet 
through  the  deputation  which  they  sent  to  him  (chap.  vii. 
1—5),  saying,  "  Should  I  weep,  etc.  ?"  The  singular  pro 
noun,  y,  It  ("  my,"  or,  "  to  me ")  is  meant  to  express  the 
fact  that  each  individual  says, "  in  their  heart "  (which  is 
also  in  the  singular),  because  all  are  as  one  in  this  con 
fidence  that  there  is  strength  for  them  in  Jehovah  their 
God,  whose  power  is  now  displayed  on  behalf  of  Jerusalem. 
"  And  in  that  day"  the  prophecy  proceeds,  "  will  I  make  the 
princes  of  Judah  as  a  pan  (or  '  basin  ')  of  fire  among  wood, 
and  like  a  torch  of  fire  among  sheaves,  and  they  shall  devour 
all  the  people  round  about  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left, 
and  Jerusalem  shall  yet  again  dwell  in  her  own  place  in 
Jerusalem "  (tachteah,  lit.,  "  under  her  place"  i.e.,  "  in  her 
place  ") — the  name  "  Jerusalem  "  in  this  last  clause  standing 
in  the  first  instance  for  the  people  personified  as  a  woman, 
and  in  the  second  for  the  city  as  such. 

That  this  great  deliverance  will  be  all  of  grace  and  by 
the  power  of  God  is  brought  out  in  the  verses  which 
follow:  "  And  Jehovah  shall  save  the  tents  of  Judah  first, 
that  the  glory  of  the  house  of  David,  and  the  glory  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  be  not  magnified  against  Judah? 

The  reason  that  "  Judah "  (which  stands  here  for  the 
people  of  the  land  generally  in  contrast  to  those  who  are 
within  the  city  of  Jerusalem)  are  saved  "  first,"  is  not,  as  is 
mistakenly  supposed  by  some,  because  Judah,  having, 

1  Ps.  xlvi.  5. 
28 


434     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

though   unwillingly,  joined  the  foe  in  the  siege,  "  will  be>? 
found  in  a  place  more  rebellious  and  more  evil  than  that  of:<: 
Jerusalem,"    but    because    of  their    weak    and    defenceless:  • 
condition    (as    indicated   by    the  fact    that   they    dwell  ir.-i 
"  tents  ")  as    contrasted  with  those  within  the   city  walls. . 
Or,  in  the  words  of  another,  "  The  defenceless  land  will  bf  ^ 
delivered  sooner    than  the  well-defended  capital,  that  tht  ; 
latter  may  not  lift  itself  up  above  the  former,  but  that  both  i 
may  humbly  acknowledge  (as  Jerome  expresses  it)  that  th<  2 
victory  is  the  Lord's,"  and  that  both  alike  may  magnifj  / 
the  grace    of    God  in    their  deliverance.      "  The  glory  (or 
'  splendour,'  rnsarij  tipheretJi)  of  the  house  of  David  "  con 
sists  in  the  fact  that  it  is  the  God-appointed  royal  line  in 
Israel,  which  was  continued  in   Zerubbabel,  the  prince  who 
was  Zechariah's  contemporary,  and  culminated  in  our  Lord 
Jesus,  the  true  Son  and   Heir  of  David  ;  and  "  the  glory  " 
or    "  splendour "  of   the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem   may  be 
regarded  as  consisting  in  the  fact  that  they  may  consider 
themselves  as  especially  privileged  and  exalted  above  th<2 
rest  of  the  people  of  the  land  as  dwellers  in  the  city  which 
God  has  especially  chosen  as  the  seat  of  His  earthly  throne. 

But  the  deliverance  of  the  defenceless  people  of  the 
land  will  be  only  the  "  first "  act  of  God's  interposition  on. 
behalf  of  Israel  in  that  day. 

The  heart  of  the  great  conflict  will  be  in  and  around 
the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  for  on  it  all  the  fury  of  the  enemy'  i 
attack  will    be  directed.      But  "  in  that  day  stiall  Jehovah 
defend  (lit.,  '  shield'}  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and  he  tha.t 
is  feeble  among  them  shall  be  as  David ;  and  the  house  of\ 
David  shall  be  as    God,  as   the    Angel  of  Jehovah    before    v 
them''      Not    its    walls    or    bulwarks    will    constitute     the    ;• 
"  defence "  of  the  remnant  of  the  people  which    shall    be- 
left  in  Jerusalem  in  that  solemn  day.      From  chaps,  xiii.  8,  9    \ 
and  xiv.    I— 6,  which,  as  we    shall   see,  refer    to  the  same   ^ 
invasion  of  the  1"       and  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Gentile    iai 
hosts,  we  learn    \  -.at  the  city,  or  a  great  part    of  it,  will  je 
actually  be  "taken"  and  spoiled,  and  half  of  the  city  (thatj^ 
is,  of  the  population)  "  go  forth  into  captivity,"  and  that 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      435 

then,  when  the  enemy  lifts  his  hand  for  the  last  blow  in 
order  utterly  to  destroy  them,  "  that  the  name  of  Israel 
may  be  no  more  in  remembrance  " — the  visible  appearance 
of  Jehovah  in  the  person  of  their  Messiah  Jesus  takes  place. 
The  uplifted  arm  of  the  adversary  becomes  suddenly 
withered  ;  and  because  Jehovah  intervenes  as  the  shield  of 
the  remnant  that  remains,  therefore  "  the  residue  of  the 
people  shall  not  be  cut  off  from  the  city  "  (xiv.  2).  "  For 
thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  me,  Like  as  when  the  lion  growleth, 
and  the  young  lion  over  his  prey,  if  a  multitude  of  shepherds 
be  called  forth  against  him,  he  will  not  be  dismayed  at  their 
voice,  nor  abase  himself  for  the  noise  of  them :  so  shall  the 
Lord  of  hosts  come  down  to  fight  upon  Mount  Zion,  and  upon 
the  hill  thereof.  As  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts 
protect  Jerusalem  ;  He  will  protect  and  deliver  it ;  He  will 
pass  over  and  preserve  it" * 

And   not  only  shall   Jehovah   Himself  "  go  forth  and 
fight  against  those  nations,"  but  when  once  the  weak  and 
broken    remnant    of    the    people    recognise     their    Divine 
Saviour,  and  hear  the  shout  of  the  King  in  their  midst,  they 
are  suddenly  girt  with  superhuman  strength.      The  feeblest 
of  them,  hannikhshal  (lit.,  "  he  that  stumbleth,"  i.e.,  the  one 
so  weak  that  he  could  not  even  stand,  much  less  fight), 
shall    in   that    day  be  as    David — the  greatest  of  Israel's 
national  heroes,  and  "  to    the    Jew,  therefore,  the   highest 
>  [type  of  strength  and  glory  on  earth" — and  the  house  of 
M  "David  shall  be  as  Elohim  (i.e.,  "  God  "  in   His  might  and 
,;'  majesty),  and  as  the  Divine  "  Angel  of  Jehovah,"  who  of 
<   old  went  "  before  them  "  in  the  desert  and  through  the  Red 
vi  'Sea  smiting  down  their  enemies,  and  therefore,  "  the  highest 
:lie  type  of  strength  and  glory  in  heaven." 
be         No    wonder,  therefore,  that  through    Him  they    "  will 
9  push  down  their  adversaries,"  and  "  through  His  Name  tread 
rae  them  under  that  had  risen  up  against  them  " ; 2  and,  if  I 
tile  may  venture  a  brief  digression,  I  would  say  that  there  is  a 
message    in    this    scripture    for    you    too,    dear    Christian 
reader.      It  is  this,  that  however  weak  in  yourself  and  ready 
1  Isa.  xxxi.  4,  5  (R.V.).  »  Ps.  xliv.  4,  5. 


436     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

to  "  stumble,"  you  may  be  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the 
power  of  His  might,  and  that  "  more  "  and  "  greater  "  is  He 
that  is  for  us,  and  with  us,  than  all  that  can  be  against  us. 
"  Through  God"  exclaims  the  Psalmist,  "  we  shall  do 
valiantly "  (or,  as  it  might  be  rendered,  "  in  God  we  shall 
form  an  host " — however  weak  and  few  and  insignificant  in 
ourselves),  for  He  it  is  that  shall  tread  down  our  adversaries.1 
But  to  return  to  our  chapter.  While  Jehovah  endows 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  with  supernatural  strength  so 
that  they  perform  exploits,  He  will  "seek  to  destroy  all 
nations  that  come  against  Jerusalem  "  (i.e.,  in  martial  array 
to  attack,  as  the  phrase  in  the  original  implies).  The 
expression  "  seek  to  do "  is  always  used  in  the  Bible  "  of 
seeking  to  do  what  it  is  a  person's  set  purpose  to  do  if  Ju 
can"  Man  may  seek  to  do  a  thing  and  fail,  but  "  woe 
indeed  to  those  whom  Almighty  God  shall  seek  to 
destroy  "  ;  for  that  on  which  His  heart  is  once  set  He  will 
assuredly  accomplish,  whether  it  will  be  in  blessing  on  His 
people  or  in  vengeance  on  His  enemies. 

The  Great  Spiritual  Crisis  in  Israels  History 

The  first  nine  verses  of  the  1 2th  chapter  of  Zechariah      • 
describe     prophetically,    as    we    have     seen,    Israel's    great 
national  deliverance  and  the  destruction   of  the  armies  of     / 
the  confederated  anti-Christian  world-powers  which  shall  be 
gathered  in  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem.      That  will,  indeed, 
be  a  great  and  wonderful  day  in   their  history,  "  an  hour  of 
triumph  such  as  they  have  never  known  before,  greater  than 
when  they  quitted  Egypt ;  greater  than  when  they  triumphed  ; 
over  Pharaoh  and  his  host  at  the  Red  Sea  ;  greater  than     lc 
when  they  entered   the   Promised   Land,  and  the  walls  of    \ 
Jericho  fell  down  before  them." 

But  yet  there  is  something  greater,  more  solemn  and     Tl£ 
more  blessed,  than  mere  outward  deliverance  and  triumph     ,n, 
over  their  enemies  that  Israel  is  to  experience  on  "  that  day," 
and  that  is  God's  final  conquest  over  them.      Ah  !   yes,  Israel 

1  Ps.  lx.  12. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      437 

shall  then  learn  the  truth  of  the  saying,  that  "our  only  true 
triumphs  are  God's  triumphs  over  us,  that  His  defeats  of  us  are 
our  only  true  victories"; l  and  will  learn  with  the  great  apostle 
-whose  history  and  experiences  are  in  many  ways  a  fore 
shadowing  of  the  history  and  experience  of  his  nation — to 
say, "  Thanks  be  unto  God,  who  always  leadeth  us  in  triumph 
in  Christ " 2 — that  is,  as  former  enemies  who  have  been 
vanquished,  and  whom  He  is  now  leading  about  as  manifest 
trophies  of  His  all-subduing  grace  and  power. 

"  On  former  occasions,  when  Jeshurun  had  been  made 
to  ride  on  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  he  had  waxed  fat 
and  kicked  ;  then  he  forsook  God  which  made  him,  and 


lightly  esteemed  the  Rock  of  his  salvation.  But  it  will  never 
be  so  again.  He  who  comes  to  conquer  their  foes  comes 
also  to  subdue  their  hearts."  Hence,  great  as  their  triumph 
will  be,  great  as  will  have  been  their  individual  might  in 
the  last  stage  of  their  conflict  with  the  surrounding  hosts 
(so  that  "  he  that  is  feeble  among  them  will  be  as  David  "), 
t,  when  they  return  from  their  victory,  this  their  glorious 
day  of  triumph  will  end  in  self-abasement  and  tears.3  How 
this  wonderful  change  will  be  brought  about,  how  the 
stubborn  heart  of  unbelieving  and  gainsaying  Israel  will  at 
ast  be  broken,  we  are  told  in  the  loth  verse :  "  And  I  will 

ai    pour  upon  the  house  of  David  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  the    spirit    of  grace  and  supplication ;    and  they 

fc:    shall  look  upon  Me  whom  they  have  pierced :  and  they  shall 

:;    mourn  for  Him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall 
be  in  bitterness  for  Him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his 

i    first-born!' 

"  I    think,"  said    a   great    master  in    Israel,    "  there    is 

r    nothing  in  the  whole  range  of  scripture  more  touching  than 

01  Jthe  promise  contained   in   these  simple,  unadorned   words. 
iAs    they    touch    the    heart    they    fix    themselves    on    our 

:c    memory.     Who  can  ever  forget  them  ?     '  They  shall  look 


unto  (or  "  upon  ")  Me  whom  they  have  pierced.'  " 

And    yet    there   is    not  another   scripture   in   the  Old 

1  Dean  Alford.  *  2  Cor.  ii.  14  (R.V. ). 

-  B.  W.  Newton.  «  Adolph  Saphir. 


438     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Testament  around  which  more  controversy  has  raged  than 
around  "  these  simple,  unadorned,"  and,  to  the  Christian, 
most  precious  words.  Jewish  commentators  and  some 
rationalistic  Christian  writers  who  seem  not  less  biased  in 
their  anti-Christological  methods  in  interpreting  the  Old 
Testament,1  have  tried  their  utmost  to  divert  this  scripture 
from  Him  whose  rejection  and  suffering  unto  death,  and 
yet  future  recognition  and  penitent  reception  on  the  part 
of  "  His  own  "  nation,  it  foretells. 

The  modern  Jewish  translation  of  the  passage  as  given, 
for  instance,  in  the  "  Appendix  of  the  Revised  Version," 
issued  by  the  Jewish  Community  in  England  for  the  use 
of  Jews,  in  1896,  is  as  follows:  "And  they  (i.e.,  the  house 
of  David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem)  shall  look  up 
to  Me  because  of  Him  whom  they  (i.e.,  the  nations  which 
come  against  Jerusalem)  have  pierced."  This  translation, 
first  suggested  by  Rashi,  adopted  by  Kimchi  in  his  com 
mentary  on  Zechariah,  was  fully  elaborated  by  Rabbi  Isaak 
of  Troki 2  in  his  polemical  work  against  Christianity,  Chizzuk 
Emunah  ("  Strengthening  of  the  Faith "),  who  thus  ex 
plains  : 

"  If  it  should  happen  that  any  of  the  Israelites  should 
be  pierced,  namely,  in  that  war,  even  though  it  should  be 
one  of  the  most  inconsiderable,  they  shall  wonder  greatly 
how  this  could  happen,  and  will  think  that  this  is  the 

1  Thus,  for  instance,  Ewald,  one  of  the  fathers  of  the  "  Higher  Criticism,"  and 
who  has  a  very  large  following  among  Christian-  commentators  and  theological 
writers  in  this  country,  considers  the  mourning  pictured  by  the  prophet  in  the 
scripture  "as  a  mourning  over  the  Jews  fallen  in  the  defence  of  their  city,"  as 
martyrs  for  their  country  and  faith  ;  those  slain  in  the  battlefield  he  considers  to 
be  "those  pierced  by  the  heathen."     Canon  Driver,  in  his  Introduction  to  the 
Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  makes  this  passage  to  refer  to  some  "deed  of 
blood  "  in  which  the  house  of  David,  together  with  the  people,  became  implicated 
some  time  before  these  chapters  were  written,  which,  according  to  him  (and  in 
opposition  to  Ewald  and  his  school,  who  assign  a  pre-exilic  origin  to  the  second 
half  of  Zechariah)  was  some  time  between  518  and  300  B.C.,  of  which  deed  of 
blood,  as  pointed  out  in  my  "  Introduction  to  the  second  half  of  Zechariah," 
which  could  occasion  such  deep  and  universal  mourning,  history  knows  nothing. 

2  Isaac  Ben  Abraham  of  Troki,  a  Karaite  Rabbi — born  in  1533,  died  in  1594. 
His  book  is  still  the  chief  arsenal  whence  many  arguments  of  modern  Jews  in 
their  polemics  against  Christianity  are  drawn. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      439 

beginning  of  a  fall  and  defeat  before  their  enemies,  as 
Joshua  did.  When  the  men  of  Ai  smote  thirty-six  of 
Israel,  he  said :  '  Alas  !  O  Lord  God,  why  didst  Thou 
cause  this  people  to  pass  the  Jordan  ? '  And  again : 
'  What  shall  I  say  when  Israel  turn  their  backs  before  their 
enemies  ?  '  (Josh.  vii.).  So  will  it  be  at  that  time  if  they 
should  see  any  of  them  pierced,  they  will  be  astonished, 
and  look  on  Me  on  account  of  Him  whom  they  pierced." 

This  translation,  however,  to  which  English-speaking 
Jews  have,  as  we  have  seen,  officially  committed  themselves, 
only  shows  the  length  which  modern  Judaism  will  go  in 
misinterpreting  the  plainest  scriptures  so  as  to  evade  the 
Christian  argument  drawn  from  them  in  support  of  the 
claims  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.1 

It  is  a  rendering  which  is  contrary  to  grammar  and  to 
the  natural  sense,  for,  first,  the  word  "i^K  JIN  (eth  asher) 
cannot  possibly  mean  "  because  of  Him  whom,"  but  simply 
"  whom,"  emphatically  and  definitely  expressed.  And, 
secondly,  the  modern  Jewish  rendering  or  paraphrase  implies 
that  the  subject  of  the  second  verb  of  the  first  verse,  VIJTI, 
daqaru — "  pierced,"  is  a  different  one  from  that  of  the  first 
verb,  i^ani,  v'hibitu — " shall  look"  in  the  same  short  sen 
tence.  But  it  is  altogether  unnatural  to  suppose  that  two 

1  An  instance  of  departure  not  only  from  the  plain  sense  and  grammar,  but 
from  the  more  ancient  Jewish  traditional  interpretations  of  Messianic  passages  for 
controversial  reasons,  is  found  in  Rashi  (Rabbi  Solomon  Bar  Isaac),  the  most 
popular  commentator  on  the  Bible  and  Talmud — born  at  Troys  in  1040,  died  in 
1 105.  In  his  commentary  on  this  passage  in  the  Bible  he  says  :  "  They  shall 
look  back  to  mourn  because  the  Gentiles  had  pierced  some  amongst  them,  and 
killed  some  of  them." 

But  in  his  commentary  on  the  Talmud  he  says  :  "The  words,  '  the  land  shall 
mourn,'  are  found  in  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah,  and  he  prophesies  of  the  future 
that  they  shall  mourn  on  account  of  Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph,  who  shall  be 
slain  in  the  war  of  Gog  and  Magog"  (Sukkah,  fol.  52,  col.  l).  That  this  mani 
fest  contradiction  is  not  accidental,  but  intentional,  appears  from  the  fact  that  this 
writer  has  dealt  similarly  by  other  controverted  passages  ;  for  instance,  Isa.  liii., 
which,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Bible,  he  expounds  of  the  Jewish  people  ;  but  in 
his  commentary  on  the  Talmud  he  explains  of  Messiah.  Indeed,  his  determination 
to  get  rid  of  any  explanation  that  could  favour  Christianity  is  plainly  avowed  in 
his  commentary  on  Ps.  xxi.,  where  he  says:  "Our  Rabbis  have  expounded  JE 
it  of  the  King  Messiah,  but  it  is  better  to  expound  it  further  of  David  himself,  in  | 
order  to  answer  heretics." 


440     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

parties  were  in  the  prophet's  mind,  and  that  "  they "  who 
"  shall  look  "  are  the  Jews,  and  "  they  "  who  "  have  pierced  " 
are  the  Gentile  nations. 

Another  "Jewish"  rendering  of  the  passage,  equally 
unfair  and  even  less  tenable,  but  contradictory  of  the  above, 
is  that  found  in  the  bulky  "  Jewish  Family  Bible,"  which 
has  also  a  kind  of  "  official  "  air  about  it,  inasmuch  as  it 
was  "  printed  with  the  sanction  of  (the  late)  Rev.  Dr.  Adler, 
the  chief  Rabbi." l  The  critical  passage  in  question  is 
translated  thus :  "  But  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David, 
and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace 
and  of  supplication,  and  they  whom  the  nations  are  piercing 
shall  look  upon  Me,  and  shall  mourn  over  it,"  etc.  But  a 
translation  which  does  not  scruple  to  interpolate  words  and 
expressions  is  not  worth  noticing,  except  to  point  out  that 
it  can  claim,  at  best,  to  be  only  a  polemical  Targum,  or 
commentary,  the  chief  aim  of  which  is  the  elimination  of 
all  references  to  a  suffering,  atoning  Messiah  from  the  pages 
of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  not  necessary  to  point  out  to 
any  one  who  can  read  the  original  that  the  words,  "  whom 
the  nations  were  piercing,"  are  not  found  in  the  Hebrew 
text,  and  are  an  unjustifiable  gloss  of  the  "  reviser." 

But  there  is  a  more  ancient  Jewish  interpretation  of 
this  prophecy  than  those  to  which  I  referred,  which  were 
invented  by  Jews  for  controversial  reasons ;  it  is  that, 
namely,  which  applies  the  passage  to  Messiah  ben  Joseph. 
Thus  Aben  Ezra,2  who  wrote  after  Rashi,  says  :  "  All  the 
heathen  shall  look  to  me  to  see  what  I  shall  do  to  those 
who  pierced  Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph  "  ;  and  Abarbanel,3 
after  noticing  the  interpretation  of  Rashi  and  Kimchi,  says  : 

1  It  claims  to  be  the  Authorised  or  "Anglican"  version,  revised  by  Dr.  M. 
Friedlander,  Principal  of  the  Jews'  College,  published  in  1881.     Its  honesty  as 
a  translation,  or  "  revision,"  may  be  judged  from  its  rendering  of  this  and  other 
Messianic  passages. 

2  Aben  Ezra— Rabbi  Abraham  ben  Ezra— one  of  the  greatest  of  Jewish  com 
mentators  and  grammarians:  born,  1088  ;  died,  1176. 

8  Abarbanel  (or  Abravanel),  Rabbi  Dan  Isaac  ben  Jehudah,  the  celebrated 
Jewish  statesman  and  philosopher,  theologian  and  commentator  :  born,  1437  ; 
died,  1508. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      441 

"  It  is  more  correct  to  interpret  the  passage  of  Messiah, 
the  son  of  Joseph,  as  our  Rabbis,  of  blessed  memory,  have 
interpreted  it  in  the  treatise  Sukkah,1  for  he  shall  be  a 
mighty  man  of  valour  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph,  and  shall  at 
first  be  captain  of  the  Lord's  host  in  that  war  (namely, 
against  Gog  and  Magog),  but  in  that  war  shall  die." 

This  interpretation  is  of  interest  and  importance  to  the 
Christian  student,  in  so  far  as  it  shows  that  the  disciples 
of  Christ,  when  the  New  Testament  was  written,  were 
not  alone  in  interpreting  this  scripture  of  the  Messiah. 
The  Jewish  Rabbis  explained  it  in  the  same  way,  only 
they  applied  it  to  Messiah  ben  Joseph,  who  does  not 
exist  in  Scripture,  and  is  an  invention  of  their  own 
brains. 

Let  me,  while  dwelling  on  the  Jewish  interpretation 
of  this  passage,  reproduce  a  striking  passage  from  Alshech,2 

1  The  passage  will  be  found  in  Bab.  Talmud,  Sukk.  520. 

2  Moses  Alshech   flourished   in  Safed,  Palestine,  in  the  second  half  of  the 
sixteenth   century.     The   doctrine   or   theory  of  two  Messiahs — a  Messiah  ben 
Joseph,  who  should  suffer  and  die,  and  the  Messiah  ben  David,  who  shall  reign 
in  power  and  glory — can  be  traced  back  to  the  third  or  fourth  century  A.D.,  and 
very  probably  originated  in  the  perplexity  of  the  Talmudists  at  the  apparently 
irreconcilable  pictures  of  a   suffering,  and  yet  a  glorious  Messiah,  which   they 
found  in  the  prophecies.     Instead  of  finding  the  solution  in  two  advents  of  the 
one  person,  they  explained  the  different  scriptures  as  referring  to  two  different 
persons. 

"But  whom  did  the  Rabbis  mean  by  the  epithet  Messiah  ben  Joseph?" 
writes  a  learned  Hebrew  Christian  brother.  We  do  not  hesitate  to  answer : 
"  None  other  person  than  Jesus,  whom,  after  their  great  disappointment  in  the 
revolution  of  Bar-Cochba,  they  tacitly  acknowledged  as  the  suffering  Messiah, 
and  denominated  Him  by  the  name  that  He  was  commonly  called  in  Galilee, 
in  order  perhaps  to  screen  themselves  against  the  hatred  and  persecution  of  their 
own  followers,  or  of  their  Roman  masters.  This  idea  has  been  hinted  at  by  the 
Rev.  M.  Wolkenberg  in  his  translation  of  The  Pentateuch  according  to  the 
Talmud,  p.  156,  and  broadly  asserted  by  Dr.  Biesenthal  in  his  Hebrew  com 
mentary  on  St.  Luke  (chap,  xxiii.  48).  This  accounts  for  the  remarkable  fact 
that  on  the  Feast  of  Trumpets,  before  the  blowing  of  the  ram's  horn,  God's 
mercy  is  besought  through  'Jesus,  the  Prince  of  the  Presence  of  God,  the 
Metatron,'  or  the  One  who  shares  the  throne  of  God.  At  this  same  service, 
verses,  mostly  from  Ps.  cxix.,  are  repeated,  whose  first  letters  form  the  name 
of  'Christon,'  but  so  ingeniously  chosen,  that  they  should  at  the  same  time  read 
JBty  jnp,  '  the  Bruiser  of  Satan.'  This  name  also  is  written  on  amulets  and  in 
Jewish  houses  when  a  child  is  born,  as  well  as  the  name  of  the  angel,  TXDXD, 
which  is  mentioned  in  the  said  service,  with  alteration  of  only  one  accountable 


442     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

which,  barring  the  mention  of  Messiah  ben  Joseph,  might 
almost  be  accepted  as  a  statement  of  the  Christian  view 
of  this  scripture. 

"  I  will  do  yet  a  third  thing,  and  that  is,  that  '  they 
shall  look  unto  Me,'  for  they  shall  lift  up  their  eyes  unto 
Me  in  perfect  repentance,  when  they  see  Him  whom  they 
pierced,  that  is,  Messiah,  the  Son  of  Joseph ;  for  our 
Rabbis,  of  blessed  memory,  have  said  that  He  will  take 
upon  Himself  all  the  guilt  of  Israel,  and  shall  then  be 
slain  in  the  war  to  make  an  atonement  in  such  manner 
that  it  shall  be  accounted  as  if  Israel  had  pierced  Him, 
for  on  account  of  their  sin  He  has  died ;  and,  therefore, 
in  order  that  it  may  be  reckoned  to  them  as  a  perfect 
atonement,  they  will  repent  and  look  to  the  blessed  One, 
saying  that  there  is  none  beside  Him  to  forgive  those 
that  mourn  on  account  of  Him  who  died  for  their  sin : 
this  is  the  meaning  of  '  They  shall  look  upon  Me.' " 

There  is  another  critical  point  on  which  I  must  very 
briefly  touch  before  proceeding  with  the  exposition.  The 
reading  of  the  Massoretic  text,  ^N  ^arn,  vhibitu  elai 
("  they  shall  look  unto  Me "),  has  been  much  disputed  by 
Jews  and  modern  writers,  but  it  is  supported  by  all  the 
ancient  versions  and  extant  MSS  with  very  few  ex 
ceptions,  and  is  the  reading  which  is  accepted  in  all  the 
Rabbinic  quotations  made  above.  In  a  few  MSS,  how 
ever,  the  marginal  correction — vta,  alav — "  unto  Him," 
instead  of  ^K,  elai — "  unto  Me,"  was  made  by  Jewish 
hands ;  and  in  several  instances  this  "  Keri,"  or  marginal 
reading,  has,  as  is  sometimes  apt  to  be  the  case,  crept  into 
the  text  itself. 


letter,  and  which  stands  for  the  King  our  Righteousness,  '  the  King  our 
Righteousness,  Jesus  the  Messiah.'  To  this  Metatron  is  again  applied  in  the 
Talmud  (Sanked.  p.  256),  the  passage  Ex.  xxiii.  20,  and  it  is  added  that 
'  His  name  is  the  name  of  His  Master.'  And  in  the  liturgy  of  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles  reference  is  made  to  the  glorious  and  dread  Metatron,  who  was 
transformed  from  flesh  to  fire. 

"  Who  cannot  see  in  these  mysterious  hints  a  purposely  covered  belief  in  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus,  and  that  in  a  most  orthodox  manner?"  (From  Rays  of 
Messiahs  Glory.') 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      443 

But  we  need  not  impute  any  dishonest  intention  to 
the  Jews  in  this  matter,  as  some  have  done,1  and  of  a 
desire  to  corrupt  the  text ;  for,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  however 
much  they  obscured  and  perverted  the  true  sense  of 
Scripture,  through  their  misinterpretations,  and  in  their 
paraphrases  and  commentaries,  they  always  most  jealously 
guarded  the  original  letter  and  text  of  Scripture  from 
alteration  or  corruption. 

The  marginal  reading  in  the  few  MSS  which  is  also 
accepted  in  the  Talmud,  is,  however,  not  recognised  as 
a  Keri>  or  proper  reading,  in  the  Massoretic  text.  It 
originated  in  the  very  natural  difficulty,  from  the  Jewish 
point  of  view,  of  conceiving  how  God,  who  is  undoubtedly 
the  speaker  in  the  first  part  of  the  verse,  since  He 
promises  to  pour  out  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication, 
can  be  "  pierced."  It  requires  the  light  which  is  thrown 
on  Messianic  prophecy  by  the  New  Testament ;  and  a 
knowledge  of  Him  in  whom  dwelt  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily,  and  who  could  say,  "  I  and  the  Father 
are  '  One,' "  for  men  to  grasp  this  mystery.2 

But  we  are  told  by  Jewish  and  rationalistic  writers 
that  we  must  not  "  read  the  New  Testament  into  these 
Old  Testament  prophecies,  "  but  rather  ask  ourselves  what 
meaning  the  people  in  the  prophet's  own  time  would 
attach  to  them.  To  this  we  reply.  First :  Though  it 
is  true,  generally  speaking,  that  the  prophets  spoke  first 
and  primarily  to  those  in  their  own  time,  there  is,  never- 

1  As,  for  instance,  Martini. 

2  It  need  not,  it  seems  to  me,  be  supposed  that  the  Apostle  John,  in  John 
xix.  37,  quoted  from  a  manuscript  which   read,   "They  shall   look   on  Him." 
It  is  rather  his  adaptation   and   application   of  the   prophecy   in   the   light   of 
fulfilment  (as  far  as  the  piercing  is  concerned)  to  our  Lord  Jesus.     lie  knew 
well  that  in  its  connection,  in  Zech.  xii.,  it  is  spoken  of  God  ;  but  this  passage, 
like  many  other  prophecies  and  promises  which  in  the  Old  Testament  centre 
in  Jehovah,  find  their  fulfilment  and  realisation  in  history  in  the  person  of  the 
Messiah,  whom  this  beloved  apostle  depicts  to  us  as  "  the  Word  made  flesh," 
and  in  whose  face  he  beheld  the  glory  of  the  only-begotten  of  the   Father. 
Hence,  as  he  now  gazes  upon  Him  on  the  Cross,  and  beholds  the  Roman  soldier 
plunging  his  spear  into  His  side,  he  says,  "Here,  truly,  is  the  One  to  whom 
this  Scripture  applies — they  shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  have  pierced." 


444      VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

theless,  a  predictive  element  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  that 
many  of  the  prophetic  utterances  concerning  "  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should  follow  "  were  not  only 
not  fully  comprehensible  to  the  people  to  whom  they 
spoke,  but  to  the  prophets  themselves,1  and  could  only 
be  fully  understood  after,  and  in  the  light  of,  their 
fulfilment. 

Secondly:  Even  the  Jews  in  the  prophet's  own  time, 
if  they  pondered  on  the  prophet's  word,  must  have 
understood,  at  any  rate  this  much,  that  the  prediction 
refers  to  "  a  national  mourning  over  some  one  who  stood 
in  an  intimate  connection  with  Jehovah,  and  whose  rejec 
tion  and  death  was  to  be  bitterly  bewailed  by  the 
people  of  Israel.  Such  would  have  been  the  meaning 
conveyed  by  the  passage  to  the  Jews  of  the  time  of 
Zechariah.  Assuming  that  the  prophecy  proceeded  from 
the  same  author  as  that  of  the  previous  chapter — and 
there  are  not  sufficient  grounds  on  which  to  deny  it — 
the  rejection  of  the  representative  of  Jehovah  (namely, 
the  Good  Shepherd,  whose  rejection  is  there  spoken  of 
as  followed  by  a  terrible  punishment),  and  the  national 
mourning  described  as  taking  place  for  one  who  should  be, 
in  some  mysterious  manner,  '  pierced '  by  the  nation  when 
acting  in  the  capacity  of  the  representative  of  Jehovah, 
must  both  have  been  considered  by  the  hearers  of  the 
prophet  to  refer  to  one  and  the  same  event." 

But  now,  to  be  done  with  criticism    and  controversy, 
let  us  look  into  the  heart  of  this  great  prophetic  promise. 

We  will  take  the  words  in  the  order  in  which  they 
stand  in  the  Hebrew.  "And  I  will  pour" — ^ssyi,  v'sha- 
phachti — the  word  expresses  the  fulness  and  abundance  of 
the  gift  of  the  Spirit  which  shall  then  be  bestowed  upon 
the  people.  The  promise  points  back  to  Joel  ii.  28,  29: 
"  And 'it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward  that  I  will  pour  out 
My  spirit  upon  all  flesh"  etc. ;  or,  as  we  read  in  Isaiah : 
"  /  will  pour  My  spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  My  blessing  upon 
thine  offspring  "•  —  in  the  same  abundance  and  with  the 
1  2  Pet.  i.  10-12. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      445 

same  blessed  quickening  and  fertilising  effects  as  "  waters  " 
and  "  streams "  are  poured  "  upon  the  dry  and  thirsty 
ground." l 

"  Upon  the  house  of  David  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem"  Jerusalem  and  its  inhabitants  are  mentioned 
alone  in  the  text,  "  not  as  though  the  blessing  of  the 
gracious  outpouring  of  the  spirit  was  to  be  confined  to 
them,  but  because  Jerusalem  is  used  as  a  designation  for 
the  whole  people,  in  accord  with  the  custom  of  regarding 
the  capital  as  the  representative  of  the  whole  nation  "  ; 2  for 
it  is  clear  enough  from  the  whole  context  that,  if  the  great 
penitential  sorrow  which  is  to  be  the  fruit  of  this  out 
pouring  commences  in  Jerusalem  as  the  centre,  and  with 
"  the  house  of  David,"  which  stands  for  the  highest  among 
the  people,  it  extends  to  "  the  whole  land  "  (ver.  1 2),  and 
to  all  "  the  families  of  the  people." 

"  TJie  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication  " — D'wnrn  jn  nn, 
ruach  hen  v'thachnunim — is  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  who 
conveys  grace  and  brings  our  hearts  into  a  condition  of 
grace.  Just  as  "  The  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding  " 
is  the  spirit  infusing  wisdom  and  understanding,  and  "  the 
spirit  of  counsel  and  might "  is  that  same  spirit  imparting 
the  gift  of  counsel  to  see  what  is  to  be  done,  and  of  might 
to  do  it,  and  "  the  spirit  of  knowledge,  and  of  the  fear  of 
the  Lord"  is  that  same  spirit  infusing  intimate  acquaintance 
with  God  with  awe  at  His  infinite  majesty  ;  so  "  the  spirit 
of  grace "  is  that  same  spirit  infusing  grace  and  bringing 
into  a  state  of  favour  with  God,  and  a  "  spirit  of  supplica 
tion  "  is  that  spirit  calling  out  of  the  inmost  soul  the  cry 
for  a  yet  larger  measure  of  the  grace  already  given.3  But 
the  simplest  way  to  understand  the  two  kindred  terms, 
hen  and  thachnunim — "  grace  and  supplication  "—is  to  view 
them  in  the  light  of  cause  and  effect,  for  grace  is  that 
which  God  bestows  and  the  Holy  Spirit  conveys,  and 
"  supplication  "  is  the  fruit  of  that  condition  of  heart,  or 
soul,  which  that  same  spirit  creates  within  us. 

1  Isa.  xliv.  3  ;  see  also  Ezek.  xxxix.  29,  xxxvi.  26,  27. 
-  Keil.  3  Pusey. 


446     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  blessed  effect  of  the  outpouring  of  the  spirit  of 
grace  and  supplication  on  the  house  of  David  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  "  in  that  day  "  will  be  that  "  they 
shall  look  upon  Me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourn" 

(a)  They  shall  look  (^aiTi,  v'hibitu]  with  no  ordinary 
or  mere  passing  look,  but  "  with  trustful  hope  and  long 
ing,"  as  one  has  paraphrased  it.  Among  the  other  mean 
ings  which  this  particular  verb  has  is  that  of  "  to  regard," 
"  to  consider,"  "  to  contemplate,"  "  to  look  upon  with 
pleasure."  It  is  used,  for  instance,  in  that  remarkable 
story  of  the  brazen  serpent  in  Num.  xxi.  9,  which,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  was  in  the  mind  of  Zechariah  when  he 
uttered  this  prophecy  :  "  And  Moses  made  a  serpent  of  brass, 
and  set  it  on  a  pole  (or  '  the  standard '),  and  it  came  to  pass 
that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  it  (or 
looked  unto — ^arn,  v'hibif),  tJie  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived" 
With  this  same  eager  look  of  faith  and  hope  shall  Israel 
in  that  day  behold  and  contemplate  Him,  who  is  the  great 
antitype  of  the  brazen  serpent,  and  who  was  "  lifted  up " 
for  us  on  the  Cross,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  Him 
should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life.  It  is  this 
word  also  which  is  used  in  Num.  xii.  8,  as  describing  the 
beatific  view  of  the  very  "  form  "  or  "  similitude  "  of  God, 
which  it  was  the  distinction  and  privilege  of  Moses  above 
the  other  prophets  to  "  behold."  Thus  also,  not  "  in  a 
vision "  or  "  in  a  dream,"  but  face  to  face,  and  with  no 
longer  any  veil  to  hide  His  glory,  shall  Israel  in  that  day 
"  look  upon  "  Him  who  came  once  in  humiliation  to  suffer 
and  die,  but  who  shall  be  manifested  now  in  the  glory  of 
His  Father  and  with  His  holy  angels.1 

(£)  "  Unto  Me,"  or  "  Upon  Me  ($K,  elai}. 

This  sets  forth  the  character  and  majesty  of  Him 
whom  they  shall  behold  as  their  great  Deliverer,  for  the 
One  who  speaks  throughout  the  chapter,  as  already 

1  See  also,  for  instance,  Ps.  xxxiv.  5  :  "They  looked  unto  Him  and  were 
lightened  "  ;  and  Isa.  li.  I,  2  :  "Look  unto  the  Rock  whence  ye  were  hewn"  ; 
"Look  unto  Abraham,"  etc.;  where  the  same  word  is  used  to  express  the 
"look,"  not  only  of  faith,  but  of  contemplation. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      447 

observed,  is  none  other  than  Jehovah,  "  which  stretcheth 
forth  the  heavens,  and  layeth  the  foundation  of  the  earth, 
and  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him  "  (ver.  I ) ;  and 
who  in  this  I  oth  verse  says  :  "  /  will  pour  out  the  spirit  of 
grace  and  of  supplications."  This,  as  already  observed 
above,  is  a  great  mystery  comprehensible  only  to  faith 
based  on  the  Biblical  revelation  of  the  twofold  nature  of 
the  Messiah ;  but  when  perceived  it  is  very  precious  and 
beautiful. 

" They  shall  look  upon  Me" 

The  Jewish  nation  has  hitherto  regarded  faith  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  as  irreconcilable  with  faith  in  God,  and  have 
conceived  of  Him  as  being  in  opposition  to  God. 

This  was  the  chief  ground  of  the  blind  hostility  to 
Christ  on  the  part  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  during 
His  earthly  ministry,  and  has  continued  to  this  day,  not 
knowing  that  their  hatred  of  Christ  was  in  its  essence 
nothing  else  than  hatred  of  God,  and  their  opposition  to 
Him  nothing  else  than  a  fighting  against  God.  But,  as 
Saul  of  Tarsus  (whose  experience  and  history  are  in  many 
ways  a  foreshadowment  of  the  history  of  his  people  in 
relation  to  Christ)  was  startled  and  surprised  to  learn  from 
that  voice  on  his  way  to  Damascus,  "  /  am  Jesus  whom  thou 
persecutest,"  that  those  hated  Nazarenes  whom  he  was 
persecuting,  even  unto  death,  were  one  with  Him  who  was 
now  revealed  to  him  as  the  risen  and  living  Son  of  God, 
and  that  he  who  was  touching  them  was  touching  "  the 
apple  of  His  eye";  so  shall  the  Jewish  nation  in  the  day 
when  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication  is  poured  upon 
them,  and  "  the  eyes  of  the  blind  are  opened  "  to  behold 
the  divine  glory  of  their  Messiah,  be  startled  and  surprised 
to  discover  that  their  having  persecuted  and  "  pierced " 
Him  was  equivalent  to  their  having  persecuted  and 
pierced  God,  because  of  His  being  one  with  God,  in 
a  higher  and  deeper  sense  even  than  believers  are  with 
Christ. 

But  just  as  the  words,  "  they  shall  look  unto  Me,"  set 
forth  the  essential  oneness  of  the  pierced  One  with  Jehovah, 


448     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

so  does  the  sudden  transition  in  the  same  verse  from  the 
first  person  to  the  third,  and  the  words,  "  they  shall  mourn 
for  Him"  teach  us  that,  as  to  His  person,  He  is  yet  distinct 
from  God.  The  same  mystery  and  apparent  paradox 
meet  us  in  many  other  Old  Testament  scriptures  which 
speak  of  the  Messiah  as  "  Jehovah "  the  "  mighty  God," 
and  yet  as  one  sent  by,  and  coming  in  the  name  of  God, 
and  is — a  mystery  which  (as  already  stated  above)  is 
solved  to  all  whose  eyes  have  been  opened  to  the  Biblical 
doctrine  of  the  Tri-unity  of  the  blessed  Godhead,  and  to  the 
twofold  nature  of  the  promised  Redeemer,  who  is  perfect 
God  and  perfect  Man — the  Son  of  David  and  the  Son  of 
the  Highest. 

(c)  "  Whom  they  have  pierced." 

The  verb  ip^,  daqar,  means  "  to  pierce,"  or  "  thrust 
through  with  a  spear  or  lance," 1  and  points  to  "  the 
climax  of  our  Saviour's  mortal  sufferings "  when,  as  the 
Gospel  narrative  bears  witness,  "  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a 
spear  pierced  His  side,  and  straightway  there  came  out  blood 
and  water."  ^ 

It  was  a  Roman  soldier  who  did  the  actual  deed ; 
Roman  soldiers  also  were  they  who  pierced  His  blessed 
brow  with  the  crown  of  thorns,  and  His  hands  and  feet 
with  those  cruel  nails  ;  but  the  guilt  and  responsibility  for 

1  See  Num.  xxv.  7,  8,  where  the  same  verb  is  used  in  connection  with  ncn, 
"spear"  or  lance  ;  the  same  verb  is  used  also  in  Zech.  xiii.  3. 

2  It  has  been  urged  that  stress  must  not  be  laid  on  the  literal  fulfilment  of 
this  item  in  the  prophecy  as  recorded  in  the  Gospel  narrative,  since  the  prophet 
uses   language   in   chap.    xiii.   7   "which  if  its    literal   signification  be  insisted 
on,  would   imply  death  by  the  sword  " ;  but  this  is  a  misapprehension,     a^n, 
"sword,"  is  used  frequently,  in  a  general  way,  as  the  instrument  of  death  by 
violence,  without  in    many  cases  defining  that  it  would  be  brought  about    by 
being  literally  slain  with  the  sword.     In  Ps.  xxii.  20,  e.g.,  we  read  :  "Deliver 
my  soul  from  the  sword  (i.e.,  from  death),  my  darling  (my  only  one)  from  the 
power  of  the  dog"  ;  yet  in  the  immediate  connection  we  read  :   "They  pierced 
My  hands  and  My   feet."     We  take  it  then  that  in  chap.  xiii.  9  we  have   a 
prophecy  of  Messiah's  sufferings  unto  death  in  a  general  way,  by  the  use  of  a 

'  -nire  well  understood  as  having  this  signification,  but  that  chap.  xii.  10  refers 
lighter?,, definite  act  in  process  of  the  infliction  of  the  sufferings  unto  death  on  our 
"Look  ^P  l^e  literal  fulfilment  of  which  the  Apostle  John  lays  such  emphasis 
"look,"  not ">4-37)- 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      449 

these  actions  will  be  brought  home  to  the  heart  and  con 
science  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  that  day,  and  they  will  then 
acknowledge  that  both  directly,  by  delivering  Him  into 
the  hands  of  the  Gentiles,  and  indirectly,  on  account  of 
their  sins,  it  was  they  who  pierced  Him. 

(ct)  "And  they  shall  mourn  for  (or  ' over'}  Him" — 
vesaphedhu  alav — not  only  with  the  ordinary  "  mourning," 
as  those  who  mourn  for  the  dead  (in  which  sense  the  verb 
*JQD,  saphad,  is  generally  used),  but  with  a  deep  and  intense 
mourning,  namely,  "  as  one  that  mourneth  for  his  only  son  " 
(or,  literally,  "  with  the  mourning  for  an  only  one "),  and 
"  they  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  Him  as  one  that  is  in 
bitterness  for  his  first-born."  Mourning  for  an  "  only  son  " 
was  proverbial  as  descriptive  of  the  magnitude  of  the  grief, 
as  we  read  in  Jer.  vi.  26:  "O  daughter  of  my  people,  gird 
thee  with  sackcloth^  and  wallow  thyself  in  ashes :  make  thee 
mourning  as  for  an  only  son,  most  bitter  lamentation''  And 
again  in  Amos  viii.  IO:  "  1 will  make  it  as  the  mourning 
for  an  only  son" 

But  not  only  on  account  of  their  proverbial  use  to  ex 
press  the  intensity  and  bitterness  of  the  sorrow  and  grief, 
are  these  names  "  the  only  one  "  and  "  first-born  "  introduced 
here  in  connection  with  Israel's  mourning  over  the  Messiah 
whom  they  had  pierced,  they  are  peculiarly  appropriate 
designations  of  Him  who  is  "  the  First-born  of  every  crea 
ture,"  and  of  whom  the  apostle  exclaims :  "  We  beheld  His 
glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father  full  of 
grace  and  truth''  And  He  is  not  only  the  "  first "  and 
"  only-begotten "  as  the  Son  of  God,  in  relation  to  the 
Father,  but  as  the  Son  of  Man,  and  more  particularly  in 
relation  to  the  Jewish  nation.  He  was  tlieir  child  of  promise 
upon  whom  the  hopes  and  expectations  of  the  nation  had 
been  centred  through  the  centuries.  He  is  the  "  only  One  " 
whom  this  nationally  barren  woman,  who  was  betrothed 
unto  Jehovah,  had  brought  forth,  as  it  were,  miraculously, 
by  the  power  of  God.  And  it  was  ordained  that  He  should 
be  "  the  First-born  among  many  brethren,"  first  and  fore 
most  to  them  who,  according  to  the  flesh,  are  "  His  own," 
29 


450     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

as  well  as  in  relation  to  men  generally — and  Him  they 
have  with  wicked  hands  "  pierced  "  and  slain  !  No  wonder 
that  "  in  that  day,"  when  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplica 
tion  is  poured  upon  them,  and  their  eyes  are  open  to  behold 
Him,  and  to  recognise  the  fearful  national  crime  which  they 
committed,  to  their  own  sorrow  and  hurt,  they  shall  mourn 
over  Him  "  with  the  mourning  for  an  only  one,"  and 
shall  be  in  bitterness  for  Him  as  he  is  in  bitterness  "  who 
mourneth  for  his  first-born." 

It  is  in  that  day  of  their  deep  sorrow  and  contrition 
that  they  shall,  amid  their  broken-hearted  sobs,  utter  that 
great  national  confession  and  lament  contained  in  that 
wonderful  chapter  in  Isaiah : 

"  He  was  despised,  and  rejected  of  men  ;  a  Man  of 
Sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief;  and  as  one  from  whom 
men  hide  their  face  He  was  despised  ;  and  we  esteemed 
Him  not.  Surely  He  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows ;  yet  we  did  esteem  Him  stricken,  smitten  of  God, 
and  afflicted.  But  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions  ; 
He  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities ;  the  chastisement  of  our 
peace  was  upon  Him  ;  and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed. 
All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray  ;  we  have  turned  every 
one  to  his  own  way,  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the 
iniquity  of  us  all." 

(e)  And  not  only  will  the  mourning  be  great  and 
intense,  it  will  also  be  universal  and  yet  individual:  "In 
that  day  shall  there  be  a  great  mourning  in  Jerusalem,  as  the 
mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon. 
And  the  land  sJtall  mourn,  every  family  apart ;  the  family 
of  the  house  of  David  apart,  and  their  wives  apart ;  the 
family  of  the  house  of  Nathan  apart,  and  their  wives  apart  ; 
the  family  of  the  house  of  Levi  apart,  and  their  wives  apart ; 
tJte  family  of  the  Shimeites  apart,  and  their  wives  apart :  all 
the  families  that  remain,  every  family  apart,  and  their  wives 
apart" 

One  or  two  points  in   these  verses   need   explanation : 

(i)  Israel's  great  penitential  mourning  over  their 
Messiah  is  likened  by  the  prophet  for  magnitude  to 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      451 

"  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  1  in  the  valley  of  Megid- 
don." 

The  reference  can  be  nothing  else  than  to  the  national 
mourning  over  the  pious  young  king  Josiah,  who  was  slain 
by  Pharaoh  Necho  "  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon,"  as  recorded 
in  2  Kings  xxiii.  29,  30,  and  more  fully  in  2  Chron.  xxxv. 
20-27.  His  death  was  the  greatest  sorrow  which  had  till 
then  befallen  Judah,  inasmuch  as  he  was  "  the  last  hope  of 
the  declining  Jewish  kingdom,  and  in  his  death  the  last 
gleam  of  the  sunset  of  Judah  faded  into  night."  In  that 
great  mourning  for  Josiah  the  prophet  Jeremiah  took  part, 
and  wrote  dirges  for  it  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  25),  and  the 
national  lamentations  over  him  continued  and  became  "  an 
ordinance "  in  Israel,  which  survived  the  seventy  years' 

1  "Hadadrimmon"  was,  according  to  Jerome,  a  city  near  Jezreel  ("in  the 
valley  of  Megiddo"),  which  in  his  day  was  called  Maximianopolis,  and  has  been 
identified  by  others  with  the  site  of  the  modern  village  of  Rammaneh,  or 
Rumani,  in  the  same  "  valley,"  or  "  plain  "  ;  but  the  identification  is  doubtful. 

Hitzig,  who  first  held  that  the  reference  might  be  to  some  mourning  for 
Ahaziah,  king  of  Judah,  who  was  wounded  by  Jehu  when  the  latter  rebelled 
against  Joram,  and  who  fled  to  Megiddo,  and  died  there  (2  Kings  ix.  27), 
afterwards,  in  his  commentary,  propounded  the  still  more  absurd  view,  which, 
however,  has  been  adopted  by  some  modern  writers,  i.e.,  that  the  mourning  of 
Hadadrimmon  refers  to  the  mourning  for  the  god  Adonis,  who,  according  to 
mythology,  was  slain  by  a  boar,  and  whose  orgies  probably  had  their  origin  in 
Phoenicia. 

A  plausible  ground  for  the  conjecture  that  Hadadrimmon,  instead  of  being  a 
place-name,  might  rather  be  the  name  of  the  object  of  mourning — that  is,  the 
god  Adonis — is  advanced  by  these  critics,  namely,  that  according  to  2  Chron. 
xxxv.,  Josiah,  though  mortally  wounded  in  Megiddo,  was  brought  to  Jerusalem, 
where  he  died,  and  that  the  great  mourning  for  him  took  place  there. 

But  to  this  it  has  been  properly  replied  that  "  the  mourning  may  be  considered 
as  having  commenced  at  Hadadrimmon,  where  the  good  king  received  his  deadly 
wound,  even  though  the  great  national  mourning  took  place  in  Jerusalem,  whither 
his  body  was  brought  from  the  fatal  field." 

Moreover,  as  it  has  been  suggested,  "the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon"  may 
be  explained  as  "  the  mourning  over  Hadadrimmon,"  i.e.,  over  the  national 
calamity  which  took  place  there. 

Other  suggestions — such  as  that  of  Pressel,  who  considers  that  the  mourning 
refers  to  the  wailing  of  the  mother  of  Sisera  over  her  son,  the  great  chieftain 
of  the  Canaanites,  who  was  slain  by  Jael  not  far  from  Megiddo — are  not  worth 
examining.  It  is  quite  wonderful  to  what  absurd  theories  and  conjectures  some 
scholars  will  resort  when  the  simple  and  obvious  sense  of  these  prophecies  is 
passed  over. 


452     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

captivity  and  continued  "  to  this  day,"  when  the  chronicles 
were  closed.  It  was  worthy,  therefore,  to  be  referred  to  by 
the  prophet,  and  to  be  compared  with  the  still  greater  and 
more  bitter  mourning  of  repentant  Israel  in  the  future. 

(2)  In  the  universal,  yet  individual,  mourning  which, 
commencing  in  Jerusalem,  will  spread  throughout  the  whole 
land,  four  "  families "  are  especially  singled  out  as  being 
conspicuous.  Of  these  four,  two  are  well  known,  namely, 
"  the  family  of  the  house  of  David  "  and  "  the  family  of  the 
house  of  Levi."  But  who  are  meant  by  "  the  family  of  the 
house  of  Nathan  "  and  "  the  family  of  Shimei  "  (or  of  "  the 
Shimeites  ")  ? 

It  would  require  a  treatise  to  analyse  the  various  con 
jectures  and  explanations  which  have  been  advanced  on 
this  point  by  Jewish  and  Christian  commentators. 

Let  me  in  the  briefest  possible  manner  give  here  what 
seems  to  me  the  most  satisfactory  explanation.  And  first, 
we  may  say  with  certainty  that  "the  family  of  the  house 
of  Nathan  "  does  not  refer  to  the  posterity  of  Nathan  the 
prophet,  as  representing  the  prophetic  order,  as  the  Rabbis 
and  some  Christian  writers  have  supposed,  but  to  the 
family  of  Nathan,  the  son  of  David  and  brother  of  Solomon 
(2  Sam.  v.  14),  whose  name  figures  also  in  the  genealogy 
of  our  Lord  in  Luke  iii.  31.  Likewise,  "the  family  of  the 
Shimeite "  does  not  refer  to  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  which, 
according  to  rabbinic  fiction,  furnished  the  teachers  of  the 
nation  ; l  for  in  that  case,  apart  from  other  considerations, 
the  name  would  be  differently  written  in  the  Hebrew,2  but 
refers  to  Shimei,  the  son  of  Gershon  and  grandson  of  Levi 
(Num.  iii.  1 8).  We  have  thus  two  families  of  the  royal 
and  two  of  the  priestly  line,  and  of  these  one  stands  for  the 

1  Jerome  sums  up  the  Jewish  view,  which  he  seems  to  have  adopted,  thus : 
"In  David  the  regal  tribe  is  included,  i.e.,  Judah.     In  Nathan  the  prophetic 
order  is  described.     Levi  refers  to  the  priests  from  whom  the  priesthood  sprang. 
In  Simeon  the  teachers  of  Israel  are  included,  as  companies  of  masters  sprang 
from  that  tribe.     He  says  nothing  about  the  other  tribes,  as  they  had  no  special 
privilege  or  dignity."     But,  as  stated  above,  these  conjectures  rest  on  no  historic 
basis  of  fact. 

2  'iype>,  Simonite — instead  of  as  it  is  in  the  text — 'ypt*. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      453 

chief  (David  for  the  royal,  and  Levi  for  the  priestly),  and 
the  other  (Nathan  for  the  royal,  and  Shimei  for  the  priestly), 
for  the  subordinate  families  of  their  lines — as  including  and 
representing  the  whole  —  to  indicate,  as  Hengstenberg 
suggests,  that  the  mourning  spoken  of  would  pervade  every 
family  (of  these  lines)  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest. 

But  though  these,  as  the  two  aristocratic  and  privileged 
lines,  the  rulers  and  priests,  who,  alas !  in  times  past  often 
set  an  evil  example  to  the  whole  nation,  will  now  be  fore 
most  in  their  self-contrition  and  mourning  over  the  great 
national  sin,  their  example  for  good  will  now  also  be 
followed  by  all  the  rest  of  the  people.  This  is  expressed 
in  the  last  verse  of  the  chapter,  which  tells  us  that  "  all  the 
families  that  remain  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart,  and 
their  wives  apart." 

In  the  last  sentence  of  the  chapter,  not  only  the  magni 
tude  and  universality,  but  the  depth  and  intensity,  as  well 
as  the  individual  character  of  this  unprecedented  mourning, 
is  once  again  described.  It  is  strikingly  pictured  as  a 
mourning  which  shall  not  only  be  manifested  in  public,  but 
be  participated  in  by  each  family  apart.  And  not  only  are 
families  spoken  of  as  mourning  apart  from  families,  but 
individuals,  compelled  by  the  deep  sorrow  which  shall 
overwhelm  them,  shall  weep  apart  by  themselves. 

This  depicts  a  sorrow  greater  than  any  previous  sorrow. 
Even  husbands  shall  mourn  apart  from  their  wives,  and 
wives  apart  from  their  husbands,  because  each  individual 
man  or  woman  will  be  overwhelmed  with  his  or  her  own 
individual  share  in  the  guilt  of  having  slain  their  Messiah. 

It  will  thus  be  both  a  national  and  individual  mourning 
at  the  same  time,  and  no  mere  ceremonial  lamentation,  but 
a  genuine  sorrow  of  heart.  "  Each  individual  shall  experi 
ence  the  grief  so  keenly  as  to  desire  to  hide  himself  from 
the  eyes  of  others  " 1 — even  from  those  nearest  to  them. 

The  only  one  who  will  be  able  effectually  to  comfort 
them  in  this  great  mourning  will  be  the  Lord  Himself,  He 
over  whom  ttiey  shall  mourn.  And  He  shall  comfort  them 

1  Wright. 


454     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAII 

in  that  day  as  "him  whom  his  mother  comforteth,"  and 
they  "  shall  be  comforted  in  Jerusalem." 

When  once  this  great  but  godly  sorrow  shall  have 
accomplished  its  blessed  end  in  working  a  repentance  never 
to  be  repented  of,  He  shall  pour  His  consolations  into 
their  broken  hearts,  and  give  unto  them  the  "  oil  of  joy  for 
mourning,  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness." 
Like  Joseph  to  his  brethren  (in  whom  the  history  of  Christ 
and  Israel  is  depicted),  He  will  say  unto  them  :  "  As  for 
you,  ye  thought  evil  against  me,  but  God  meant  it  unto 
good,  to  bring  to  pass,  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much 
people  alive :  now,  therefore,  be  not  grieved  nor  angry  with 
yourselves."  l 

We  are  done  with  the  exposition  of  this  great  Messianic 
prediction.  The  ultimate  literal  fulfilment  of  it  lies  yet  in 
the  future,  in  the  day  for  which  we  watch  and  pray,  when 
our  Lord  Jesus  shall,  according  to  His  promise,  appear  in 
His  glory,  and  the  Jewish  nation  shall  literally  look  upon 
Him  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  be,  as  it  were,  "  born  in 
a  day."  But  there  is  a  forestalment,  so  to  say,  in  the  fulfil 
ment  of  this  prophecy  in  the  case  of  the  individual  even 
now.  "  And  thus,"  to  quote  the  words  of  an  honoured 
Hebrew  Christian  brother  and  true  master  of  Israel,  "every 
Jew  who,  by  the  grace  of  God  since  the  Day  of  Pentecost, 
has  been  brought  to  Christ,  fulfils  this  prediction  ;  he  looks 
unto  Him  whom  he  has  pierced.  It  is  the  look  of  repent 
ance  ;  for  only  a  sight  of  the  crucified  Jesus  shows  us  our 
sin  and  grief.  It  is  the  look  of  supplication  and  faith ;  for 
He  only  can  bless  and  save,  and  He  saves  all  who  believe. 
It  is  the  look  of  peace  and  adoration ;  for  His  love  is 
infinite,  unchanging,  and  omnipotent.  It  is  the  look  which 
never  ceases  and  never  ends ;  for  now  the  veil  is  taken 
away,  and  we  with  open  face,  beholding  the  glory  of  the 
Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to 
glory."  2 

And  as  it  is  with  the  individual  Jew,  so  it  is  with  the 
individual  Gentile.  Yes,  thanks  be  to  God,  as  we  all, 

1  Gen.  xlv.  5,  1.  20.  2  Adolph  Saphir. 


FINAL  CONFLICT  AND  DELIVERANCE      455 

whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  had  our  share  in  the  guilt  of 
Christ's  crucifixion  because  of  our  common  sin,  so  also 
may  all  have  their  share  in  the  salvation  which  comes 
through  a  penitent  look  of  faith  on  Him  whom  we  have 
pierced. 

The  Cross  has  been  from  the  beginning,  and  must 
continue  to  be,  the  centre  of  all  true  Christian  devotion, 
"  the  security  against  passion,  the  impulse  to  self-denial,  the 
parent  of  zeal  for  souls,  the  incentive  to  love.  This  has 
struck  the  rock,  that  it  gushed  forth  in  tears  of  penitence ; 
this,  the  strength  and  vigour  of  hatred  of  sin — to  look  to 
Him  whom  our  sins  have  pierced." 

Let  us  all  then  look  to  Him  for  our  salvation,  and  have 
our  gaze  fixed  upon  Him  for  our  sanctification,  and  so 
have  no  occasion  to  dread  that  awful  day  when  "  He  cometh 
with  clouds ;  and  every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  they  which 
pierced  Him :  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail 
because  of  Him.  Even  so,  Amen"  (Rev.  i.  7). 


CHAPTER    XVIII 

THE  OPENED  FOUNTAIN  AND  ITS 
CLEANSING  POWER 

(CHAPTER  XIH.  1-6) 


457 


In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David  and  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  in  that  day,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  that  I  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the 
idols  out  of  the  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered  :  and  also  I  will 
cause  the  prophets  and  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the  land.  And  it  shall 
come  to  pass  that  when  any  shall  yet  prophesy,  then  his  father  and  his  mother 
that  begat  him  shall  say  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  not  live ;  for  thou  speakest  lies 
in  the  name  of  Jehovah  :  and  his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat  him  shall  thrust 
him  through  when  he  prophesieth.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the 
prophets  shall  be  ashamed  every  one  of  his  vision,  when  he  prophesieth  ;  neither 
shall  they  wear  a  hairy  mantle  to  deceive  :  but  he  shall  say,  I  am  no  prophet, 
I  am  a  tiller  of  the  ground ;  for  I  have  been  a  bondman  from  my  youth. 
And  one  shall  say  unto  him,  What  are  these  wounds  between  thine  arms  ?  Then 
shall  he  answer,  Those  with  which  I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  my  friends. 


458 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

THE  first  six  verses  of  the  I3th  chapter  stand  in 
closest  connection  with  the  great  prophecy  in  the 
i  2th  chapter. 

There  the  prophet  depicts  in  the  last  verses  the  great 
national  repentance  and  sorrow  of  Israel  over  Him  "  whom 
they  have  pierced,"  as  the  result  of  the  pouring  out  upon 
them  of  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication.  Here  we  see 
how  that  same  blessed  Spirit,  who  shall  have  wrought  in 
them  this  godly  penitential  sorrow  on  account  of  their 
great  national  sin,  shall  also  bring  them  into  the  experi 
ence  of  forgiveness,  and  open  their  eyes  to  the  provision 
God  has  made  for  their  justification  and  cleansing. 

"  In  that  day  " — the  goal  of  prophetic  vision  in  relation 
to  the  nation,  the  great  "  day  "  of  Israel's  national  atone 
ment — when  "  the  iniquity  of  that  land  shall  be  removed 
in  one  day," l  and  when  a  whole  nation  shall,  as  it  were, 
"  be  born  at  once,"  z  "  sJtall  a  fountain  be  opened  to  the  house 
of  David  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for 
uncleanness." 

The  word  employed  here  for  "  fountain "  is  ">ipc>, 
maqor,  which,  according  to  its  etymological  meaning, 
describes  a  place  "  dug "  out,3  and  perhaps  originally 
standing  for  "  well,"  or  artificially  made  "  cistern,"  came  to 
mean  spring  or  fountain.  It  is  the  substantive  used  in 
Ps.  xxxvi.  9  :  "  For  with  Tltee  is  the  fountain  of  life  "  ;  and 
in  Jer.  ii.  I  3  and  xvii.  13  it  is  used  as  the  figure  of  Jehovah 
Himself,  "  tfie  Fountain  of  living  ivaters" 

Here  in  Zech.  xiii.,  however,  it  is  not  primarily  as  the 

1  Zech.  iii.  9.  *  Isa.  Ixvi.  8. 

8  From  the  verb  "flp,  qur,  "to  bore,"  "dig,"  or  "scoop  out." 

459 


460     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

source  of  life  and  refreshment,  but  as  the  means  of  puri 
fication  from  sin  and  moral  uncleanness,  that  the  figure  of 
the  fountain  is  introduced. 

The  background  of  the  figurative  language  in  this 
prophetic  scripture  are  the  Divine  appointments  in  the 
Levitical  ritual.  The  primary  allusion  may  be  to  the 
water  used  for  the  purification  of  the  Levites  on  their  con 
secration,  which  is  called  nstan  "•»,  mei  hattath,  literally, 
"  sin  water  "  or  "  water  of  expiation."  l 

It  is  this  Levitical  ordinance  which  was  very  probably 
also  in  the  mind  of  the  priestly  prophet  Ezekiel  in  his 
great  prophecy  concerning  Israel's  future  in  chap,  xxxvi. : 
"  And  I  will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
clean  :  from  all  your  filthiness  and  from  all  your  idols  will 
I  cleanse  you" 

In  our  passage  in  Zechariah,  however,  the  figure  is  a 
much  stronger  one.  Instead  of  water  being  sprinkled 'upon 
the  defiled,  a  fountain  of  cleansing  water  is  opened,  in 
which  the  guilty  may  wash  and  be  clean.  But  the  words 
le-hattath  u-leniddah — "  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  "- 
seem  almost  an  echo  of  Num.  xix.  9,  where  these  two  words 
are  used.  The  ashes  of  the  red  heifer,  we  read,  shall  be 
laid  up  in  a  clean  place  without  the  camp,  "  lemai  niddah, 
hattath  hi'"  literally,  "  for  water  of  purification,  a  means 
of  removing  sin  it  is." 

The  Revised  Version  renders  the  words  "  a  water  of 
separation  ;  it  is  a  sin  offering."  The  fact  is  that  hattath 
means  "  sin,"  and  also  "  offering  for  sin,"  or  "  means  of 
removing  sin."  The  same  is  true  of  the  word  niddah, 
translated  "uncleanness"  in  Zech.  xiii.  I,  2,  and  "separa 
tion"  in  'the  Authorised  and  Revised  Versions  in  Num. 
xix.  9,  which  means  primarily  that  kind  of  ceremonial 
uncleanness  which  requires  "  separation,"  z  but  denotes  also 
the  means  of  the  removal  of  this  particular  uncleanness. 

But,  to  repeat,  it  is  not  for  the  purification  from  bodily, 
or  ceremonial  uncleanness,  that  the  fountain  shall  then  be 
opened  to  the  house  of  David  and  to  the  inhabitants  of 

5  Num.  viii.  7.  2  Lev.  xii.  2,  xv.  19-24. 


lH  THE  OPENED  FOUNTAIN  461 

,,,.  Jerusalem — which  in  this  passage  also,  as  in  chap.  xii.  10, 
,0f  represents  the  whole  nation — but  for  purification  from  the 
guilt  and  the  moral  defilement  of  sin,  of  which  bodily 
j,js  uncleanness  is  often  used  in  the  Bible  as  a  figure.  Thus, 
t|,e  for  instance,  in  Ps.  li.  7  David  prays :  "  Purge  me  (literally, 
•u  if  one  may  invent  an  expression,  '  unsin  me'  or  '  rid  me  of 
,  my  sin  ')  with  hyssop  " — which  is  a  distinct  allusion  to  the 
L  cleansing  of  the  leper  from  his  bodily  plague,1  in  connection 

/' 

\with  which  a  Jewish  commentator  rightly  observes  : 
I  "  What  has  befallen  the  soul  is  like  unto  the  plague  of 
,js  leprosy  in  the  body."2  To  pass  from  the  figure  to  the 
:.  treality,  from  the  shadow  to  the  substance,  the  "  fountain" 
„.  which  shall  then  be  opened  to  the  house  of  David  and  the 

n  *• 

,    inhabitants  of   Jerusalem    for  the  national  and  individual 
cleansing  from  guilt  and  sin,  is  nothing  else  than  the  blood 

Mof  their  Messiah  whom  they  have  pierced.  Hence,  those 
are  not  far  wrong  who  trace  a  connection  between  ~iip», 

:  maqor  ("  fountain ")  in  chap.  xiii.  I  and  ip^,  daqar 
("pierced")  in  chap.  xii.  10,  and  say  that  the  opening  of 
the  fountain  took  place  when  the  Roman  soldier  with  his 
spear  pierced  our  Saviour's  side,  and  "  there  came  out  of  it 
blood  and  water" — though  the  basis  for  the  connection  is 
not  in  philology  (the  root  of  the  two  words  not  being  the 
same  though  of  cognate  significance),  but  in  fact. 

Yes,  Israel  "  in  that  day  "  shall  experience  the  wonder 
ful  and  everlasting  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  their 
Messiah,  God's  Son,  which  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  In  quite 
another  and  blessed  sense  shall  that  fearful  prayer  once 
uttered  in  ignorance,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and  our  children," 
which  has  haunted  the  Jewish  conscience  through  all  the 
centuries  since,  and  has,  like  the  blood  of  Abel,  brought 
down  the  curse  of  Cain  on  the  whole  nation,  be  fulfilled  "  in 
that  day."  It  shall  be  upon  them  for  life  and  not  for 
death,  for  cleansing  and  not  for  defilement. 

They  shall  experience  then  the   truth  of  the  inspired 
words  in   Heb.  ix.    13,  that  "  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats,    and   the    ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean, 
1  See  Lev.  xiv.  1-9.  2  Eben  Ezra. 


462     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,  how  much  more  shall 
the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered 
Himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  our1  conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God." 

But,  it  may  be  objected,  if  it  is  the  blood  of  Christ 
which  constitutes  the  cleansing  stream  which  shall  wash 
away  Israel's  "  sins  and  uncleanness,"  then  the  fountain  was 
"  opened "  nineteen  centuries  ago  on  Calvary ;  whereas 
this  is  a  prophecy  of  the  national  purification  of  Israel 
which  is  to  take  place  "  in  that  day  "  which  is  yet  future. 

For  answer,  I  repeat  what  I  stated  in  my  notes  on 
chap.  iii.  9  :  "  I  will  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  land  in 
one  day " — namely,  that  what  is  here  predicted  will 
assuredly  be  fulfilled  only  on  the  ground  and  as  a  blessed 
consequence  of  "  the  day  of  Golgotha,"  when  Christ,  through 
the  eternal  Spirit,  offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God  ; 
but  actually  and  experimentally  the  great  "day"  of  Israel's 
national  repentance  and  of  cleansing  will  take  place  when 
the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  shall  be  poured  out 
upon  them,  and  they  shall  look  upon  Him  whom  they 
have  pierced.  The  cleansing  fountain  for  sin  and  for 
uncleanness  was  opened  once  and  for  all  when  "  the  Lamb 
of  God  "  was  slain  and  His  precious  blood  shed  ;  but  to  the 
sinner  actually  and  experimentally  the  Day  of  Calvary  is  the 
day  his  eyes  are  opened  to  the  true  meaning  to  himself  of 
the  great  redeeming  work  there  accomplished,  and  when 
the  Spirit  of  God  applies  Jesus'  blood  and  righteousness  and 
high-priestly  intercession  to  his  own  need.  Thus  "  in  that 
day  "  it  will  be  with  Israel  nationally.  The  fountain  will 
be  opened  then  "  to  the  house  of  David  and  the  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem,"  because  "  then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be 
opened' 'z  for  the  first  time  to  behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  and 
to  perceive  the  atoning  value  and  efficacy  of  the  offering 
which  He  once  made  for  the  sins  of  many. 

Blessed  be  God  !   the  fountain  once  opened  shall  never 

1  Many  ancient  authorities  read  "  our,"  and  not  "  your,"  as  in  the  Authorised 
and  Revised  Versions." 
*  Isa.  xxxv.  5. 


THE  OPENED  FOUNTAIN  463 

be  closed,  for  the  force  of  the  Hebrew  words  1  which  are 
used,  is  not  only  "  shall  be  opened,"  but  "  shall  remain 
open  " — ever  free  and  accessible  to  all,  and  everlastingly 
efficacious  for  "  sin  and  for  uncleanness." 

From  the  inward  cleansing  of  the  people  from  the  guilt 
and  moral  defilement  of  sin,  the  prophet  passes  in  vers.  2—6 
to  the  cleansing  of  the  land  and  the  purification  of  the 
environment  in  which  the  forgiven  and  sanctified  people 
shall  then  live  and  move.  Nothing  that  defileth  shall  be 
permitted  in  the  restored  Jewish  state  in  the  day  when 
"  Jehovah  shall  inherit  Judah,  His  portion  in  the  holy  land, 
and  shall  choose  Jerusalem  again." 

The  two  chief  sources  of  moral  pollution  and  the  great 
besetting  sin  of  Israel  in  the  land  were  idolatry  and  false 
prophecy.  These  shall  be  utterly  purged  out  of  their  midst. 
"  A  nd  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
that  /  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and 
they  shall  no  more  be  remembered :  and  I  will  also  cause  the 
prophets  and  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the  land?  Not 
only  shall  the  idols — the  objects  of  idolatrous  worship — 
themselves  be  "  cut  off,"  but  their  very  names  and  remem 
brance  shall  perish  in  the  land  ;  and  not  only  shall  false 
prophets  disappear,  but  the  unclean  spirit — the  author  and 
inspirer  of  false  prophecy  as  well  as  the  instigator  of  idolatry 
— shall  be  cast  out  from  the  midst  of  the  people,  whose  ears 
shall  then  be  circumcised  to  hearken  only  to  words  of  truth 
and  purity,  and  whose  heart's  love  and  worship  shall  be 
centred  in  Jehovah  alone. 

The  evil  spirit  is  particularly  designated  as  the  ruach 
hattumah  ("  the  spirit  of  uncleanness  "),  in  contrast  to  "  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications"  in  chap.  xii.  10,  who  is 
pre-eminently  the  Ruach  Ha-qodesh — the  "  Holy  Spirit  " — 
because  He  is  the  representative  and  revealer  of  the  blessed 
Godhead,  whose  chief  attribute  is  that  of  holiness,  and  who 
dwells  in  the  midst  of  His  people  to  sanctify  them  and  to 
make  them  holy,  because  Jehovah  their  God  is  holy. 

Some  have  argued  from  the  mention  of  idols  and  false 
1  nn?a  ,T.T,  Yeeyhe  nifhtach. 


464     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

prophecy  in  this  passage  that  these  last  chapters  of 
Zechariah  must  have  been  written  in  the  pre-exilic  period 
when  these  two  great  national  sins  were  still  prevalent  in 
the  land.  But  there  is  no  real  foundation,  in  fact,  for  this 
any  more  than  for  the  other  "  proofs "  of  a  pre-exilic 
authorship  of  these  chapters,  as  I  have  already  shown  else 
where.1  In  reference  to  this  particular  point,  though  it  be 
true  that  idolatry,  and  false  prophecy,  which  was  usually 
associated  with  it,  did  not  exist  any  more  in  their  gross 
form  among  the  Jewish  people  after  the  Babylonian  cap 
tivity,  such  passages  as  Neh.  vi.  10;  Ezra.  ix.  i  ;  Neh. 
xiii.  23,  24,  etc.,  which  speak  of  the  lying  prophets  which 
existed  at  that  time,  and  of  marriages  contracted,  even  by 
priests,  with  Canaanitish  and  other  heathen  women,  whose 
children  could  not  even  speak  the  Jewish  language — show 
very  clearly,  as  Keil  and  others  point  out,  that  "  the  danger 
of  falling  back  into  idolatry  was  not  a  remote  one." 

The  range  of  the  prophetic  vision,  however,  in  the  six 
last  chapters  of  Zechariah  does  not  terminate  with  the  mere 
immediate  future,  but  finds  its  goal  in  the  time  of  the  end, 
when  the  great  sins  of  idolatry  and  false  prophecy  shall 
reach  their  climax  in  the  worship  of  the  beast  and  his 
image,  and  in  the  "  unclean  spirits  "  z  which  shall  go  forth 
upon  the  earth  to  deceive  the  anti-Christian  nations. 

The  four  verses  which  follow  are  an  amplification  of  the 
announcement  in  ver.  2  that  idolatry  and  false  prophecy 
would  be  utterly  exterminated  from  the  land  "  in  that 
day."  They  set  forth  in  realistic — we  might  almost  say 
dramatic  —  form  the  great  change  which  will  then  come 
over  the  Jewish  nation,  and  their  zeal  against  those  sins 
which  formerly  were  the  chief  causes  of  their  national 
ruin. 

The  3rd  verse  introduces  an  hypothetical  case:  "And 
it  shall  come  to  pass  that,  when  any  shall  yet  propliesy,  then 
his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat  him  shall  say  unto  him, 
Thou  shalt  not  live :  for  thou  speakest  lies  in  the  Name  of 

1  See  the  introduction  to  the  second  part  of  this  book. 

2  2  Thess.  ii.  4  ;  Rev.  xiii.  1-6;  xvi.  13,  14. 


THE  OPENED  FOUNTAIN  465 

the  Lord :  and  his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat  him  shall 
thrust  him  through  when  he  prophesieth" 

The  allusion  is  to  Deut.  xiii.  6-10,  where  we  read  :  "If 
thy  brother,  the  son  of  thy  mother,  or  thy  son,  or  thy  daughter, 
or  the  wife  of  thy  bosom,  or  thy  friend,  which  is  as  thine  own 
soul,  entice  thee  secretly,  saying,  Let  us  go  and  serve  other 
gods,  .  .  .  thine  eye  shall  not  pity  him ;  neither  shalt  thou 
spare,  neither  shalt  thou  conceal  him,  but  thou  shalt  surely  kill 
him  :  thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  him  to  put  him  to  death" 

The  same  injunction  holds  true  in  relation  to  the  false 
prophet  who  either  speaks  "  presumptuously  "  or  falsely  in 
the  Name  of  Jehovah,  or  in  the  name  of  other  gods. 
"  That  same  prophet  shall  die?  1 

Now  the  prophet,  to  illustrate  the  zeal  for  Jehovah  and 
His  truth  which  shall  then  characterise  converted  and 
regenerated  Israel,  supposes  such  a  case.  Even  if  it  should 
be  their  own  son  who  should  presumptuously  "  prophesy," 
either  to  entice  them  from  their  allegiance  to  Jehovah  or  to 
spread  error  in  His  Name,  his  own  parents  will  not  spare 
or  pity  him  ;  but  his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat  him 
shall  thrust  him  through  (ud'qaruhu — the  verb  is  the  same 
as  in  chap.  xii.  I  o  for  "  pierced ")  when  he  prophesieth 
(iaqan:^  Uhinnabho],  which  may  mean  either  when  he  is  in 
the  act  of  prophesying,  or,  "  because  of  his  prophesying."  Zeal 
for  Jehovah  and  His  law  will  be  so  strong  as  to  overmaster 
even  parental  affection  ;  the  people  themselves  would  stop 
short  at  nothing  in  order  utterly  to  exterminate  the  evil 
should  it  be  possible  once  again  to  assert  itself. 

And  not  only  will  false  prophets  no  longer  be  tolerated 
in  their  midst,  the  pretended  prophets  themselves  will  be 
ashamed  of  their  calling.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day  that  the  prophets  shall  be  ashamed  every  one  of  his  vision 
when  he  prophesieth  ;  neither  shall  they  wear  a  hairy  mantle 
to  deceive"  "In  former  days  the  false  prophets  had  been 
bold  enough  to  assert  their  claims  even  in  the  very  face  of 
the  true  prophets  raised  up  by  Jehovah.  Now,  popular 
feeling  will  run  so  strongly  in  an  opposite  direction  that 

1  Deut.  xviii.  20. 
30 


466     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

persons  will  be  ashamed  of  making  any  pretence  to  super 
natural  visions,  and  confounded  when  charged  with  having 
made  such  assumptions.  Instead  of  being  anxious  to  be 
considered  as  prophets,  they  will  rather  seek  in  every  way 
to  avoid  the  reputation  of  such  a  dangerous  and  unpopular 
profession." l 

The  "  hairy  mantle "  was  the  distinguishing  garb  of 
some  of  the  great  prophets.  Some  (as  Koehler)  suppose  it 
to  have  been  made  of  untanned  skins ;  others  think  it  was 
a  garment  formed  of  camel's  hair,  such  as  that  worn  by 
John  the  Baptist.  Thus,  Elijah  was  recognised  by  Ahaziah 
when  described  by  his  messengers  as  "  a  hairy  man,  and 
girt  with  a  girdle  of  leather  about  his  loins."  2  The  "  rough 
garment "  was  not  only  the  outward  sign  of  "  the  strict 
course  of  life  and  abstinence  from  worldly  pleasures " — 
"  the  frugality  alike  in  food  and  attire,"  which  marked  the 
true  prophets  of  Jehovah — but,  also  (on  certain  great 
occasions,  at  any  rate),  it  was  the  symbol  of  grief  and 
mourning  for  the  sins  of  the  nation,  and  the  consequent 
judgments  which  they  were  commissioned  to  announce. 

In  the  case  of  the  false  prophets  it  was  a  cloak  of 
hypocrisy,  and  was  assumed  "  in  order  to  lie,"  or  "  deceive  "  ; 
for,  though  outwardly  they  may  be  clothed  like  "  sheep,"  or 
even  like  the  true  prophets  of  God,  inwardly  they  are 
"  ravening  wolves." 

The  prophet  having  shown  the  opposition  which  would  i 
be  exhibited  by  the  Jewish  nation  to  the  false  prophets,  i 
who  in  the  past  were  the  chief  cause  of  their  national  un 
doing — first,  by  the  hypothetical  instance  of  a  son  who 
should  venture  to  prophecy  falsely  being  slain  by  his  own 
parents ;  and  secondly,  by  the  general  statement  that  the 
pretended  prophets  would  themselves  be  ashamed  of  their 
evil  profession  and  seek  in  every  way  to  avert  suspicion 
that  they  ever  had  to  do  with  such  evil  practices,  with  a 
view  to  deceive  the  people — proceeds  in  the  next  two  verses 
still  more  fully  to  illustrate  the  condition  of  the  time. 

In  a  few  but  graphic  touches  he  pictures  a  dramatic 

1  Dr.  Wright.  "  2  Kings  i.  8. 


THE  OPENED  FOUNTAIN  467 

incident.  One  who  is  suspected  of  being  a  false  prophet  is 
suddenly  challenged  by  a  zealous  Israelite.  He,  however, 
vehemently  answers,  "  /  am  no  prophet "  ;  far  from  ever 
having  professed  to  be  an  inspired  teacher  of  the  people,  "  / 
am  a  tiller  of  the  ground  (i.e.,  belonging  to  the  humblest 
class  of  the  people),  and  I  have  been  made  a  bondsman  x 
(or,  '  a  man  has  bought  me ')  from  my  youth" 

A  certain  similarity  has  been  pointed  out  between  the 
words  of  this  false  prophet  and  those  of  Amos,  when  in 
answer  to  Amaziah,  the  priest  of  the  idolatrous  worship  of 
Bethel,  who  warned  him  to  flee  to  Judah  and  prophesy 
there,  but  to  cease  prophesying  in  Bethel,  because  it  was 
the  chief  sanctuary  and  a  royal  residence  of  the  kings  of 
Israel,  the  prophet  said:  "/  was  (or  'am'}  no  prophet, 
neither  was  I  a  propJiefs  son,  but  I  was  a  herdman,  and  a 
dresser  of  sycamore  trees? 

But  the  purport  of  the  two  passages  is  very  different. 
Here,  in  our  passage  in  Zechariah,  the  false  prophet,  when 
accused  with  exercising  the  functions  of  a  prophet,  utterly 
denies  the  charge ;  but  Amos,  though  he  disclaims  having 
been  a  prophet  by  profession  and  training,  is  nevertheless 
conscious  of  a  direct  call  from  God,  and  boldly  asserts  his 
Divine  mission  in  the  words  which  immediately  follow : 
"Jehovah  took  me  from  following  the  flock,  and  Jehovah  said 
unto  me,  Go,  prophesy  unto  My  people  Israel"  2  Far,  therefore, 
from  being  intimidated  by  the  threats  of  Amaziah,  or  his 
royal  master  Jeroboam  II.,  he  proceeds :  "  Now  therefore 
hear  tJwu  the  word  of  Jehovah" 

1  'Wijri — kiqnnani.     The  verb  njj;  in  the  Kal   means  to  "originate,"    "ac 
quire,"  "  possess"  ;  but  since  it  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  in  the 
Hiphil  there  is  great  difficulty  in  determining  its  exact  force  in  this  sentence. 
Some  take  it  as  a  stronger  Kal,  "  to  purchase,"  others  "  to  sell."     Some  taking  it 
as  a  denominative  from  njijo,  miqneh,  "possession,"  deduce  the  same  meaning, 
i.e.,  "  to  buy." 

Rashi  and  Kimchi  derive  hiqnnani  from  "  miqnch  "  in  the  sense  of  a  flock,  and 
translate  "  made  me  a  shepherd,  or  set  me  to  keep  his  flock." 

But  in  the  words  of  W.  H.  Lowe  :  "  Whatever  be  the  exact  meaning  of  the 
word  it  is  clear  that  the  person  accused  here  of  assuming  prophetic  powers  dis 
avows  all  such  assumption,  and  claims  to  be  looked  on  as  a  simple  rustic." 

2  Amos  vii.  10-14. 


468     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

But  to  return  to  the  dramatic  incident  in  our  passage  in 
Zechariah.  Not  easily  put  off  by  the  vehement  protesta 
tions  of  the  false  prophet  that  he  is  not  at  all  likely  to  have 
performed  the  functions  of  a  prophet,  seeing  he  is  only  a 
simple  peasant — in  fact,  a  slave  from  his  youth — his  inter 
rogator  proceeds :  "  Wliat  are  these  wounds  between  thine 
hands  ?  And  he  shall  say  (They  are)  those  with  which  I  was 
ivounded  in  the  house  of  my  friends" 

The  two  clauses  in  this  6th  verse  are  to  be  understood 
as  "  speech  and  reply,  or  question  and  answer."  It  was 
very  probably  these  makkoth  —  "  wounds  "  —  which  the 
zealous  challenger  of  the  false  prophet  had  observed  which 
first  aroused  his  suspicion.  He  evidently  regards  them  as 
self-inflicted  on  his  person  in  order  to  arouse  his  prophetic 
frenzy,  or  in  connection  with  idolatrous  rites.  "  It  must 
not  be  forgotten,"  to  quote  the  words  of  another,  "  that  such 
rites  were  sometimes  observed  even  where  Jehovah  was 
acknowledged  to  be  the  highest  object  of  adoration.  In 
the  idolatrous  court  of  Ahab  there  were  hundreds  of  false 
prophets  who  were  wont  to  prophesy  in  the  Name  of 
Jehovah,1  and  yet  at  the  same  court  priests  and  prophets  of 
Baal  cut  themselves  with  knives  and  lancets  until  blood 
gushed  out  upon  them,2  in  order  to  procure  answers  from 
their  god."  That  such  practices  were  common  among 
Israelites  in  the  days  of  apostasy  is  plain  from  the  passage 
referred  to,  as  well  as  from  the  prohibition  of  similar  doings 
in  Deut.  xiv.  I,  in  cases  of  mourning  for  the  dead,  which 
were  employed  in  later  times  by  the  Israelites.3 

The  expression  "  between  thy  hands  "  is  an  idiom  which 
may  mean  on  the  palms  of  the  hands,  or  on  the  arms,  i 
or  on  the  chest  between  the  hands ;  but  the  explana 
tion  of  Rashi  that  it  means  "  between  thy  shoulders," 
where  persons  are  wont  to  be  scourged,  is  a  very  unlikely 
one.  There  is  difference  of  opinion  among  commentators 
as  to  the  meaning  of  the  answer  of  the  false  prophet  in  the 
second  half  of  the  verse.  It  greatly  depends  on  the  mean- 

1  I  Kings  xxii.  5,  6,  7,  II,  12.  '-'  I  Kings  xviii.  28. 

3  Jer.  xvi.  6,  xli.  5. 


THE  OPENED  FOUNTAIN  469 


ing  we  attach  to  the  word  '^n^P  —  rendered  "  of  my  friends," 
in  the  Authorised  Version,  but  which  might  more  properly 
be  translated  "  my  lover."  Now  Hengstenberg  and  others 
understood  the  "  lovers  "  to  signify  idols,  and  regard  the 
answer  as  a  humble  confession  on  the  part  of  the  false  prophet 
who  is  thus  detected,  either  that  his  wounds  were  received 
during  some  idolatrous  rites,  or,  though  self-inflicted,  he  was 
only  the  instrument  —  the  real  authors  of  the  wounds  beings 
Ihis  "lovers,"  namely,  the  idols  whom  he  worshipped.  But 
I  agree  with  Koehler,  Keil,  Dr.  Wright,  and  others,  that, 
though  it  be  true  that  the  special  conjugation  of  this  verb 
(piel)  is  used  in  other  cases  of  dishonourable  love,  and 
might  therefore  be  figuratively  used  of  idolatry  and  idols, 
"  there  is  nothing  in  the  form  of  the  verb  to  render  that 
meaning  necessary.  Intensity  of  love  is  all  that  is  expressed 
in  the  word  ;  and  the  expression  might,  as  far  as  the  form 
is  concerned,  be  used  with  reference  to  parents  or  any 
friends,  whether  good  or  bad." 

It  is  very  probable,  therefore,  that  far  from  being  a 
humble  confession  of  his  guilt,  "  this  answer  is  also  nothing 
but  an  evasion,  and  that  he  simply  pretends  that  the  marks 
were  scars  left  by  the  chastisements  which  he  received  when 
a  boy  in  the  house  of  either  loving  parents,  or  some  other 
loving  relations  or  friends."  * 

This  seems  to  me  more  in  accord  with  the  context,  and 
illustrates  the  general  statement  that  the  false  prophets 
would  in  that  day  themselves  be  ashamed  of  their  former 
evil  profession,  and  when  detected  would  stop  short  of  no 
falsehood  in  order  to  avert  or  dispel  suspicion. 

1  Keil.  Kimchi  explains  as  follows  :  "  He  shall  say  these  wounds  are  not  on 
account  of  prophecy,  but  my  friends  wounded  and  chastised  me  because  I  was 
abandoned,  and  was  not  industrious  in  cultivating  the  land  in  my  youth  ;  and 
they  beat  me  that  I  should  cease  from  the  profligacy  of  young  men,  and  should 
set  to  my  work.  And  the  reason  of  the  wounds  being  in  the  hands  is,  that  they 
used  to  bind  his  hands  and  feet  that  he  should  not  go  out." 


CHAPTER  XIX 

THE  SMITTEN  SHEPHERD  AND  THE 
SCATTERED  SHEEP 

(CHAPTER  xm.  7-9) 


47  > 


Awake,  O  sword,  against  My  Shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that  is  My 
Fellow,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts :  smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall  be 
scattered  ;  and  I  will  turn  My  hand  upon  the  little  ones.  And  it  shall  come  to 
pass,  that  in  all  the  land,  saith  Jehovah,  two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  and 
die  ;  but  the  third  shall  be  left  therein.  And  I  will  bring  the  third  part  into  the 
fire,  and  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,  and  will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried  : 
they  shall  call  on  My  Name,  and  I  will  hear  them  :  I  will  say,  It  is  My  people  ; 
and  they  shall  say,  Jehovah  is  my  God. 


CHAPTER    XIX 

INTRODUCTORY 

"T  "T  TITH  the  7th  verse  begins  a  new  section  in  this  last 
yy  great  prophecy  (chaps,  xii.— xiv.),  which  has  for  its 
main  theme  the  judgment  by  means  of  which  Israel 
will  be  finally  purged  and  transformed  into  the  holy  people  of 
Jehovah.  It  is  in  the  first  instance  an  expansion  and  enlarge 
ment  of  what  has  gone  before.  But,  whereas  the  preceding 
section  (xii.  I— xiii.  6)  announces  how  the  Lord  will  protect 
Israel  and  Jerusalem  against  the  pressure  of  the  world-powers, 
•how  He  will  smite  their  enemies,  and  not  only  endow  His 
people  with  miraculous  power  which  ensures  their  victory, 
but  also  by  pouring  out  His  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplica 
tions  upon  them,  lead  them  to  a  knowledge  of  the  guilt  they 
'have  incurred  by  putting  the  Messiah  to  death,  and  to 
repentance  and  renovation  of  life  ;  the  second  half  (xiii.  7— 
xiv.  21)  depicts  the  judgment  which  will  fall  on  Jerusalem 
itself,  by  means  of  which  the  ungodly  shall  be  cut  off,  and 
the  righteous  remnant  and  the  land  itself  be  purified  and 
made  fit  to  be  the  centre  of  God's  kingdom  on  the  earth. 

This  second  half  is  divided  again  into  two  parts,  the 
former  of  which  (chap.  xiii.  7-9)  gives  a  summary  of  the 
contents,  whilst  the  latter  (chap,  xiv.)  expands  it  into  fuller 
detail.1 

THE  EXPOSITION 

From  the  false  prophet  "  wounded  in  the  house  of  his 
friends,"  or  "  lovers,"  upon  whom  his  attention  had  been 
fixed  in  the  verses  immediately  preceding,  the  Spirit  of 
God  abruptly  turns  the  prophetic  gaze  of  Zechariah  on  to 

1  Condensed  from  the  valuable  remarks  of  Keil. 

473 


474     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

another  and  altogether  different  figure,  who  is  now  made 
to  pass  before  his  vision,  and  whose  experience,  if  not  fore 
shadowed,  is  at  least  suggested  by  the  treatment  which  had 
been  meted  out  to  the  false  prophet.  He  was  the  true 
prophet,  and  much  more  than  a  prophet,  but  He  also  was 
"  wounded,"  yea,  "  smitten  "  even  unto  death,  in  the  house 
of  His  friends  (i.e.,  "  His  own  "  nation),  who  in  their  blind 
and  ungodly  zeal  even  thought  that  they  rendered  God  a 
service  in  slaying  the  Prince  of  Life ;  because,  having 
become  alienated  in  their  hearts  from  God,  they  did  not 
recognise  Him  Who  is  the  very  "  image  of  the  invisible 
God,"  and  charged  Him  with  blasphemy,  because  He 
claimed  to  speak  to  them  in  the  Name  of  God,  as  one 
who  is  "  equal  with  God." 

But  this  great  national  crime,  which  has  occasioned 
them  unparalleled  sorrow  and  suffering,  was  nevertheless 
overruled  of  God  to  the  greatest  good  for  the  world  as  a 
whole,  and  is  the  very  ground  of  Israel's  future  national 
redemption.  The  slaying  of  the  Messiah,  therefore,  which, 
in  chap.  xii.  10—14,  is  viewed  as  being  the  act  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  of  which  they  shall  yet  repent  with  such 
deep  and  godly  sorrow,  is  in  the  passage  now  before  us 
described  as  an  act  of  God.  "Awake,  O  sword,  against 
My  Shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that  is  My  Fellow." 
This  aspect  of  Messiah's  sufferings  and  death,  namely, 
that  they  were  inflicted  upon  Him  by  God  in  order  to 
make  His  soul  "  an  offering  for  sin,"  is  set  forth  more  fully 
in  Isa.  liii.,  where  we  read  that  "  /'/  pleased  Jehovah  to 
bruise  Him ;  He  fiath  put  Him  to  grief"  etc.  It  was 
indeed  by  the  hand  of  man  that  "  He  was  led  as  a  lamb  to 
the  slaughter  "  ;  but,  "  human  malice  acting  freely  "  could  do 
no  more  than  what  "  His  hand  and  His  counsel  had  fore 
ordained  to  come  to  pass."  *  Yes,  "  the  envy  and  hatred 
of  Satan,  the  blind  fury  of  the  chief  priests,  the  contempt  of 
Herod,  the  guilty  cowardice  of  Pilate,  freely  accomplished 
that  death  which  God  had  before  decreed  for  the  salvation 
of  the  world." 2 

1  Acts  iv.  28.  "  Pusey. 


THE  SMITTEN  SHEPHERD  475 

But  let  us  look  more  carefully  at  this  remarkable 
passage:  "O  sword,  awake!"  (Jierebh  urt) — the  sword 
being  addressed  as  a  person,  and  called  upon  to  rouse  itself, 
as  it  were,  from  sleep  in  order  to  execute  Divine  justice.1 

But  upon  whom  shall  it  fall  ?  Not,  in  this  instance, 
upon  the  wicked  and  the  ungodly,  but,  mystery  of 
mysteries !  upon  Him  who  is  not  only  absolutely  innocent 
and  holy,  but  who  stands  in  the  nearest  and  closest  relation 
ship  to  Jehovah.  This  would  be  the  most  inexplicable 
thing  in  God's  moral  government  of  the  universe  were  it 
not  for  the  wonderful  counsel  of  God  in  the  salvation  of 
man  revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  according  to  which  the 
Messiah  willingly  becomes  the  Lamb  of  God  in  order  to 
save  a  lost  world,  and  is  "  wounded  (lit,  '  pierced  through  ') 
for  our  transgressions,  bruised  (or  '  crushed ')  for  our 
iniquities,"  and  "  pours  out  His  soul  unto  death,"  in  order 
that  sinners  might  not  only  be  saved  from  the  penalty  of 
their  sin,  but  obtain  eternal  life. 

"  Against  My  Shepherd" — Jehovah  Himself  is  "  the 
Shepherd  of  Israel,"  but  He  fulfils  all  that  is  implied  in 
this  relationship  and  office  mediately,  in  and  through  the 
Messiah.  This  is  fully  set  forth  in  Ezek.  xxxiv.,  where, 
after  announcing  that  He  will  Himself"  seek"  and  "save," 
"  heal  "  and  "  strengthen,"  "  feed  "  and  "  satisfy,"  His  now 
scattered  flock,  He  says :  "  /  will  set  up  one  shepherd  over 
them,  and  He  sliall  feed  them,  even  my  servant  David" 
(whom  the  Jewish  commentators  themselves  identify  with  the 
Messiah,  "  David's  greater  Son  ").  "  He  shall  feed  them, 
and  He  shall  be  tlieir  Shepherd?  God,  therefore,  calls 
Him  "  My  Shepherd,"  for  He  is  not  only  specially  called 
and  appointed  by  Him  to  this  office,  but  because  He  is  in 
the  fullest  sense  His  Representative,  in  and  through  whom 
the  shepherd  relationship  between  God  and  His  people 
is  realised. 

1  Compare  for  a  similar  personification  of  the  sword  of  Jehovah  Jer.  xlvii.  6,  7. 
As  already  explained  in  a  note  on  chap.  xii.  10,  the  sword  is  used  in  a  general 
way  as  an  emblem  of  death,  or  as  a  weapon  used  for  killing,  and  is  not  intended 
to  describe  the  manner  of  Messiah's  death. 


476     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  unique  and  peculiar  relationship  between  this 
"  Shepherd  "  and  Jehovah  is  fully  brought  out  in  the  words 
which  follow :  "JVOJ?  I?}  f>y  ('#/  gebher  'amithz) — "  the  man 
that  is  my  Fellow."  The  word  JVOJ?  (amit/i)  is  found  else 
where  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  only  in  Leviticus.  It  seems 
to  be  a  substantive,  and  denotes  "  fellowship,"  "  neighbour 
ship,"  in  the  abstract.  But  the  only  other  place  in  the 
Hebrew  Bible  where  this  word  is  found,  namely,  in  Leviti 
cus,  it  is  used  only  as  the  synonym  of  HN  ("  brother "),  in 
the  concrete  sense  of  the  nearest  one.1  The  two  words 
gebher  ("  man  ")  and  "  'amithi  "  ("  my  Fellow  ")  must  there 
fore  be  regarded  as  apposites,  and  have  been  properly  so 
rendered  in  the  English  Bible. 

Some  rationalistic  writers  have  sought  to  identify  the 
smitten  Shepherd  in  this  passage  with  "  the  foolish 
shepherd"  in  chap.  xi.  15—17,  who  is  permitted  to  destroy 
the  flock  in  punishment  for  their  rejection  of  the  Good 
Shepherd,  and  who  is  himself  in  the  end  smitten  with  a 
sword  on  his  right  arm  and  his  right  eye.2  If  the  expression, 
"  My  Shepherd,"  stood  alone,  there  might  be  some 
slight  plausibility  for  this  view,  for  the  "  foolish,"  or  evil 
shepherd  is,  in  a  sense,  also  raised  up  of  God  as  a  scourge 
on  the  "  sheep  of  slaughter  "  after  their  rejection  of  the  Good 
Shepherd  ;  but  the  further  description  of  the  Shepherd  in 
this  passage  as  gebher  'amithi — "  the  man  who  is  my 
Fellow,"  or  "  my  nearest  one  " — implies  much  more  than 
mere  appointment  to  this  office  by  Jehovah.  More  also 
than  mere  "unity  or  community  of  vocation,"  or  that  he  is 
so  styled  because  he  had  to  feed  the  flock  like  Jehovah, 
and  as  His  representative. 

"  No  owner  of  a  flock,  or  lord  of  a  flock,  would  call  a 
hired  or  purchased  shepherd  his  'amitk.  And  so  God 
would  not  apply  this  epithet  to  any  godly  or  ungodly  man 
whom  He  might  have  appointed  shepherd  over  a  nation. 

1  Comp.  Lev.  xxv.  15.     It  occurs  altogether  eleven  times  in  Leviticus.     Pusey 
observes :   "It  stands  alone  in  the  dialects,  having  probably  been  formed  by 
Moses  to  express  more  than  "  neighbour  " — "  our  common  nature,"  as  we  speak. 

2  See  the  exposition  of  that  passage,  page  414  ff. 


THE  SMITTEN  SHEPHERD  477 

^s  The  idea  of  nearest  one  (or  fellow)  involves  not  only 
^  similarity  in  vocation,  but  community  of  physical  or 
laa  spiritual  descent,  according  to  which  he  whom  God  calls 
•se-  His  neighbour  cannot  be  a  mere  man,  but  can  only  be  one 
m»  who  participates  in  the  Divine  nature,  or  is  essentially 
Cr-  Divine.  The  Shepherd  of  Jehovah,  whom  the  sword  is  to 
:ta  smite,  is  therefore  no  other  than  the  Messiah,  who  is  also 
&  ,  identified  with  Jehovah  in  chap.  xii.  I  o ;  or  the  Good 
in  ,  Shepherd,  who  says  of  Himself,  '  I  and  My  Father  are  one ' 
--  (John  x.  30)." 

No,  the  Shepherd  of  this  passage  is  the  Good  Shepherd, 
who,  in  chap.  xi.  4-14,  is  mysteriously  identified  with 
Jehovah,  the  same  over  whom  the  nation  will  mourn  with 
a  deep  universal  mourning  in  the  day  when  the  spirit  of 
grace  and  of  supplication  is  poured  upon  them,  and  their 
eyes  are  opened  to  perceive  that  in  piercing  Him  they 
pierced  Jehovah.1 

The  Jews  accused  our  Lord  Jesus  of  blasphemy, 
because  He  claimed  not  only  to  have  come  from  God,  but 
that  He  was  "  equal  with  God  " ;  or  because  when  speaking 
of  Himself  as  "  the  Good  Shepherd  "  who  layeth  down  His 
life  for  the  sheep,  He  said  (with  probable  allusion  to  this 
very  passage  in  Zechariah)  :  "  /  and  My  Father  are  one" 

It  was  indeed  a  mystery  passing  mere  human  compre 
hension  how  this  could  be  true  of  a  man  who  stood  in 
their  midst.  But  this  mystery  faces  us,  not  only  in  the 
pages  of  the  New  Testament,  but  in  the  inspired  Scriptures 
of  the  prophets.  There,  too,  the  promised  Redeemer  is 
depicted  as  a  babe  born  in  Bethlehem,  "  whose  goings  forth 
are  from  everlasting," 2  "  a  child  born  "  in  the  midst  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  whose  name  is  "  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
Mighty  God,  Father  of  Eternity,  Prince  of  Peace,"  3  a  son  of 
David,  yet  Jehovah  Tzidkenu,4  a  "  man,"  and  yet  Jehovah's 
"  Fellow,"  or  equal.  This  mystery,  like  others  in  the  pages 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  can  be  solved  only  by 
faith  in  things  which  are  revealed,  to  the  knowledge  of 

1  Chap.  xii.  10.  -  Mic.  v.  2. 

3  Isa.  ix.  6.  4  Jer.  xxiii.  6. 


478     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

which  man  can  never  attain  by  a  mere  process  of  reason 
ing. 

But  when  thus  laid  hold  of  with  a  pure  heart  and  in 
childlike  simplicity,  we  are  brought  also  to  understand  that 
the  doctrine  of  the  twofold  nature  of  the  Messiah — the 
fact  that  He  is  Man  according  to  His  human  nature  and, 
according  to  His  Divine  nature  "  God  blessed  for  ever,"  is  a 
necessary  part  in  the  Divine  philosophy  of  Redemption 
unfolded  in  the  Scriptures,  for  it  is  only  a  Divine  Saviour 
who  could  redeem  man  from  sin  and  death ;  only  one  in 
whose  person  the  human  and  the  Divine  meet  who  can  be 
the  true  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  in  and  through 
whom  the  broken  fellowship  between  heaven  and  earth, 
between  the  Holy  God  and  fallen  man,  can  be  fully  restored. 
Only  as  man,  and  one  who  in  all  points  was  tempted  even 
as  we  are,  could  He  become  the  compassionate  High  Priest 
touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  able  with 
a  perfect  human  sympathy  to  enter  into  all  our  griefs  and 
sorrows  ;  but  only  as  the  Holy  One,  who  Himself  was  pure 
from  sin — the  everlasting  Son  of  the  Father  in  whom  dwelt 
"  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,"  could  He  effectually 
succour  and  deliver  us,  and  lift  us  out  of  our  own  innate 
wretchedness  and  sin. 

Therefore,  this  doctrine  of  the  twofold  nature  of  the 
Messiah,  which  to  the  unbelieving  is  such  an  occasion  of 
stumbling,  is  to  the  child  of  God  a  source  of  unspeakable 
comfort,  and  an  occasion  for  unceasing  praise. 

But  this  is  somewhat  of  a  digression.  To  return  to  the 
passage  immediately  before  us,  it  is  interesting  to  observe 
that  Jewish  commentators  themselves  have  admitted  that 
the  word  "famithin  ("my  Fellow")  implies  equality  with 
God  ;  "  only  since  they  own  not  Him  who  was  God  and 
Man  they  must  interpret  it  of  a  false  claim  on  the  part  of 
man,"  overlooking  that  it  is  God  Himself  who  thus  speaks 
of  the  shepherd  of  his  text.1 

1  Aben  Ezra  (1088-1177)  interprets  it  of  the  Gentile  kings,  who  in  their  arro 
gance  are  styled  Divine,  and  thus  called  themselves  "God's  fellows."  Kimchi 
adopts  the  same  interpretation,  adding,  "thinks  himself  my  Fellow."  Rabbi 


THE  SMITTEN  SHEPHERD  479 

The  immediate  consequence  of  the  smiting  of  the 
Shepherd  is  that  "  tJie  sheep  shall  be  scattered"  or,  as  the 
Hebrew  verb  more  accurately  expresses  it,  "  that  the  sheep 
may  be  scattered"  For,  although  the  slaying  of  the 
Messiah  is  (as  stated  above)  overruled  of  God  to  the 
eventual  gathering  and  blessing,  not  only  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  but  of  those  many  millions  of  "  other  sheep  "  from 
among  the  Gentiles,  who  are,  as  the  result  of  Messiah's 
death,  brought  into  the  one  fold — yet  the  fact  of  the 
removal  by  a  violent  death,  as  the  direct  consequence  of 
national  sin  and  rebellion  against  God,  of  Him  who  was 
appointed  to  be  their  Shepherd,  could  not  but  bring 
calamity  on  the  flock.  And  this — the  consequent  disaster 
which  it  would  bring  on  the  people — is  the  primary  thought 
associated  with  the  slaying  of  the  Messiah  in  this  particular 
passage.  It  announces  the  fact  that  Jehovah  will  scatter 
the  flock  by  smiting  the  shepherd  :  "  That  is  to  say,  He 
will  give  it  up  to  the  misery  and  destruction  to  which  a 
flock  without  a  shepherd  is  exposed." 

The  flock  which  is  to  be  thus  "  scattered  "  is  neither  the 
human  race  nor  the  Christian  Church,  as  some  commentators 
would  have  us  think,  but  the  Jewish  nation,  or  those  which 
the  Good  Shepherd  was  appointed  to  feed,  according  to 
chap.  xi.  1-14,  but  who,  because  of  their  wilful  obduracy, 
are  designated  "  sheep  of  slaughter" 

It  was  primarily  fulfilled  when,  after  the  crucifixion  of 
our  Lord,  "  the  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  " x — 
that  is,  the  Romans — destroyed  the  city  and  the  sanctuary, 

Izaak  of  Troki,  in  the  Chizzuk  Etnunah,  interprets  the  whole  of  the  King  of 
Ishmael,  "called  also  the  King  of  Turkey,"  who  in  his  pride  and  greatness  of 
his  heart  "accounts  himself  like  God."  This  is  a  modification  and  enlargement 
of  the  interpretation  given  by  Abrabanel,  who  explains  the  words  "  My  Shepherd  " 
of  Mohammed,  and  the  words  "  the  man  my  Fellow  "  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  in  a  bitter 
controversial  spirit,  thus:  The  words,  "the  Man  my  Fellow,"  are  spoken  of 
Jesus  the  Nazarene,  for,  according  to  the  sentiment  of  the  children  of  Edom  (i.e., 
the  Christians)  and  their  faith,  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the  same 
substance,  and  therefore  He  is  called,  according  to  their  words,  "  the  Man  my 
Fellow," — overlooking  the  fact  pointed  out  above  that  it  is  not  man  but  Jehovah 
Himself  who  calls  Him  "  My  Shepherd  "  and  "  My  Fellow." 
1  Dan.  ix.  26. 


480     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  brought  about  the  new  and  more  universal  phase  of 
the  dispersal  of  the  Jewish  people  among  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth,  which  is  continued  to  this  day. 

But  while  this  terrible  judgment  would  fall  on  the 
nation,  a  little  remnant  would  remain  the  object  of  His 
compassion  and  care.  This  is  expressed  in  the  words 
D'njfon  hy  ST  'nia^ni  (vehashibhothi  yadi  al  hatsoarim}  —  "  I 
will  turn  My  hand  upon  (or  '  back  upon  ')  the  little  (or 
'  small  '  ones)." 

The  idiomatic  phrase,  "  to  turn  (or  '  bring  back  ')  the 
hand  over  a  person,"  is  usually  used  in  connection  with  the 
infliction  of  judgment  ;  as,  for  instance,  in  Amos  i.  8,  "  I 
will  turn  My  hand  over  (or  '  against  '  Ekron  "  ;  or 
Ps.  Ixxxi.  14:  "I  should  soon  have  subdued  their  enemies, 
and  turned  My  hand  over  ('  against  ')  their  adversaries." 
But  I  agree  with  Keil,  Hitzig,  Dr.  Wright,  and  others, 
that  the  phrase  is  used  here  in  a  good  sense,  namely,  that 
God  will  turn  His  hand  upon  "  the  little  ones,"  for  salvation, 
though  that  salvation  may  be  brought  about  by  means  of 
chastisement.  It  occurs  in  this  sense  in  Isa.  i.  25,  "in 
relation  to  the  grace  which  the  Lord  will  manifest  towards 
Jerusalem  by  purifying  it  from  its  dross  "  ;  and  it  is  used 
here  in  Zech.  xiii.,  also  in  that  same  sense  as  vers.  8  and  9 
clearly  show,  according  to  which  the  judgment  which  is  to 
come  upon  Israel  in  consequence  of  the  Shepherd  being 
smitten,  will  only  be  the  cause  of  ruin  to  the  greater 
portion  of  the  nation,  whereas  it  will  bring  salvation  to  the 
remnant. 

The  particular  form  of  the  word  translated  "  little 
ones  "  (tsoarim)  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  Hebrew- 
Bible.  Its  true  signification  is,  "  those  who  appear  as  little" 
"  those  who  make  themselves  small,  or,"  the  patient,  the 
humble  ones.1 

They  are  to  be  identified  with  "  the  poor  of  the  flock  " 
of  chap.  xi.  7,  namely,  the  poor  and  righteous  in  the  nation 
who  suffer  oppression  from  the  godless  majority. 


i'  is  not  equivalent  to  the  adjective  Q'TJJ?.     It  is  the  active  participial 
form  of  the  verb  iyy,  and  is  found  only  in  this  passage. 


THE  SMITTEN  SHEPHERD  481 

The  prophetic  message,  then,  in  the  whole  of  the  yth 
verse  is  briefly  this :  The  Shepherd  would  be  smitten  on 
account  of  the  sin  of  the  people,  who  would  in  consequence 
be  scattered,  but  Jehovah  would  remember  in  mercy  a  little 
remnant  of  the  flock,  namely,  the  poor  in  spirit,  the  humble 
ones  who  are  little  in  their  own  eyes,  and  who  give  heed  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord.1 

The  prophecy  finds  its  fulfilment  in  Christ :  "  The 
Shepherd  was  slain  " ;  as  another  writer  truly  observes : 
"  When  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  crucified — an  act  ascribed 
in  the  New  Testament  no  less  to  the  determinate  counsel 
and  foreknowledge  of  God,  on  the  one  hand,  than  to  the 
malice  of  men  on  the  other."  And  there,  in  the  same 
inspired  narrative  which  tells  of  the  smiting  of  the  Shepherd, 
we  read  also  of  another  fulfilment  of  the  scattering  of  the 
flock,  which  is,  so  to  say,  additional  to  the  primary  mean 
ing  of  the  prophecy,  but  is  not  altogether  unconnected  with 
the  scattering  of  Israel  and  the  saving  of  the  remnant. 

On  the  night  of  His  betrayal,  after  He  had  partaken 
for  the  last  time  of  the  Paschal  Supper,  and  transformed  it 
to  be  henceforth  the  memorial  supper  of  His  death  "  till  He 
come,"  our  Lord  Jesus  said  to  His  disciples  :  "All ye  shall 
be  offended  in  Me  this  night,  for  it  is  written,  I  will  smite 
the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered 
abroad.  But,  after  I  am  raised  up,  I  will  go  before  you  into 
Galilee."  2 

The  reference  is  to  this  passage  in  Zechariah,  though 
the  quotation  is  a  free  one,  and  does  not  in  every  detail 
correspond  with  the  words  in  the  Hebrew.  The  meaning 
of  the  passage  is,  however,  preserved  intact.  Where  the 
words  are  slightly  modified,  it  is  (as  is  usually  the  case 
with  free  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament  in  the  pages 
of  the  New)  designedly  so,  with  a  view  to  throw  a  new,  or 
additional,  meaning  on  Old  Testament  prophecy  in  the 
light  of  the  fuller  unfolding  of  God's  purpose  brought  about 
by  the  actual  advent  of  the  Messiah.  Thus,  the  address  to 
the  sword  to  awake  and  smite,  resolves  itself  in  the  quota- 

1  Chap.  xi.  ii.  2  Matt.  xxvi.  31,  32  ;  Mark  xiv.  27  (R.V.). 

31 


482     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

tion  into  its  actual  meaning,  "  /  will  smite"  The  offend 
ing  of  the  disciples  took  place  when  Jesus  was  taken 
prisoner,  and  they  all  fled.  This  flight  was  a  prelude  to 
the  dispersion  of  the  flock  at  the  death  of  the  Shepherd. 
The  closing  words  of  our  Lord,  "  I  will  go  before  you  into 
Galilee,"  is,  I  think,  rightly  taken  by  Keil  and  others  as  a 
practical  exposition  of  the  words  of  the  prophet,  "  /  will 
turn  My  hand  upon  the  little  (or  '  humble ')  ones,"  inasmuch  as 
it  was  a  promise  of  their  re-gathering  to  Him  and  of  His 
care  for  them  after  His  resurrection. 

But,  to  repeat,  this  special  fulfilment  did  not  exhaust 
the  meaning  of  the  prophecy  as  some  erroneously  think. 
"  The  correct  view,"  to  quote  again  from  an  English  writer, 
"  appears  to  be  that  the  desertion  of  Christ  in  the  hour  of 
trial  by  His  most  faithful  followers,  whereby  they  were 
scattered  every  man  to  his  own,  and  left  the  Saviour  alone  x 
— a  desertion  which  added  so  much  to  the  bitterness  of 
that  '  hour  of  darkness  ' — was  indeed  of  importance  in  itself, 
but  still  more  so  as  prefiguring  the  rejection  of  Christ  by 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  terrible  scattering  of  the  flock  of 
Israel."  2 

That  the  primary  reference  of  the  words,  "  the  flock 
shall  be  scattered,"  etc.,  is  to  the  Jewish  nation,  is  placed 
beyond  a  doubt  by  the  verses  which  follow,  for  the  8th 
verse  sets  forth  the  misery  which  the  dispersion  of  the  flock 
brings  upon  Israel,  and  the  9th  verse  shows  how  the  words, 
"  I  will  turn  My  hand  upon  (or,  '  back  upon ')  the  little 
ones,"  would  be  realised  in  the  final  deliverance  and  salva 
tion  of  the  remnant :  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  in  all 
the  land,  saitli  Jehovah,  two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off,  shall 
die,  and  the  third  part  shall  remain  therein.  And  I  will 
bring  the  third  part  through  (lit.,  '  into ')  the  fire,  and  refine 
(or  '  melt ')  them  as  silver  is  refined" 

The  idiomatic  expression  DW  ""S  {pi  sttnaynri]  is  found 
in  Deut.  xxi.  1 7  and  2  Kings  ii.  9,  and  is  primarily  used 
of  the  "  double  portion "  inherited  by  the  first-born  ;  but 
here,  in  Zechariah,  it  means  two-thirds,  as  is  shown  by  the 

1  John  xvi.  32.  2  C.  H.  H.  Wright. 


THE  SMITTEN  SHEPHERD  483 

use  of  the  word  hq  shelishith  ("  the  third  part  ")  in  the  second 
half  of  the  verse. 

A  parallel  to  this  scripture  is  found  in  Ezek.  v.  1 2, 
where  the  nation  is  also  divided  into  three  parts :  "  A  third 
part  of  thee  (shelishith}  shall  die  with  the  pestilence,  .  .  . 
and  a  third  part  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  .  .  .  and  a  third 
part  1  will  scatter  unto  all  the  winds" 

"  The  whole  of  the  Jewish  nation,"  observes  Hengsten- 
berg,  "  is  introduced  here  as  an  inheritance  left  by  the 
Shepherd  who  has  been  put  to  death,  which  inheritance  is 
divided  into  three  parts:  death  claiming  the  privilege  of 
the  first-born,  and  so  receiving  two  portions,  and  life  one — a 
division  similar  to  that  which  David  made  in  the  case  of 
the  Moabites."  *  The  literalness  of  this  division  must  not, 
however,  be  pressed.  Isaiah,  for  instance,2  speaks  of  only 
a  tenth  part  as  escaping  from  the  great  purging  judgment. 
Both  expressions,  as  Dr.  Wright  properly  observes,  are  to 
be  regarded  as  emblematic  for  a  comparatively  small 
number,  and  not  as  describing  the  exact  proportion  of  the 
remnant  that  should  escape. 

The  emphatic  word,  aa  ("  therein  "),  or  literally,  "  in  it," 
which  is  twice  repeated,  refers  to  the  land  and  not  to  the 
flock,  as  some  interpreters  explain :  "  In  all  the  land  .  .  . 
two-thirds  in  it  shall  be  cut  off,  shall  die"  It  seems  to  me, 
therefore,  that,  though  the  fulfilment  may  not  be  entirely 
limited  to  it,  yet,  that  the  reference  is  chiefly  to  the  judg 
ments  which  would  come  on  the  people  in  the  land,  namely, 
immediately  after  the  "  smiting  of  the  Shepherd,"  while 
they  were  yet  recognised  as  a  nation  in  Palestine,  though 
no  longer  in  a  nationally  independent  condition ;  and  again 
after  the  restoration  of  a  representative  remnant  in  unbelief 
at  the  end  of  the  long  parenthetical  period,  when  God's 
national  dealings  with  them  shall  be  resumed,  and  His  long 
controversy  with  them  as  a  nation  on  account  of  their 
great  sin  finally  settled  on  the  same  soil  where  it  origin 
ated. 

And  with  what  terrible  literalness  has  this  Divine  fore- 

1  2  Sam.  vjii.  2.  *  Isa.  vi.  13. 


484     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

cast  been  verified !  During  the  futile,  but  heroic,  struggle 
with  the  great  Roman  power,  which  commenced  so  soon 
after  the  crucifixion  of  the  Messiah,  and  lasted  seven  years, 
about  one  million  and  a  half  Jews  perished  in  the  land  by 
the  sword  and  by  famine  and  pestilence.  Great  numbers 
of  Jews  were  crucified  by  the  Romans  outside  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem,  while  many  thousands  were  taken  in  ships  to 
Egypt  and  sold  as  slaves.  Then,  not  to  speak  of  the  great 
numbers  of  Jews  who  were  during  the  same  time  done  to 
death  in  different  parts  of  the  Roman  Empire,  only  some 
sixty  years  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  a 
calamity  of  almost  equal  magnitude  overtook  the  Jewish 
people  "  throughout  all  the  land,"  consequent  on  their 
renewed  rising  under  the  false  Messiah,  Bar  Cochba.1 

Then,  after  the  "  two-thirds"  in  the  land  were  "  cut  off," 
the  remainder  of  "  the  sheep  of  the  flock  "  were  "  scattered  "  ; 
for  a  new  stage — the  universal  phase  in  the  dispersion  of 
the  Jewish  nation  took  place  consequent  on  the  culmination 
of  Israel's  apostasy  in  the  rejection  of  their  Messiah. 

Throughout  all  these  centuries  the  Jews  have  suffered 
as  no  other  nation  on  earth.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  according  to  reliable  computations,  there 
were  only  about  one  million  Jews  left  in  the  whole  world 
after  the  centuries  of  oppression  and  unparalleled  sufferings 
which  they  had  had  to  endure,  especially  throughout  the 
dark  Middle  Ages. 

And  there  is  yet  a  climax  to  all  their  sufferings  to  be 
reached  in  the  "Day"  of  Jacob's  final  great  "trouble,"2 
when  they  are  once  again  "  in  the  land  "  and  God's  "  fire  " 
is  kindled  in  Zion,  and  His  "  furnace  "  set  up  in  Jerusalem  3 

1  Five  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  Jews  are  said,  by  Jewish  historians,  to 
have  perished  by  the  sword  in  the  siege  at  the  fall  of  Bithar,  besides  those  who 
perished  by   famine  and  sickness.     "Judea   was  almost  wholly  a   wilderness." 
Fifty  castles  and  two  hundred  and  eighty-five  villages  were  entirely  destroyed. 
At  the  yearly  market,  by  Abraham's  Oak,  at  Hebron,  Jewish  slaves  were  sold 
at  a  nominal  price  ;  a  Jew  was  worth  no  more  than  a  horse.     See  the  summary 
of  Jewish  History   since  the  Dispersion,   in   The  Shepherd  of  Israel  and  His 
Scattered  Flock. 

2  Jer.  xxx.  7.  3  Isa.  xxxi.  9. 


THE  SMITTEN  SHEPHERD  485 

for  the  final   purging  of  the  nation.      And  yet  in  this  very 
prophecy  we  see  mercy  blended  with  judgment. 

Two-thirds  may  be  "cut  off"  and  die,  but  the  nation 
can  never  be  utterly  destroyed.  There  is  always  "  a  third," 
or  "  a  tenth,"  which  forms  the  indestructible  "  holy  seed,"  * 
which  God  takes  care  to  preserve  as  the  nucleus  of  the 
great  and  blessed  nation  through  whom  His  holy  will  and 
His  wonderful  purposes  in  relation  to  this  earth  shall  yet 
be  realised.  "  I  will  make  a  full  end,"  He  says,  "  of  all 
nations  whither  I  have  scattered  thee,  but  I  will  not  make 
a  full  end  of  thee." 

Hence,  no  fires  of  tribulation,  however  hot,  have  been 
able  utterly  to  consume  them  ;  and  no  waters  of  affliction, 
however  deep,  to  drown  them. 

And  the  end  of  the  Lord  in  all  the  chastisements  and 
judgments  with  which  He  has  to  visit  His  people  on 
account  of  their  great  and  manifold  sins,  is  not  their 
destruction,  but  that  they  may,  by  these  very  judgments, 
as  well  as  by  the  abundant  mercy  which  He  will  reveal  to 
them  "  in  that  day,"  be  brought  as  a  nation  fully,  and  for 
ever,  to  know  Him,  in  all  the  Divine  perfections  of  His 
glorious  character,  so  as  to  be  able  to  fulfil  their  fore 
ordained  mission  to  show  forth  His  praise,  and  to  proclaim 
His  glory  among  the  nations. 

Hence  the  "  refining  "  and  the  "  trying,"  or  "  testing,"  of 
even  "  the  third  part,"  or  little  remnant,  as  set  forth  in  the 
9th  verse.  This,  I  believe,  refers  more  particularly  to  the 
remnant  in  the  land  at  the  time  of  the  very  end,  immedi 
ately  before  their  final  glorious  deliverance.  Then, 
particularly,  He  will  "  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,  and 
will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried,"  for  in  the  words  of  Malachi, 
"  He  will  be  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fullers'  sope."  He 
shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver,  "  and  shall  purge 
and  purify  them  that  they  may  offer  unto  Jehovah  offerings 
in  righteousness."  2 

But  from  the  midst  of  this  fiery  furnace  of  tribulation 
"  tJiey  shall  call  on  My  Name  and  I  will  hear  them  :  I  will 

1  Isa.  vi.  13.  2  Mai.  iii.  2-4.     See  also  Ps.  Ixvi.  10-12. 


486     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

say,  Ammi-hu.     It  is  My  people  ;  and  they  shall  say,  Yehovah 
Elohoi,  Jehovah  is  my  Godl 

Blessed  and  most  glorious  consummation  !  The  cove 
nant  relationship  between  God  and  His  people,  so  long 
interrupted  though  never  broken,  is  restored  again ;  she 
that  was,  during  the  time  of  her  wanderings  from  her  God, 
Lo-ammi — "  not  My  people,"  is"Ammz"2 — "My  people" 
again  ;  the  national  vow  of  Israel  by  which  they  avouched 
Jehovah  to  be  their  God,  to  walk  in  His  ways,  and  ever  to 
hearken  to  His  voice,  is  now  renewed,  never  to  be  broken 
again.3  Well  might  the  prophets — contemplating  the  day 
when  restored  and  converted  Israel  shall  once  again  be,  as 
it  were,  pressed  to  God's  own  heart,  and  in  view  of  the 
glorious  issues  which  shall  result  to  the  whole  world  from 
this  restoration  of  covenant  relations  between  God  and 
"  His  own  "  people — call  upon  the  whole  creation  to  join  in 
a  grand  chorus  of  praise. 

"  Sing,  O  heavens  ;  and  be  joyful,  O  earth  ; 
And  break  forth  into  singing,  O  mountains  : 
For  Jehovah  hath  comforted  His  people, 
And  will  have  compassion  upon  His  afflicted?  4 

1  See  Jer.  xxxii.  38-42  ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  23-28,  and  other  places  in  the  former 
prophets,  of  which  this  is  an  inspired  echo  and  reiteration. 

3  Hos.  i.  9-11.  *  Deut.  xxvi.  17-19.  4  Isa.  xlix.  13. 


CHAPTER    XX 
THE    GLORIOUS    CONSUMMATION 

MESSIAH'S  VISIBLE  APPEARING  AS  THE  DELIVERER 
OF  ISRAEL  AND  THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GOD'S 
KINGDOM  ON  EARTH 

(CHAPTER  xiv) 


487 


Behold,  a  day  of  Jehovah  cometh,  when  thy  spoil  shall  be  divided  in  the 
midst  of  thee.  For  I  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem  to  battle  ;  and  the 
city  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses  rifled,  and  the  women  ravished  :  and  half  of 
the  city  shall  go  forth  into  captivity,  and  the  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be 
cut  off  from  the  city.  Then  shall  Jehovah  go  forth,  and  fight  against  those 
nations,  as  when  He  fought  in  the  day  of  battle.  And  His  feet  shall  stand  in  that 
day  upon  the  mount  of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east,  and  the 
mount  of  Olives  shall  be  cleft  in  the  midst  thereof  toward  the  east  and  toward 
the  west,  and  there  shall  be  a  very  great  valley  ;  and  half  of  the  mountain  shall 
remove  toward  the  north,  and  half  of  it  toward  the  south.  And  ye  shall  flee  by 
the  valley  of  My  mountains ;  for  the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach  unto 
Azel :  yea,  ye  shall  flee,  like  as  ye  fled  from  before  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of 
Uzziah  king  of  Judah  :  and  Jehovah  my  God  shall  come,  and  all  the  holy  ones 
with  Thee.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  there  shall  not  be  light : 
the  bright  ones  shall  withdraw  themselves  :  but  it  shall  be  one  day  which  is 
known  unto  Jehovah  ;  not  day,  and  not  night  :  but  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  at 
evening  time  there  shall  be  light.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that 
living  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem  ;  half  of  them  toward  the  eastern  sea, 
and  half  of  them  toward  the  western  sea  :  in  summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be. 
And  Jehovah  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth  :  in  that  day  shall  Jehovah  be  one, 
and  His  name  one.  All  the  land  shall  be  made  like  the  Arabah,  from  Geba  to 
Rimmon  south  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  she  shall  be  lifted  up,  and  shall  dwell  in  her 
place,  from  Benjamin's  gate  unto  the  place  of  the  first  gate,  unto  the  corner  gate, 
and  from  the  tower  of  Hananel  unto  the  king's  winepresses.  And  men  shall 
dwell  therein,  and  there  shall  be  no  more  curse  ;  but  Jerusalem  shall  dwell 
safely.  And  this  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith  Jehovah  will  smite  all  the  peoples 
that  have  warred  against  Jerusalem  :  their  flesh  shall  consume  away  while  they 
stand  upon  their  feet,  and  their  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their  sockets,  and 
their  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their  mouth.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  that  a  great  tumult  from  Jehovah  shall  be  among  them  ;  and  they 
shall  lay  hold  every  one  on  the  hand  of  his  neighbour,  and  his  hand  shall  rise 
up  against  the  hand  of  his  neighbour.  And  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  Jerusalem  ; 
and  the  wealth  of  all  the  nations  round  about  shall  be  gathered  together,  gold, 
and  silver,  and  apparel  in  great  abundance.  And  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the 
horse,  of  the  mule,  of  the  camel,  and  of  the  ass,  and  of  all  the  beasts  that  shall 
be  in  those  camps,  as  that  plague.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  one 
that  is  left  of  all  the  nations  that  came  against  Jerusalem  shall  go  up  from  year  to 
year  to  worship  the  King,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles. 
And  it  shall  be,  that  whoso  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  goeth  not  up  unto 
Jerusalem  to  worship  the  King,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  upon  them  there  shall  be  no 
rain.  And  if  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up,  and  come  not,  neither  shall  it  be 
upon  them  ;  there  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith  Jehovah  will  smite  the  nations 
that  go  not  up  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  This  shall  be  the  punishment 
of  Egypt,  and  the  punishment,  of  all  the  nations  that  go  not  up  to  keep  the  feast 
of  tabernacles.  In  that  day  shall  there  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses,  Holy 
unto  Jehovah  ;  and  the  pots  in  Jehovah's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before  the 
altar.  Yea,  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judah  shall  be  holy  unto  Jehovah  of 
hosts  :  and  all  they  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take  of  them,  and  boil  therein  : 
and  in  that  day  there  shall  be  no  more  a  Canaanite  in  the  house  of  Jehovah  of 
hosts. 

488 


INTRODUCTORY 

PERHAPS  in  connection  with  no  other  scripture  do 
the  contradictions  and  absurdities  of  the  allegorising 
commentators  appear  so  clearly  as  in  their  interpre 
tations  of  this  1 4th  chapter  of  Zechariah.     Thus,  according 
to    Hengstenberg,    Keil,   and  others   of  the   older  German 
expositors,  who  are  followed  by  such  English  scholars  as 
Pusey  and  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  to  whose  works  I  have  so  often 
referred  in   this  exposition,  "  Israel,"  in  this  last  section  of 
Zechariah,  "  denotes  the  people  of  God  in  contradistinction 
to  the  peoples  of  the  world  ;  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
'with  the  house  of  David,  and  Judah  with  its  princes,  as  the 
!  i representatives  of  Israel,  are  typical  epithets  applied  to  the 
representatives  and   members  of  the  new-covenant  people, 
namely,  the  Christian   Church ;  and  Jerusalem  and  Judah, 
as    the  inheritance  of    Israel,  are  types  of  the    seats  and 
territories  of  Christendom." l 

And  yet,  when  it  is  a  question  of  judgment,  as,  for 
instance,  the  statement  that  "  two  thirds  shall  be  cut  off 
and  die  in  the  land,"  then,  of  course,  they  are  agreed  that 
those  "cut  off"  are  literal  Jews,  and  "  the  land  "  Palestine. 

Or  again,  when  it  is  a  prediction  which  has  already  been 
fulfilled,  such  as  the  piercing  of  the  Messiah  in  chap.  xii.  10, 
or  the  smiting  of  the  shepherd  and  the  scattering  of  the 
flock  in  chap.  xiii.  7,  then  it  is  to  be  understood  literally  ; 
but  when  the  prophet  speaks  of  things  of  which  no  fulfil 
ment  can  yet  be  found  in  history,  then  the  words,  however 
definite  and  particular,  must  be  spiritualised,  and  "  Jeru 
salem  "  is  no  longer  the  capital  of  the  Promised  Land,  but 

1  Keil. 

489 


490     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  the  Church,"  and  "  Israel  "  no  longer  the  literal  descendants 
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  but  "  the  people  of  God,"  by 
which,  as  is  seen  in  the  quotation  given  above,  is  meant 
"  Christendom." 

But  that  is  not  really  a  spiritual  way  of  interpreting 
Scripture,  which  robs  it  of  its  simple  and  obvious  sense. 

Kliefoth,  Keil,  etc.,  speak  of  the  views  expressed  by 
Koehler  and  Hoffmann  in  their  works  on  Zechariah,  that 
this  chapter  refers  to  a  yet  future  siege  of  Jerusalem  after 
the  return  of  the  Jews  in  a  condition  of  unbelief,  and  of 
their  deliverance  by  the  appearing  of  Christ,  as  "  Jewish 
Chiliasm,"  but  Jewish  Chiliasm  was  not  all  wrong.  There 
is  a  Messianic  Kingdom — a  literal  reign  of  peace  and 
righteousness  on  the  earth,  with  Israel  as  its  centre ;  but 
where  Jewish  Chiliasm  erred  was  that  it  overlooked,  or 
explained  away,  the  sufferings  of  the  Messiah  which 
precede  the  glory.  The  question  is  if  these  allegorising 
commentators  are  not  as  much  in  the  dark  in  relation  to 
the  Second  Coming  and  the  glory  that  should  follow,  as 
the  Jews  were  in  relation  to  His  First  Advent  and  His 
atoning  suffering  and  death. 

In  the  words  of  a  true  master  in  Israel :  "  The  literal 
fulfilment  of  many  prophecies  has  already  taken  place.  It 
belongs  to  history.  But  the  Christian  has  no  more  diffi 
culty  in  believing  the  future  fulfilment  of  prophecy  than  in 
crediting  the  record  of  history.  He  believes  because  God 
has  spoken,  because  it  is  written.  To  believe  that  the 
Jews  are  scattered  among  all  nations,  that  Jerusalem  was 
destroyed  by  the  Romans,  that  of  the  Temple  not  one 
stone  was  left  upon  another,  requires  no  spiritual  faith — it 
requires  only  common  information.  But  to  believe  that 
Israel  will  be  restored,  Jerusalem  rebuilt,  and  that  all 
nations  shall  come  up  against  the  beloved  city  and  besiege 
it,  and  that  the  Lord  Jehovah  shall  appear  and  stand  on 
the  Mount  of  Olives,  requires  faith,  for  it  is  as  yet  only 
written  in  the  Bible.  But  what  difference  does  it  make  to 
the  child  of  God  whether  the  prophecy  is  fulfilled  or  not  ? 
Can  he  for  a  moment  doubt  it  ? 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  491 

"  And  when  we  remember  how  literally  prophecy  has 
been  fulfilled,  we  cannot  but  expect  as  literal  a  fulfilment 
in  the  future. 

"  How  natural  it  would  have  been  for  those  who  lived 
before  the  First  Advent,  to  think  that  only  the  spiritual 
features  of  the  Messiah's  Coming  and  Kingdom  could  be 
the  object  of  inspired  prophecy,  and  that  the  outward  and 
minute  circumstances  predicted  were  either  allegorical  and 
figurative,  or  only  the  drapery  and  embellishment  of 
important  and  essential  truths.  And  yet  the  fulfilment 
was  minute  even  in  subordinate  detail."1  For  our  own 
part,  it  is  unnecessary  to  say,  after  what  we  have  already 
written  on  chaps,  xii.  and  xiii.,  that  we  have  here  a  great 
and  solemn  prophecy  which  will  yet  be  literally  fulfilled 
in  the  future.  And  when  it  is  objected  by  some  of  the 
modern  writers  that  the  literal  fulfilment  is  "  impossible," 
because  it  would  involve  not  only  national  upheavals,  but 
physical  convulsions  of  nature,  our  answer  is  that  this  is 
just  what  the  prophet  declares  as  most  certainly  to  take  place  ; 
and,  as  if  to  anticipate  the  objection  on  the  ground  of 
its  being  naturally  "  impossible,"  or,  according  to  human 
judgment,  "  improbable,"  he  reminds  us  at  the  very  outset 
of  this  section  of  his  prophecy  that  it  is  the  ivord  of 
Jehovah,  "  Who  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  and  layeth  the 
foundation  of  the  earth,  and  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within 
him"  2  with  whom  nothing  is  impossible. 

THE  EXPOSITION  3 

The  first  verses  of  this  fourteenth  chapter,  which  are 
an  expansion  and  amplification  of  the  last  three  verses  of 
the  preceding  chapter,  lead  us  back,  I  believe,  to  the  point 
of  time  with  which  the  twelfth  chapter  opens,  and  tells  us 

1  Adolph  Saphir.  a  Chap.  xii.  I. 

3  The  exposition  of  the  first  seven  verses  of  this  chapter — now  slightly  altered 
— was  originally  written  out  and  read  as  "a  paper"  at  a  meeting  of  the 
"  Prophecy  Investigation  Society,"  which  also  printed  it  for  private  circulation 
among  the  members.  This  will  account  for  its  being  slightly  different  in  form 
and  style  from  my  exposition  generally. 


492     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

of  the  judgment  which  is  first  allowed  of  God  to  be 
inflicted  on  Jerusalem  in  the  final  great  siege  by  means  of 
the  marshalled  Gentile  armies,  whose  subsequent  sudden 
destruction  these  chapters  prophetically  set  forth  with  all 
the  vividness  of  an  historic  event  depicted  by  an  eye-witness. 

Nor  need  we  be  surprised  to  find  in  this  chapter  a 
partial  reiteration  of  events  which  had  already  been 
announced  by  the  prophet  in  chaps,  xii.  and  xiii. ;  for,  to 
quote  a  few  sentences  from  a  writer  with  whose  interpreta 
tion  of  the  last  chapters  of  Zechariah  I  am  utterly  at 
variance,  "  the  prophets  frequently  speak  generally  of  the 
final  results  of  an  event,  and  afterwards  proceed  to  give 
further  details.  Any  attempt  to  regard  all  the  statements 
of  the  prophets  as  necessarily  succeeding  one  another  in 
chronological  order,  would  reduce  many  of  these  prophecies 
to  a  mass  of  confusion."  This  observation  is  true. 

But  it  is  necessary  briefly  to  summarise  the  probable 
events  which  lead  up  to  the  supreme  crisis  into  the  midst 
of  which  we  are  introduced  in  this  last  chapter  of  Zechariah. 

First  of  all  we  have  to  suppose  a  restoration  of  the 
Jews  in  a  condition  of  unbelief — not  a  complete  restoration 
of  the  whole  nation,  which  will  not  take  place  till  after  their 
conversion,  but  of  a  representative  and  influential  remnant. 

It  seems  from  Scripture  that  in  relation  to  Israel  and 
the  land  there  will  be  a  restoration,  before  the  Second 
Advent  of  our  Lord,  of  very  much  the  same  state  of  things 
as  existed  at  the  time  of  His  First  Advent,  when  the 
threads  of  God's  dealing  with  them  nationally  were  finally 
dropped,  not  to  be  taken  up  again  "  until  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles  shall  be  fulfilled." 

There  was  at  that  time  a  number  of  Jews  in  Palestine 
representative  of  the  nation  ;  but  compared  with  the 
number  of  their  brethren,  who  were  already  a  diaspora 
among  the  nations,  they  were  a  mere  minority,  and  not  in 
a  politically  independent  condition. 

So  it  will  be  again.  There  will  be  at  first,  as  compared 
with  the  whole  nation,  only  a  representative  minority  in 
Palestine,  and  a  Jewish  state  will  be  probably  formed, 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  493 

either  under  the  suzerainty  of  one  of  the  Great  Powers,  or 
under  international  protection. 

The  nucleus  of  this  politically  independent  Jewish 
state  is  already  to  be  seen  in  the  120,000  Jews  who  have 
wandered  back  from  all  regions  of  the  earth  to  the  land  of 
their  fathers. 

Already  Jerusalem  before  the  war  was  almost  a  Jewish 
city,  while  the  thirty  and  more  Jewish  colonies  which 
dotted  the  land  were  described  by  a  prominent  English 
Jew  as  "  so  many  milestones  marking  the  advance  which 
Israel  is  making  towards  national  rehabilitation."  And  in 
no  other  country  in  the  world  do  the  Jews,  to  the  same 
extent,  represent  the  nation.  In  Jerusalem  and  in  the 
other  Jewish  settlements  in  Palestine  I  have  personally,  in 
the  course  of  my  seven  different  visits  to  the  land  since 
1890,  met  Jews  from  all  parts — from  the  east  and  the 
west ;  from  India  and  the  burning  plains  of  Southern 
Arabia,  and  from  the  extreme  north  of  Siberia  and  the 
Caucasus ;  and  have  heard  them  speaking  in  nearly  all 
languages  under  heaven. 

Around  this  nucleus  a  large  number  more  from  all 
parts  of  the  world  will  in  all  probability  soon  be  gathered ; 
but  we  shall  only  be  able  to  speak  of  a  restoration  of  the 
Jews  as  an  accomplished  fact  when  Palestine  becomes  by 
international  consent  (to  quote  from  the  Zionist  programme) 
the  "  openly  recognised  and  legally  assured  home  "  of  the 
Jews,  i.e.,  when  the  Jews  are  once  more  acknowledged  as  a 
nation  with  a  land  of  their  own  to  which  they  might  go.1 

But  what  follows  ?  After  a  brief  interval  of  prosperity 
there  comes  a  night  of  anguish.  What  occasions  the 
darkest  hour  in  the  night  of  Israel's  sad  history  since  their 
rejection  of  Christ  is  the  gathering  of  the  nations  and  the 
siege  predicted  in  this  chapter. 

1  How  rapidly  things  have  developed  on  the  lines  here  forecast  since  the 
above  was  originally  written  four  or  five  years  ago. 

The  "  Declaration  "  of  the  British  Government  recognises  the  Jews  as  once 
more  a  nation,  and  promises  to  facilitate  their  re-establishment  in  Palestine  ; 
while  Jerusalem  has  been  captured  by  the  victorious  British  Army  ! 


494     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

If  we  interpret  Scripture  rightly,  they  shall  have 
entered  into  covenant  and  sworn  allegiance  to  a  false 
Messiah,  thus  culminating  their  national  apostasy,  and 
fulfilling  the  word  of  Christ,  "  If  another  shall  come  in 
his  own  name,  him  ye  shall  receive." 

But  the  covenant  of  iniquity  based  upon  apostasy  will 
not  stand.  Infuriated,  probably  by  the  faithfulness  to  the 
covenant  God  of  their  fathers  on  the  part  of  the  godly 
remnant  who  shall  then  be  found  in  the  land,  the  Anti 
christ  forms  the  purpose  of  utterly  and  finally  exterminat 
ing  this  people,  who  can  never  cease,  even  in  apostasy  and 
unbelief,  to  be  witnesses  for  the  living  God  and  His  truth. 
The  armies  of  the  confederated  nations,  the  very  flower 
of  their  strength,  are  marshalled  together  in  Palestine, 
their  watchword  being,  "  Come,  let  us  cut  them  off  from 
being  a  nation,  that  the  name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more 
in  remembrance." 

The  dreadfulness  of  these  hosts  I  have  already  dwelt 
on  in  my  notes  on  the  1 2th  chapter.  They  march  in 
triumph  through  the  land,  easily  treading  down  all  opposi 
tion.  And  now  the  enemy  in  overwhelming  force  and 
irresistible  fury  attacks  Jerusalem,  which  is  soon  at  his 
mercy.  The  city  is  taken,  and  the  "  spoil "  or  booty 
leisurely  "  divided  in  the  midst  "  of  her,  without  any  fear  on 
the  part  of  the  enemy  of  interruption  or  molestation. 
There  ensue  scenes  of  cruel  brutality,  and  lust,  and 
horrors,  which  usually  accompany  the  sack  of  cities  by 
enraged  enemies,  only  intensified  in  this  particular  case  by 
the  accumulated  hatred  of  these  confederated  hosts  against 
this  land  and  people.  Half  of  the  remaining  population  in 
the  city  is  dragged  forth  into  captivity,  and  there  is  but  a 
small  and  wretched  remnant  left,  which  probably,  in  the 
intention  of  the  enemy,  are  also  devoted  to  destruction. 

Well  might  another  prophet  exclaim,  "  Alas  !  for  that 
day  is  great,  so  that  none  is  like  it ;  it  is  even  the  time  of 
Jacob's  trouble" 

But  though  it  is  a  day  which  begins  with  calamity  and 
judgment  to  Israel,  it  is  not  going  to  end  in  triumph  to 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  495 

[srael's  enemies.  It  is  pre-eminently  the  rnifp  Di*  (yom  la- 
Yehovah] — "a  day  for  Jehovah" — the  day  set  apart  and 
ippointed  by  Him,  not  only  for  the  display  of  His  majesty 
•md  the  vindication  of  the  righteousness  of  His  character 
ind  ways,  but  it  is  the  day  of  the  manifestation  of  His 
Divine  might  and  glory  in  the  destruction  of  Israel's 
enemies,  and  the  salvation  of  His  own  people.  "  Then  shall 
'Jehovah  go  forth,  and  fight  against  these  nations,  as  when 
*He  fought  in  the  day  of  battle  "  ;  or,  "  as  in  a  day  of  His 
nghting  in  a  day  of  conflict" — as  the  words  in  the  original 
may  more  properly  be  rendered. 

There  are  many  instances  recorded  in  the  Old  Testa 
ment  when  Jehovah  manifestly  fought  for  His  people.  In 
Josh.  x.  14,  for  instance,  we  find  words  which  seem 
echoed  in  this  prophecy.  "  And  there  was  no  day  like  that 
before  it  or  after  it"  we  read  there,  "for  Jehovah  fought  for 
Israel"  But  I  think  we  must  agree  with  the  Jewish 
Targum  and  those  commentators  who  regard  the  reference 
•as  being  particularly  to  the  conflict  between  Jehovah  and 
(the  Egyptians  at  the  Red  Sea  ;  for,  "  of  all  the  wars  in 
'which  human  insolence  could  claim  no  part  of  the  glory," 
ito  quote  the  words  of  a  well-known  writer,  "  none  was  more 
wondrous  than  that  in  which  Pharaoh  and  his  army  were 
isunk  in  the  deep."  It  was  after  that  great  act  of  judg 
ment  on  Israel's  enemies  on  the  part  of  God  that  Israel 
sang,  "Jehovah  is  a  man  of  war ;  Jehovah  is  His  Name" 
(Ex.  xv.  3).  The  reference  is  more  likely  to  be  to  this 
outstanding  event  in  the  past  history  of  the  Jewish  people, 
since  we  know  that  the  prophetic  Scriptures  generally 
regard  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  as  typical,  not  only  of 
the  greater  spiritual  redemption  accomplished  by  Christ, 
'but  of  the  future  greater  national  deliverance  of  Israel ; 
and  the  overthrow  of  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts  as  a  fore- 
shadowment  of  the  final  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  God 
and  of  His  people  at  the  time  of  the  end. 

And  it  will  be  no  other  than  Jehovah-Jesus,  the  El 
Gibbor,  "  God  the  Mighty  Man,"  who  will  thus  suddenly 
appear  as  Israel's  deliverer  in  the  hour  of  their  sorest  need  : 


496     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  And  His  feet"  we  read,  "shall  stand  in  that  day  tipon  the^{ 
Mount  of  Olives,  ^vh^ch  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east" 

The  mountain  which  is  so  clearly  defined  and  located,  ,„., 

I   \iWIJ 

in  this  prophecy  is  already  associated  with    many  events  ^ 
and    crises    in    Israel's  history.      We    especially  remember:    j 

that  before  the  final  overthrow  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  ... 

§ 

the  commencement  of   the  Times  of  the  Gentiles,  it  was  AI: 
from  this  mountain,  which  is  before  Jerusalem   on  the  east,  , 
that  the  prophet  Ezekiel   saw  the  glory  of  Jehovah  finally  ,  ^ 
taking  its  departure. 

It  was  from  this  mountain  also  that  He,  who  was  not    i 
only  the  symbol,  but  the  living  personal  revelation   of  the  •  ,/ 
glory  of  Jehovah,  finally  took  His  departure  from  the  land,  ,. 
after  He  had  already  been  rejected  by  the  nation.      He  led  n{ 
His    handful  of   disciples  out  as  far  as   Bethany  (on  the 
Mount  of  Olives),  and  He  lifted  up   His  hands  and  blessed     , 
them.      "And  it  came  to  pass  while  He  blessed  them,  He  ,  , 
was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up  into  heaven  "  ; l  since  n , 
when    a    still    darker  era    in   the  long   Ichabod   period   of 
Israel's  history  commenced. 

But    from    the    same    direction    whence     he    saw    the  n 
departure  of  the  Glory  of  Jehovah,   the   prophet    Ezekiel 
saw  also  its  return.     "  Afterwards"  we  read,  "  He  brought  \ 
me  to  the  gate  that  looketh  toward  the  east,  and  behold,  the     ( 
Glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  came  from  the  way  of  the  east, 
and  His  voice  was  like  the  noise  of  many  waters,  and  the 
earth  shined  with  His  glory."     And    what  is    this    but    a    ,  , 

6        J  ljesj 

prophecy  in  symbolic   language  of  the  same  event  which 

ijlljj 

the  heavenly  messengers  announced  to  the  men  of  Galilee, 

.  "Ofl 

that  "  this  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  up  into   ,, 
heaven"      And  not  only  "  in  like  manner " — that  is,  bodily,   ., 

visibly — but   He  shall  come  to  the  same  place  whence   He    , 

top 
finally  departed. 

We  love  to  think  that  this  same  mountain  on  which   j 
He  once  shed  tears  of  sorrow  over  Jerusalem,  the  slope  of 
which  witnessed  His  agony  and   bloody  sweat,  shall  be  the 

I     T         1  •  ""i 

1  Luke  xxiv.  50,  51- 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  497 

irst  also  to  witness  His  manifestation  in  glory ;  and  that 
His  blessed  feet,  which  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  walked 
vearily  over  this  mountain  on  the  way  to  Bethany  shall, 
'  in  that  day,"  be  planted  here  in  triumph  and  majesty. 

In  response  to  the  actual  presence  of  the  Divine 
Tiajesty  of  the  Son  of  God  on  this  earth,  the  Mount  of 
Dlives,  on  which  He  shall  descend,  shall  be  cleft  in  two 
from  east  to  west ;  half  of  it  moving  to  the  north  and  half 
to  the  south,  forming  "  a  very  great  valley." 

Into  this  valley  the  remnant  still  remaining  in  Jeru- 

lem  will  flee,1  "  like  as  ye  fled  from  before  the  earthquake 
the  days  of  UzziaJi  king   of  Judah?  of  which  earthquake 

ere  is  no  other  mention  in  Scripture  except  in  Amos  i.  I. 

ut    it    must    have    been    very  terrible  indeed,  since    the 

emory  of  it  survived  for  more  than  two  centuries,  and 
could  still  be  referred  to  by  the  prophet  as  an  occurrence 
:resh  in  the  minds  of  the  people.  "  Ye  shall  flee,"  as  the 
Hebrew  Text  reads,  "  into  MY  mountains  "  —  the  lofty 
precipitous  sides  of  this  newly-formed  chasm,  or  valley,  being 
called  His  mountains,  because  they  were  formed  by  an  act  of 
His  power.  This  may,  in  a  sense,  be  regarded  as  a 
parallel  to  the  passage  through  the  Red  Sea  after  it  was 
divided  by  the  power  of  God,  and  "  the  waters  were  a  wall 
unto  them  on  their  right  hand  and  on  their  left  "  (Ex.  xiv. 
22). 

The  occasion  of  this  flight  will  not  only  be  fear  of  the 
destroying  enemy,  and  the  terror  inspired  by  the  earth 
quake,  but  they  shall  flee  most  of  all  "  for  fear  of  Jehovah, 
and  the  glory  of  His  majesty,"  when  thus  suddenly  and 

nexpectedly  "  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come"  in  the  person 

f  their  long-rejected  Messiah,  "  and  all  the  holy  ones  with 
TJiee  " — by  which  are  meant,  not  only  the  myriads  of  His 
holy  angels,  but  His  saints,  who  are  also  called  CW"1!?, 

edosJdm  ("  holy  ones  "),  and  who  shall  have  been  caught  up 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air. 


1  The  Massoretic  reading,  onpfi,  venastem,  "  Ye  shall  flee,"  is  doubtless  the 
correct  one,  and  not  09511,  venistant,  "  shall  be  stopped  up,"  which  is  found  in 
several  MSS,  and  adopted  in  the  Targum,  the  Septuagint,  and  other  versions. 

32 


498     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

It  is  at  this  point,  I  believe,  that  the  solemn  events 
announced  from  the  4th  verse  of  chap.  xii.  to  the  2nd 
verse  of  chap.  xiii.  will  transpire. 

The  first  proof  of  the  Lord's  interposition  on  behalf  of 
His  people  and  land,  will  be  His  act  of  judgment  on  the 
besieging  hosts.  The  pride  of  the  glory  of  the  marshalled 
armies  will  probably  be  in  the  mounted  squadrons,  which 
will  no  doubt  include  the  finest  horsemen  of  Europe  and 
Arabia,  and  against  them  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host 
shall  first  direct  His  hand  :  "  In  that  day  I  will  smite  every 
horse  with  astonishment,  and  his  rider  with  madness."  a 

Then  the  extended  ranks  of  infantry  shall  be  visited 
with  the  plague  described  in  chap.  xiv.  12,  and  a  great 
tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  ensue  among  the  confederated 
hosts,  as  happened  in  the  past,  when  Jehovah  fought  for 
Israel ;  so  that  each  man's  hand  shall  be  against  his 
neighbour. 

And  not  only  by  the  direct  act  of  God  shall  the 
enemy  be  destroyed,  but,  as  already  shown  in  my  Notes  oh 
chap,  xii.,  with  the  shout  of  a  king  in  their  midst,  and 
conscious  that  Almighty  power  is  now  on  their  side,  the 
remnant  of  Judah,  too,  will  do  valiantly,  and  tread  down 
their  enemies  under  their  feet :  "  He  that  is  feeble  among 
them  at  that  day  shall  be  as  David,  and  the  house  of  David 
shall  be  as  God,  as  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  before  them" 

But  suddenly  the  noise  of  war  and  the  shout  of  triumph 
is  turned  into  wailing  and  lamentation  as  the  spirit  of  grace 
and  supplication  takes  possession  of  the  heart  of  the 
remnant  of  Israel,  and  the  eyes  of  the  blind  are  opened, 
and  they  behold  in  the  King  of  Glory,  at  whose  presence 
the  earth  trembles  and  the  mountains  are  cleft,  and  who 
has  so  marvellously  delivered  them  in  the  hour  of  their 
greatest  need,  none  other  than  the  one  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  whom  for  so  many  centuries  they  have 
rejected  and  despised.  This  look  of  recognition,  as  we 
have  seen  in  chap,  xii.,  will  break  Israel's  heart,  and  "  they 
shall  mourn  for  Him  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and 

1  Chap.  xii.  4. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  499 

shall  be  in  bitterness  for  Him  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness 
for  his  firstborn." 

And  not  only  will  the  sorrow  and  mourning  spread 
from  Jerusalem  to  the  whole  land,  but  also  to  the  whole 
earth ;  for,  though  Jerusalem  and  Palestine  will  be  the 
centre  of  these  awful  and  solemn  events,  the  whole  world 
will  be  more  or  less  involved  in  them. 

When  the  final  judgments  of  God  are  abroad  in  the 
earth,  and  when  the  anti-Christian  rage  and  persecution 
will  be  everywhere  directed  not  only  against  the  confessors 
of  Christ,  but  against  those  in  Israel  who  are  faithful  to  the 
God  of  their  fathers,  there  will  be  weeping,  and  mourning, 
and  heart-searching  among  the  scattered  tribes  of  Israel  in 
all  the  lands  of  their  dispersion. 

And  when  at  last,  in  the  hour  of  their  deepest  need, 
their  long-rejected,  crucified  Messiah  appears  for  their 
deliverance — when  His  blessed  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day 
upon  the  Mount  of  Olives — they  will  almost  simultaneously 
be  made  aware  of  it ;  for,  though  they  may  not  all  at  once 
behold  Him  with  their  eyes,  the  whole  world,  and  nature 
generally,  will  be  conscious  of,  and  respond  to,  the  visible 
appearing  and  presence  of  the  Son  of  God. 

And  the  spared  remnant  of  the  dispersed  of  Israel  will, 
like  their  brethren  in  Jerusalem,  hail  Him — though  at  first 
it  may  be  from  a  distance — whom  they  crucified,  and  turn 
to  Him  in  true  repentance. 

But  to  proceed  to  the  6th  verse. 

In  keeping  with  the  awful  solemn  events  shall  be  the 
outward  natural  phenomena  and  physical  characteristics  of 
that  fateful  day.  It  shall  be  a  day  of  preternatural  gloom. 
"  There  shall  be  no  light,  the  "  precious  ones  "  (i.e.,  the  stars, 
"  the  splendid  heavenly  bodies  ")  will  contract  themselves 
(or  "  wane  "),  which  I  believe  to  be  the  true  meaning  of  the 
two  last,  somewhat  difficult  Hebrew  words  of  the  6th  verse, 
which  have  been  variously  rendered  and  interpreted  by 
commentators.1  This  is  in  harmony  with  the  plain  declara- 

1  The   words  in  the  Hebrew  text  are   |it<^  n^jj;,  yeqaroth  ytqipatun  :    15;, 
yaqor  ("  precious,"  "  rare,"  "  splendid  ")  is  applied  to  the  moon  in  Job  xxxi.  26, 


500     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

tions  of  other  prophetic  announcements  concerning  that 
day ;  as,  for  instance,  "  The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be 
darkened,  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shining"  x  or,  in 
the  words  of  Isaiah :  "  The  moon  shall  be  confounded  and 
the  sun  ashamed  when  the  Lord  of  Hosts  shall  reign  in 
Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem,  and  before  His  ancients 
gloriously "  ; 2  and  again :  "  The  stars  of  heaven,  and  the 
constellations  thereof,  shall  not  give  their  light :  the  sun  shall 
be  darkened  in  his  going  forth,  and  the  moon  shall  not  cause 
her  light  to  shine"  3 

"  But  in  those  days  after  that  tribulation  the  sun  shall  be 
darkened  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars 
shall  be  falling  from  heaven^  and  the  powers  that  are  in  the 
heaven  sliall  be  shaken"  4 

And  it  shall  be  yom  echad,  "  one  day,"  we  read  in  our 
prophecy — "  one  "  primarily  in  the  sense  of  its  being  unique 

which  is  described  as  "  sailing  resplendent"  and  it  seems  most  probable  that  the 
plural  yeqaroth  is  used  here  of  "the  resplendent  heavenly  bodies,"  i.e.,  the  stars. 
The  verb  ttsfi,  qapha  ("  thicken,"  "  condense,"  "  congeal  ")is  found  in  Ex.  xv.  8, 
and  describes  the  depths  as  becoming  congealed,  or  consolidated,  in  the  midst  of 
the  seas.  But  the  difference  of  the  gender  in  the  combination  of  the  feminine 
substantive  yeqaroth  with  the  masculine  verb  yeqipa'ttn,  the  irregularity  of  con 
struction,  and  the  rarity  with  which  these  words  are  met  with  in  the  Hebrew 
Bible,  have  occasioned  many  conjectural  readings  and  explanations.  The 
" keri"  (marginal  alternative  reading  in  the  Massoretic  text)  has  JiN$p]  n'np;, 
yeqaroth  rfqipa'un — the  meaning  of  which  is  also  not  quite  clear,  but  may  be 
rendered  "intense  brightness,  and  waning."  But  it  is  pretty  generally  agreed 
by  all  scholars  that  the  kethib  (the  Hebrew  text)  and  not  the  keri,  or  margin, 
has  the  true  reading.  The  "Jewish"  explanation  is  embodied  in  Kimchi's 
comment,  which  is  as  follows :  "  In  that  day  in  which  he  says  that  this 
miracle  shall  occur,  there  shall  also  be  this  circumstance,  that  the  light  shall 
neither  be  yeqaroth  ( "  precious  ")  nor  yeqipa'un  ("  thickness  ").  The  meaning  is 
figurative,  that  the  light  of  that  day  shall  not  be  bright,  which  is  the  meaning  of 
"precious  lights,"  or  "the  moon  walking  in  brightness"  (Job  xxxi.  26),  nor 
light  of  thickness,  i.e.,  dense  and  thick,  which  is  like  darkness.  The  sense  is,  the 
day  shall  not  be  entirely  light  nor  entirely  dark,  i.e.,  it  shall  not  pass  entirely  in 
tranquillity  nor  in  affliction,  for  they  two  shall  be  in  it ;  and  so  he  says  afterwards, 
not  day  nor  night.  Jonathan  has  interpreted,  "There  shall  be  nothing  that  day 
but  privation  and  coagulation." 

The  LXX  reads  KO.\  ^ux'n  *a'  Tayos,  "and  cold  and  frost." 

The  translation  which  I  have  given  in  the  text  seems  to  me  the  most  satis 
factory. 

1  Joel  iii.  15.  3  Isa.  xxiv.  23. 

3  Isa.  xiii.  10.  4  Mark  xiii.  24,  25. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  501 

and  different  to  all  other  days  in  the  world's  history,  "  so 
that  none  is  like  it,"  as  Jeremiah  expresses  it,  "  and  it  shall 
be  known  to  Jehovah"  which  phrase  certainly  reminds  us  of 
the  words  of  our  Lord  :  "  Of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no 
man,  not  even  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the 
Son,  but  the  Father"1 — "  Not  day  nor  night" — "like 
mysterious  light  when  day  and  night  are  contending 
together."  It  shall  not  be  day,  for  the  natural  sources  of 
light  will  be  withdrawn  ;  but  it  cannot  be  like  the  darkness 
of  night,  for  there  will  be  the  transplendent  light  of  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  and  the  myriads  of  His  holy  angels,  and 
of  the  glorified  saints  reflected  on  the  earth. 

"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  tJiat  at  evening  time  " — when 
in  the  order  of  nature  everything  should  sink  into  darkness — 
"  there  shall  be  light "  ;  out  of  the  contest  between  light  and 
darkness  on  that  eventful  day  light  shall  emerge  victorious 
— "  the  light  of  salvation  breaking  its  way  through  the 
night  of  judgment,"  as  Von  Orelli  observes  ;  and  out  of  the 
apparent  chaos  beauty  and  order. 

As  far  as  its  primary  literal  significance  is  concerned, 
the  statement  that  "  at  evening  time  there  shall  be  light," 
may  perhaps  be  explained  by  the  words  of  Isaiah :  "  The 
light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  the 
light  of  the  sun  shall  be  sevenfold,  as  the  light  of  seven 
days,  in  the  day  that  Jehovah  bindeth  up  the  hurt  of  His 
people  and  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  wound."  2 

But  this  literal  physical  phenomenon  will  answer  also 
to  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  spared  remnant.  "  At 
evening  time "  of  that  great  and  most  solemn  day — the 
great  Atonement  Day  for  the  nation — when  the  long  dark 
period  of  their  national  history  shall  end  in  bitter  sorrow  and 
universal  mourning,  not  on  account  of  their  suffering,  but 
for  their  sin  ;  when  the  glorious  Sun  of  Righteousness  shall 
at  last  rise  upon  them  with  healing  in  His  wings,  "  there 
shall  be  light" — the  light  and  the  joy  of  forgiveness  and 
eternal  reconciliation ;  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ  which  shall  shine  upon  them. 

1  Mark  xiii.  32.  *  Isa.  xxx.  26. 


502     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

"  We  can  in  part  conceive  the  feelings  with  which  the 
spared  remnant  of  Israel  will  behold  the  light  of  that 
evening — the  evening  which  is  to  introduce  the  new  order 
of  God.  They  have  been  described  in  the  I  2th  chapter  as 
subdued,  contrite,  and  mourning.  And  no  marvel :  carried 
as  they  will  have  been  by  a  power  that  they  knew  not, 
through  such  a  day  of  terror,  strengthened  for  the  Lord  in 
it,  and  left  at  last  in  a  scene  of  tranquil  blessing  received 
from  the  hands  of  One  whom  they  had  despised,  but  to 
whom  they  have  now  learned  to  say  '  My  Lord,  and  my 
God  ' ;  it  would  be  strange  indeed  if  they  should  not,  number 
ing  such  mercies,  be  bowed  in  contrition  of  spirit.  And 
when  they  shall  at  last  be  comforted,  and  the  Spirit  be 
poured  out  upon  them  from  on  high,  when  the  knowledge  of 
their  own  past  history  and  of  the  Church's  history  will  all 
be  opened  to  them  in  the  light  of  God,  then,  like  so  many 
Pauls,  monuments  of  Sovereign  grace,  they  shall  go  forth 
to  the  dark  places  of  the  earth,  rich  in  experience  and  in 
the  knowledge  of  God,  and  from  them  shall  flow  rivers  of 
living  waters."  l 

The  blessed  issues  of  the  great  and  solemn  events  of 
"  that  day,"  as  set  forth  in  the  first  seven  verses,  are 
described  in  the  verses  that  follow : — 

I.  By  means  of  the  great  earthquake  spoken  of  in 
vers.  4  and  5,  and  other  convulsions  of  nature  which  are 
immediately  to  precede  and  to  accompany  the  visible 
appearing  of  the  Messiah,  when  His  feet  shall  stand  in  that 
day  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives — great  physical  changes  will 
take  place  in  Palestine  and  the  whole  land,  but  particularly 
the  position  of  Jerusalem  will  be  greatly  altered  and  trans 
formed.2  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day  that  living 
waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem,  half  of  them  toward  the 
eastern  sea,  and  half  of  them  toward  the  western  sea ;  in 
summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be." 

The  "  eastern  "  (haqqadmoni,  which  has  sometimes  also 
the  meaning  of  "  ancient ")  is  the   Dead   Sea,  which  shall 
then    be    healed    by    the    streams    of    fresh,    or    "  living," 
1  B.  W.  Newton.  2  Isa.  xxx.  25,  26. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  503 

water  which  will  flow  through  it ;  and  the  western 
Jia-acJtaron  (literally,  the  "  last  "  "  or  hindermost ")  is  the 
Mediterranean.  And  these  waters  will  never  run  dry,  as 
the  streams  in  the  south  x  are  apt  to  do  now :  "  summer 
drought  shall  not  lessen  them,  nor  winter  cold  bind  them," 
but  they  shall  ceaselessly  flow  "  in  summer  and  in  winter." 
To  these  perennial  waters  flowing  from  the  "  river  of  God," 2 
primarily  so  called,  because  it  is  formed,  as  it  were,  by  a 
direct  act  of  His  power,  there  are  many  references  in  the 
prophetic  Scriptures. 

Thus  Joel,  speaking  of  the  time  when  Jehovah  shall 
manifestly  dwell  in  Zion,  and  "  Jerusalem  shall  be  holy," 
into  which  nothing  that  defileth  shall  enter,  says,  "  And  a 
fountain  shall  come  forth  from  the  house  of  Jehovah  and 
shall  water  the  valley  of  Shittim  "  ; 3  and  in  Ps.  xlvi.,  which 
is  a  great  prophecy  of  the  same  solemn  events  which  are 
described  in  these  last  chapters  of  Zechariah,  the  inspired 
Psalmist  beholds  in  vision  "  a  river  the  streams  whereof 
make  glad  the  city  of  God"  4  namely,  restored  and  renewed 
Jerusalem,  the  vestibule,  as  it  were,  during  the  millennial 
period  of  the  Jerusalem  which  is  above — which  shall 
emerge  from  the  catastrophe  described  in  the  first  verses, 
when  the  earth  shall  "  be  removed,"  or  "  changed,"  and  the 
"  mountains  shaken  into  the  heart  of  the  seas,  and  the 
waters  roar  and  be  troubled." 

The  allusion  in  all  these  scriptures,  which  speak  of  the 
river  of  living  waters  dividing  themselves  into  streams 
flowing  in  different  directions,  is  probably  to  Gen.  ii.  10. 
There  we  read  :  "  A  nd  a  river  went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the 
garden  ;  and  from  thence  it  was  parted  and  became  four 

1  Ps.  cxxvi.  4.  2  Ps.  Ixv.  9. 

3Joeliii.  1 8.  Some  modern  writers  understand  this  as  referring  to  a  valley 
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  ("a  valley  in  connection  with  the 
Kidron  Valley" — Von  Orelli),  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  reference  is  to 
the  Shittim  of  Num.  xxv.  I,  the  last  encampment  of  the  Israelites  on  the  steppes 
of  Moab  before  their  entrance  into  Canaan — the  barren  valley  of  the  Jordan  above 
the  Dead  Sea.  Shittim  means  acacias,  which  grow  only  in  arid  regions,  and  the 
words  of  the  prophecy  imply  that  even  the  arid  desert  shall  be  fertilised  by  the 
waters  issuing  from  this  fountain. 

4  Ps.  xlvi.  4. 


504     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

heads"  or  streams.  Now,  since  for  beauty  and  fertility,  and 
as  the  earthly  centre  of  God's  dwelling  and  worship, 
Jerusalem  and  Palestine  will,  in  the  millennial  period, 
answer,  as  it  were,  to  the  garden  of  Eden — there  is  again 
the  River,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  city  of  God, 
and  flowing  thence  fertilise  other  parts  of  the  earth. 

Now,  to  repeat,  we  believe,  in  a  literal  fulfilment  of  this 
prophecy  in  Zechariah,  and  when  we  are  told  by  a  scholarly 
English  writer  that  a  literal  fulfilment  is  out  of  the  question 
because  "  the  physical  nature  of  the  whole  land  would  have 
to  be  changed  to  permit  literal  rivers  to  flow  forth  from 
Jerusalem," x  our  answer  is,  "  Certainly ;  this  is  just  what 
the  prophecy  says  will  be  the  case"  The  physical  nature  of 
the  whole  land  will  be  changed  through  the  convulsions  of 
nature,  which  are  described  here  and  in  other  scriptures, 
and  which  will  be  brought  about  by  the  Almighty  power 
of  God,  with  whom  nothing  is  impossible.  But  while  this 
literal  fulfilment  cannot  be  emphasised  too  strongly  in 
order  to  a  true  understanding  of  these  prophecies,  it  is 
important  also  to  note  that  the  literal,  material  river  will  be 
at  the  same  time  the  visible  symbol  of  the  mighty  river  of 
God's  grace  and  salvation,  which,  during  the  millennial 
period  dividing  itself  into  full  streams  of  Messianic 
blessings,  will  start  from  Jerusalem  as  its  source  and  centre, 
and  carry  life  and  salvation  to  all  nations. 

"  We  read  in  many  parts  of  the  Scripture  that  the  land 
of  Israel  will  in  that  day  teem  with  evidences  of  the 
miraculous  power  of  God  in  dispensing  blessings.  On  the 
sides  of  Zion,  for  example,  the  wolf  and  the  lamb,  the 
leopard  and  the  kid,  shall  be  seen  together,  and  a  little 
child  shall  lead  them.  Nothing  shall  hurt  or  destroy 
throughout  God's  holy  mountain.  These  will  be  sights 

1  Dr.  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  Zechariah  and  his  Prophecies.  His  long  chapter  of 
nearly  one  hundred  pages  on  "The  Eschatology  of  Zechariah,  or  the  Last  Things 
as  seen  in  the  Light  of  the  Old  Dispensation,"  is  an  illustration  and  specimen 
of  the  phantomising  method  of  interpreting  Old  Testament  prophecy,  to  which  I 
referred  in  the  introductory  remarks  to  this  chapter.  But  though  very  dogmatic 
in  his  style,  Dr.  Wright  succeeds,  not  in  explaining,  but  in  explaining  away,  these 
great  prophecies. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  505 

that  no  one  will  deny  to  be  in  themselves  blessed.  But 
they  are  symbols  also,  living  symbols,  speaking  of  higher 
blessings ;  for  they  indicate  the  peace  and  harmony  and 
love  that  shall  pervade  all  hearts  and  all  peoples  whom  the 
power  of  Zion  shall  effectually  reach.  And  if  God  has 
appointed  that  the  spiritual  influence  of  which  I  have 
spoken  above  should  go  forth  from  His  forgiven  and 
privileged  nation  in  Jerusalem,  we  might  expect  to  find 
some  outward  symbol  of  this,  its  relation.  And,  accord 
ingly,  a  symbol  is  given  in  the  perennial  flow  of  those 
streams  which,  going  forth  from  the  sanctuary  in  Jerusalem, 
shall  heal  waters,  which,  like  the  Dead  Sea,  have  been 
accursed,  and  spread  life  and  refreshment  in  the  midst  of 
desolation."  l 

As  the  symbol  of  the  greater  spiritual  reality,  let  us 
pause  and  contemplate  for  a  moment  this  "  river  of  God." 
Its  source  is  God  Himself.  "  There"  exclaims  the  prophet 
Isaiah — that  is,  in  renewed  and  glorified  Jerusalem — "  The 
glorious  Jehovah  "  (or,  "Jehovah  in  His  Majesty ")  "  will  be 
unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams" 2  Or,  in  the 
language  of  the  beloved  John  in  the  Apocalypse,  "  He 
showed  me  a  river  of  zvater  of  life  bright  as  crystal  proceeding 
out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb'' 3  Yes,  "  and  of 
the  Lamb"  for  though  God  is  the  Source,  the  Eternal 
Fountain  of  this  pure  Water  of  Life,  the  Lamb  slain  is  the 
channel  through  which  it  flows. 

Another  glorious  fact  emphasised  in  the  Scriptures  in 
connection  with  these  living  waters  is  their  fulness — indica 
tive  of  the  abundance  of  God's  grace  and  salvation,  which 
shall  go  forth  during  the  period  of  Messiah's  reign,  from 
Jerusalem  as  its  centre,  into  all  parts  of  the  world.  The 
"  River  of  God,"  we  read,  "  is  full  of  water"  4  and  Ezekiel 
beholds  it  in  vision  "  as  a  river  which  he  could  not  pass 
through,  for  the  waters  were  risen,  waters  to  swim  in,  a  river 
that  could  not  be  passed  through'' 6 

And  as  they  are  abundant  in  quantity,  so  also  is  the 

1  B.  W.  Newton.  2  Isa.  xxxiii.  21.  s  Rev.  xxii.  I. 

4  Ps.  Ixv.  9.  6  Ezek.  xlvii.  1-12. 


506     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

healing,  life-giving  efficacy  of  the  living  waters  wonderful. 
The  very  desert  shall  be  transformed  by  them,  and  the 
stagnant  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  healed.  "  Everything" 
says  Ezekiel,  "  and  every  living  creature  which  swarmeth  in 
every  place  whither  the  river  shall  come,  shall  live  ;  .  .  .  and 
by  the  river  upon  the  bank  thereof  on  this  side,  and  on  that 
side,  shall  grow  every  tree  for  meat,  whose  leaf  shall  not 
ivither,  neither  shall  the  fruit  thereof  fail ;  it  shall  bring  forth 
new  fruit  every  month,  because  the  waters  thereof  issue  out  of 
the  sanctuary  ;  and  the  fruit  shall  be  for  meat,  and  the  leaf 
thereof  for  healing"  Yes,  "for  the  healing  of  the  nations"  x 
as  the  beloved  Apostle  adds  in  the  last  chapter  of  the 
Apocalypse,  where  Ezekiel's  imagery  of  the  earthly  but 
glorified  Jerusalem  during  the  millennial  period  is  trans 
ferred  also  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 

A  foretaste  of  the  great  spiritual  realities,  which  in  the 
age  to  come  will  be  symbolised  also  by  literal  and  visible 
objects,  we  have  indeed  in  the  present  dispensation,  for 
those  are  not  wholly  wrong  who  point  to  the  Gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  embodying  the  very  qualities  ascribed 
to  these  "  living  waters,"  and  many  there  be  who  can  testify 
from  experience  to  its  life-giving,  healing,  sanctifying 
power,  and  to  the  great  and  glorious  transformations  which 
it  has  effected  in  the  world  since  Christ's  first  Advent. 
But,  whereas  its  course  now  and  all  through  the  present 
period  is  an  intermittent,  chequered  one,  and  its  quickening 
power  has  been  experienced  only  by  individuals,  by-and-by, 
when  Israel  as  a  nation  is  first  quickened  and  transformed 
by  it,  and  the  national  Saul  of  Tarsus  is  turned  into  a 
nation  of  Pauls,  with  the  same  burning  love  and  self- 
consuming  zeal  for  their  Redeemer-King,  which  characterised 
the  great  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles  —  the  blessings  of 
Messiah's  Gospel,  and  the  beneficent  effects  of  His  reign — 
will  flow  from  Jerusalem  as  mighty  rivers  and  streams  into 
all  parts  of  the  world,  so  that  it  will  not  be  long  before 
"  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  Jehovah  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  2 

1  Rev.  xxii.  2.  -  Hah.  ii.1. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  507 

II.  Another  glorious  issue  of  the  solemn  events 
described  in  the  first  seven  verses  of  our  chapter  will  be 
the  establishment  of  Messiah's  righteous  and  beneficent 
rule  on  earth,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  prayer  which  has 
ascended  from  the  yearning  hearts  of  the  faithful  in  all 
ages  :  "  Thy  Kingdom  come."  This  is  announced  in  the 
9th  verse  :  "  And  Jehovah  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth  : 
in  that  day  shall  JeJiovah  be  one  and  His  Name  one."  In 
this  great  and  comprehensive  prophecy  we  note  especially 
two  or  three  points  :  (a)  "Jehovah  shall  be  King " — but 
according  to  the  united  and  harmonious  testimony  of  the 
prophetic  Scriptures  it  will  be  Jehovah  in  the  person  of  the 
Messiah,  Jehovah-Jesus,  Immanuel — He  whose  feet  shall 
in  that  day  stand  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  which  is  before 
Jerusalem  on  the  east — who  will  thus  set  up  His  Kingdom 
and  rule  on  this  earth.  And  He  will  be  King,  not  only  in 
virtue  of  His  being  the  Son  of  God,  in  whose  coming  and 
reign  the  long-promised  rule  of  God  Himself  on  this  earth 
shall  at  last  be  realised  in  the  fullest  possible  measure,  but 
by  reason  of  His  being  the  Son  of  Man — the  second  Adam 
— the  appointed  Lord  of  creation,  in  whom  the  original 
purpose  of  God  in  the  creation  of  man  and  of  the  world 
shall  be  fulfilled,  and  as  the  Son  of  David,  in  whom  all  the 
promises  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  are  centred,  before 
whose  birth  it  was  announced  by  the  angel  from  heaven, 
"  He  shall  be  great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest ; 
and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him  the  throne  of  His 
father  David.  And  He  shall  reign  over  the  House  of  Jacob 
for  ever  ;  and  of  His  Kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end." 

All  that  is  implied  in  the  blessed  announcement  that 
Jehovah  Himself  shall  at  last  be  King  over  this  earth,  and 
in  the  person  of  His  own  Son,  who  is  at  the  same  time 
the  man  after  His  own  heart,  visibly  rule  among  the  nations, 
we  cannot  yet  fully  conceive.  "  Our  ideas  of  kingship,"  to 
quote  the  words  of  a  master  in  Israel,  "  are  limited,  and  do 
not  come  up  to  the  Divine  conception." *  Man  has  had 
experience  of  rule,  or  kingship  on  earth,  but  "  the  true  or 

1  Adolph  Saphir. 


508     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

real  king  among  men  has  not  appeared  yet."  The  nearest 
approach  to  His  rule  was  David's ;  but  what  are  the  last 
words  of  the  son  of  Jesse,  the  man  who  was  raised  up  on 
high,  the  anointed  of  the  God  of  Israel  and  the  sweet 
Psalmist  of  Israel  ?  His  last  testimony  was  that  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  had  spoken  by  him,  and  that  he  had  heard  the 
Rock  of  Israel,  and  that  the  sum  and  substance  of  these 
Divine  revelations  was  the  coming  of  the  perfect  King : 
"  One  tJiat  ruleth  over  men  righteously,  that  ruletJi  in  the  fear 
of  God,  He  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  morning  when  the 
sun  riseth,  a  morning  without  clouds,  when  the  tender  grass 
springeth  out  of  the  earth  through  clear  shining  after  rain"  1 

For  this  ideal  King,  for  this  glorious  "  Sun  "  to  usher 
in  "  the  morning  without  clouds "  on  this  groaning  earth, 
the  nations  have  long  waited  ;  but  He  shall  come,  and  the 
world  will  experience  the  blessedness  of  His  righteous  and 
beneficent  sway. 

(£)  The  extent  of  His  rule — "  over  all  the  earth"  As 
explained  more  than  once  in  the  course  of  these  notes,  p.K, 
eretz,  translated  "  earth,"  means  both  "  land  "  and  "  earth  "  ; 
and  the  primary  reference  in  this  prophecy  is  doubtless  to 
"  the  holy  land,"  2  as  the  enlarged  and  purified  Land  of 
Promise  shall  then  be  called.  The  word  is  used  in  this 
more  restricted  sense  in  the  very  next  verse  of  our  chapter, 
where  it  is  rightly  translated  "  land."  But  while  the  holy 
hill  of  Zion  shall  be  the  seat  of  His  throne,  and  Palestine, 
with  restored  and  converted  Israel,  the  centre  of  His 
blessed  rule,  "  He  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to 
sea,  and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth  " ;  yea, 
all  kings  shall  fall  down  before  Him,  all  nations  shall  serve 
Him,3  for  all  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  then  become 
the  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ,  and  He  shall 
reign  for  ever  and  ever. 

That  the  prophet's  vision  of  the  theocratic  kingdom 
ranged  beyond  even  the  enlarged  boundaries  of  the  "  land," 
and  extended  to  the  whole  "  earth"  is  seen  also  from  the 
1 6th  verse,  where  he  speaks  of  all  the  nations  coming  up 

1  2  Sam.  xxxiii.  1-4  (R.V.).  -  Chap.  ii.  12.  3  Ps.  Ixxii.  8-1 1. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  509 

to  Jerusalem  "  to  worship  the  King-Jehovah  of  Hosts," 
whose  sole  rule  they  will  then  acknowledge.  Yes,  Messiah's 
kingship  is  to  extend  over  the  earth.  God's  will,  accord 
ing  to  the  petition  which  He  teaches  His  disciples,  is  to  be 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven. 

"  It  is  on  earth,  where  God  has  been  denied  and 
forgotten ;  where  His  honour  has  been  disregarded  and 
His  commandments  have  been  transgressed  ;  where  nations 
and  kingdoms,  instead  of  seeking  His  glory  and  showing 
forth  His  praise — have  not  bowed  to  His  authority  and 
reverenced  His  law ;  it  is  on  earth  that  the  Lord  shall 
reign ;  injustice,  cruelty  and  war  shall  be  banished ;  and 
instead  of  idolatry,  selfishness  and  sin,  the  fear  and  love 
and  beauty  of  God  will  be  manifest.  Christ  and  the 
glorified  saints  shall  reign  over  Israel  and  the  nations. 
The  appearings  of  the  risen  Lord  to  His  disciples  during 
the  forty  days  seem  to  be  a  prophetic  parallel  of  the 
relation  of  the  transfigured  Church  to  the  earth.  Jerusalem 
is  the  centre  of  the  world ;  the  land  of  Israel  is  restored  to 
wonderful  fertility  and  blessedness.  We  may  not  be  able 
clearly  to  conceive  the  fulfilment  of  the  predictions  con 
cerning  this  earth  during  the  Christocracy,  but  our  danger 
does  not  lie  in  believing  too  implicitly  or  too  literally  what 
is  written."  1  And  this  kingship  over  the  "  earth  "  is  due  to 
our  Lord  Jesus  as  an  answer  to  His  humiliation.  "  It  is 
not  sufficient  that  He  is  glorified  in  heaven — it  is  a  perfect 
delight  to  His  own  that  He  is  to  be  glorified  and  adored 
in  the  very  scene  of  His  rejection  and  shame.  God  will 
see  to  this.  Here,  where  His  royal  claims  were  scorned, 
every  knee  shall  bow  to  Him  ;  here,  where  He  was  reviled 
and  insulted,  every  tongue  shall  own  that  "  He  is  Lord  to 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  His  Name  shall  be  excellent 
in  all  the  earth'' 

HI.  "/«  that  day"  the  prophet  adds,  "  shall  Jehovah  be 
One  " — that  is,  recognised  and  acknowledged  as  such,  and  be 
known  and  called  the  "  God  of  the  whole  earth," 2  the  only 

1  Adolph  Saphir,  lectures  on  the  Lord's  Prayer. 
-  Is*,  liv.  5. 


5io     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  blessed  Potentate ; l  for  the  false  gods  of  the  nations, 
to  whom  even  Israel  was  tempted  in  former  days  of 
apostasy  to  render  worship,  shall  be  "  cut  off,"  and  all  idols 
utterly  abolished. 

'•''And  His  Name" — which  embodies  His  revealed 
character  as  the  God  of  Redemption,  the  faithful  covenant- 
keeping  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  now  fully  made 
known  to  us  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  Himself 
the  fullest  revelation  of  the  Name,  shall  be  "  One  " — to  the 
exclusion  of  all  others — as  the  only  object  of  reverence, 
praise,  and  worship,  "  so  t/tat  he  who  blesseth  himself  in  the 
earth  sJiall  bless  Jiimself  in  the  God  of  truth  ;  and  he  that 
sweareth  in  the  earth  shall  swear  by  the  God  of  truth  ; 2  and 
the  nations,  even  from  "  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  confess  that 
the  gods  which  they  had  formerly  worshipped  were  "  no 
gods,"  and  the  idolatries  which  they  had  inherited  from 
their  fathers  were  "  nought  but  lies,  even  vanity,  and  things 
wherein  there  is  no  profit."  3 

IV.  As  "the  city  of  the  great  King"  (Ps.  xlviii.  2), 
whose  dominion  extends  to  earth's  utmost  bounds,  and  as 
the  centre  whence  God's  light  and  truth  shall  go  forth 
among  all  the  nations,  Jerusalem  is  also  to  be  physically 
exalted  above  the  hills  by  which  she  has  hitherto  been 
surrounded  and  overshadowed.  This  is  the  announcement 
in  the  roth  verse:  "  All  the  land  shall  be  turned"  (or 
"  changed"  so  that  it  shall  become  "  as"  or)  "  like  the  Arabak" 
Then  the  district  to  be  thus  transformed  is  more  closely 

1  I  Tim.  vi.  15.  2  Isa.  Ixv.  16. 

3  Jer.  xvi.  19-20  (R.V.).  Von  Orelli  thinks  that  by  the  unity  of  the  name 
Jehovah  "is  to  be  understood  primarily  unity  of  designation,  which  is  important 
as  the  plurality  of  designations  of  the  one  God  has  led  in  various  ways  to  plural 
conceptions  of  the  Godhead,"  and  refers  to  Hos.  ii.  16.  Lange,  by  simply 
referring  his  readers  for  an  explanation  of  this  clause  to  Hitzig,  seemingly  adopts 
it  as  his  own — namely,  "that  in  consequence  of  the  display  of  Jehovah's  glory, 
the  heathen  who  had  hitherto  worshipped  God  under  other  names,  such  as 
Moloch,  Baal,  etc.,  should  from  henceforth  honour  and  adore  Him  as  '  Jehovah,' 
under  which  Name  He  had  made  Himself  known  to  the  people  of  Israel."  But, 
as  another  has  observed,  "  The  idea  that  the  heathen  under  the  various  names  of 
their  gods  really  n.eant  to  worship  Jehovah,  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  engraft 
modern  ideas  (whicix  I  venture  to  add,  have  no  basis  in  fact)  upon  those  of  the 
Old  Testament  prophets." 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  511 

defined,  namely,  "from  Geba  to  Rimmon,  south  of  Jerusalem" 
Geba,  probably  the  same  as  Gibeah  of  Saul,  was  in  the 
tribe  of  Benjamin,1  and  is  mentioned  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  8 
as  one  of  the  northern  border  towns  of  the  land  of  Judah. 
Rimmon  was  on  the  southern  border  of  Palestine,  and  is 
identified  by  some  scholars  with  the  modern  Umm-er- 
Rummamin,  north  of  Beersheba.  The  words  "  south  of 
Jerusalem  "  are  added,  to  distinguish  this  latter  place  from 
the  town  Rimmon  in  Galilee  '2  (identified  with  Rummaneh), 
and  from  the  rock  Rimmon  in  the  hill  range  of  Benjamin.3 

All  this  district  from  Geba  to  Rimmon  is  to  be  changed 
and  become  "  as  the  Arabah  "  (nznyii).  This  word,  trans 
lated  "  plain  "  in  the  A.V.,  is  the  proper  name  of  the  Jordan 
valley — "  that  remarkable  depression  which  runs  from  the 
slopes  of  Hermon  to  the  Red  Sea,  known  as  the  deepest 
depression  in  the  surface  of  the  globe  " ;  the  sea  of  Galilee 
situated  within  it  being  652  feet  below  the  level  of  the 
Mediterranean,  while  the  Dead  Sea,  which  is  also  included 
in  its  course,  is  1316  feet  below  that  level,  or  the  level  of 
the  Red  Sea.  Parts  of  this  valley  were  distinguished  for 
their  luxurious  vegetation,  but  the  reference  here  is  not  to 
its  fertility  nor  to  its  deep  depression,  which  probably  will 
itself  undergo  modification  in  that  day  of  great  physical  as 
well  as  moral  upheavals,  but  to  the  fact  of  its  being  a  plain. 

The  whole  hill-country  specified  shall  be  levelled  or 
become  a  plain,  "  and  she  "  (i.e.,  Jerusalem)  "  shall  be  lifted 
up"  (or  "exalted"}  "and  shall  dwell"  (or  "become  settled"} 
"in  lier place"  literally,  "upon  that  which  was  under  her," 
upon  her  own  tel,  or  mound,  as  Jeremiah  expresses  it.4 

In  this  brief  statement  about  the  towering  position  of 
Jerusalem  in  that  day  the  prophet  Zechariah  gives  us  also, 
as  is  his  wont,  a  terse  summary  of  the  longer  predictions 
of  the  former  prophets ;  for  already  Isaiah  and  Micah,  as 
well  as  Ezekiel,  announced  that  "  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the 
latter  days  that  the  mountain  of  Jehovah's  house  shall  be 

'Josh,  xviii.  24.  2Josh.  xix.  13. 

a  Judg.  xx.  45-47. 

4  *&  ^V,  Jer.  xxx.  18.     Translated  in  the  A.V.,  "  Upon  its  own  heap." 


512     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

established  on  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted 
above  the  hills"  J 

And  here  again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  "  living  waters  " 
in  the  8th  verse,  the  literal  fact  will  at  the  same  time 
be  emblematic  of  a  great  spiritual  truth.  Zion  in  the 
millennial  age  will  be  the  city  of  truth,  "  the  habitation  of 
righteousness  and  mountain  of  holiness"  and  therefore  will 
be  raised  conspicuously  aloft  in  the  view  of  all  the  nations  ;  it 
will  be  the  source  whence  the  living  waters  of  God's  grace 
and  salvation  are  to  issue  in  all  directions,  and  therefore 
every  obstacle  which  might  hinder  their  flow  shall  be 
"  changed  "  and  turned  into  a  plain.  It  will  be  the  centre 
of  God's  governmental  rule  of  the  world,  and  the  place  to 
which  "  all  nations  shall  flow  "  for  instruction  and  guidance, 
and  therefore  it  must  be  lifted  high,  and  approach  to  it 
rendered  easy. 

In  the  words  of  the  beautiful  paraphrase  of  the 
prophetic  announcement  by  Isaiah  and  Micah : 

Behold  !  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 

In  latter  days  shall  rise 
On  mountain-tops  above  the  hills, 

And  draw  the  wond'ring  eyes. 

To  this  the  joyful  nations  round, 

All  tribes  and  tongues,  shall  flow ; 
"  Up  to  the  hill  of  God,"  they'll  say, 

"And  to  His  house  we'll  go!" 

The  beam  that  shines  from  Zion's  hill 

Shall  lighten  ev'ry  land  ; 
The  King  who  reigns  in  Salem's  towers 

Shall  all  the  world  command. 

Among  the  nations  He  shall  judge — 

His  judgments  truth  shall  guide  ; 
His  sceptre  shall  protect  the  just 

And  quell  the  sinner's  pride. 

The  second  half  of  the  loth  verse  describes  the  bounds 
of  the  restored  and  enlarged  city,  which  shall  thus  be 
"  lifted  up  "  and  settled  down  to  dwell  safely  "  in  her  own 
place." 

"  From  Benjamin's  gate  unto  the  place  of  the  first  (or 

1  Isa.  ii.  2. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  513 

former ')  gate,  unto  the  corner  gate,  and  from  the  tower  of 
Hananel  unto  the  king's  winepresses? 

I  shall  not  trouble  my  readers  with  topographical 
letails,  all  the  more  as  by  general  confession  the  gates  and 
owers  here  named  cannot  with  any  certainty  be  identified, 
suffice  it  here  to  say  that  "  Benjamin's  gate,"  which  is  very 
>robably  the  same  as  "  the  gate  of  Ephraim,"  mentioned  in 
:  Kings  xiv.  13,  was  in  the  north  wall  of  the  city  through 
/hich  the  road  to  Benjamin,  and  thence  to  Ephraim, 
an. 

The  first  (or  "  former  ")  "  gate,"  which  no  longer  existed 
n  Zechariah's  time,  since  only  the  place  where  it  once 
tood  is  referred  to,  is  supposed  to  have  been  at  the  north- 
astern  corner,  and  the  "  corner  gate  "  (which  is  also  men- 
ioned  in  2  Kings  xiv.  I  3  as  well  as  in  Jer.  xxxi.  38)  at 
he  north-western  corner. 

If  these  suppositions  be  correct,  this  line  would  describe 
he  whole  breadth  of  the  city  from  east  to  west,  while  the 
ower  of  Hananel,1  which  stood  at  the  north  or  north-east 
orner,  and  "  the  king's  winepresses,"  which  all  are  agreed 
/ere  in  the  king's  gardens  south  of  the  city,  would  indi- 
ate  the  northern  and  southern  boundaries.  But  the  chief 
•Tiportance  of  these  local  and  topographical  details  in  this 
'Teat  prophecy  is  the  proof  which  they  afford  that  it  must 
|e  literally  understood,  and  that  it  is  of  Jerusalem  and 
'alestine  that  the  prophet  primarily  speaks,  or  what  can  the 
.llegorising  commentators  make  of  these  physical  land- 
,iarks  and  boundaries,  such  as  "  the  gate  of  Benjamin  " 
•nd  "  the  corner  gate  "  ?  And  in  what  part  of  the  heavenly 
erusalem  can  "  the  tower  of  Hananel  "  and  "  the  king's 
'inepresses  "  be  located  ? 

V.  The  i  ith  verse  gives  us  in  three  brief  sentences 
glimpse  of  the  blessed  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of 
erusalem,  which  shall  be  thus  renewed  and  established. 

(a)  "  And  they  shall  dwell  in  her"  that  is,  permanently  and 
/ peace,  "nevermore  to  go  forth  from  it  either  in  captivity 
r  in  flight."2  In  the  words  of  one  of  the  former  prophets, 

1  See  Jer.  xxxi.  38  ;  Neh.  iii.  I,  xii.  39.  *  Koehler. 

33 


514     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

Jacob  then  "  shall  be  quiet  and    at  ease,  and  none   shall 
make  him  afraid."1 

(£)  "  And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse  "  (or  "  ban,"  or 
"  sentence  of  destruction,"  as  the  word  may  be  rendered), 
because  the  causes  which  previously  provoked  the  Holy 
One  to  inflict  desolating  and  destructive  judgments  upon 
the  land  and  people  shall  be  no  more.2  Another  glorious  « 
and  blessed  contrast  with  the  past,  when  on  account  of  /i? 
manifold  and  continuous  transgressions  He  had  to  "  profane  jr 
the  princes  of  the  sanctuary,  and  give  Jacob  over  to  the  curse  K; 
(D?.n,  herein)  and  Israel  to  reproaches  "  (or  "  reviling").3  fc 

(c]  "  A  nd  Jerusalem  shall  dwell  (or  '  shall  be  inhabited ')  \i 
safely,  or  literally,  in  conscious  security  "  (n9?/,  labhetacli)  or  );,:, 
"  in  confidence  " ;  for,  though  it  shall  be  surrounded  neither  fa 
by  walls,  nor  fortifications,  it  shall  have  nothing  to  fear.  K( 
"  For  I,  saith  Jehovah,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  fe 
about,  and  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her,"  4  and  "  salvation  "  {/ 
will  Jehovah  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks.5  This  outline 
picture  of  the  blessed  condition  of  restored  and  purified 
Jerusalem,  which  in  the  millennial  period  will  be,  so  to  say,  /, 
the  earthly  vestibule  and  the  reflection  of  the  giory  $ 

]  k 

1  Jer.  xxx.  10. 

2  The   word   Q"in,    herein  (which  is  a   masculine   noun),   describes  primarily 
something  devoted—  usually  for  utter  destruction,  but  occasionally  also  for  sacred  ;, 
uses.     Thus,  for  instance,  the  cities  and  inhabitants  of  Canaan  were  devoted  by<  Of 
God  to  utter  destruction,  and  of  Jericho  particularly  we  read:  "And  the  cityj  j,, 
shall   be    Dnn,    herem   (devoted) — even  it  and  all  that  is  therein  to  Jehovah "  ,, 
(Josh.    vi.   17).     Achan,  by  taking   D"jnn  |p,  min   hacherem,   "of  the   devoted:  je 
thing,"  made  the  whole  camp  of  Israel  D"in,  "  accursed,"  or  devoted  to  destructive  „ 
judgment,  until  it  was  purged  by  the  discovery  and  stoning  of  the  transgressor,  „ 
who   became  himself  herem,  like   the  "devoted"  thing  which  he   had   stolen  :ir 
(Josh.  vi.   18,  vii.   11-13).     If  an  individual  or  a  whole  city  in  Israel  forsook  T 
Jehovah  and  turned  to  serve  other  gods,  they  became  herem,  devoted  to  utter  \ 
destruction  (Deut.  vii.  25,  26,  xiii.  12-17).     In  Lev.  xxvii.  29,  where  we  read,  a 
"All  devoted  (herem},  that  shall  be  devoted  from   among   men,  shall  not   be  , 
ransomed,    he  shall  surely  be  put  to   death,"   it  is  such  cases  which  are  con-  ; 
templated,  i.e.,  those  devoted  by  God  "  from  among  men  "  for  utter  destruction,  j, 
either  on  account  of  apostasy  or  because  of  some  special  crime.     Thus  Benha- 
dad  is  called  'Pin  E>'i<,  "  a  man  under  my  herem,  or  ban,"  "  one  whom  I  have  |T 
devoted  to  utter  destruction"  (i  Kings  xx.  42).     So  likewise  were  the  Amale-  r 
kites,  etc.     The  Septuagint  properly  renders  onri  in  Zech.  xiv.  II,  by  anathema.  -( 

3  Isa.  xliii.  28.  4  Zech.  ii.  4,  5.  5  Isa.  xxvi.  i. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  515 

of  the  new  or  heavenly  Jerusalem,  which  shall  come 
down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  is  filled  in  by  the  inspired 
utterances  of  the  "former"  prophets  (on  which  the  pro 
phecies  of  Zechariah  are  more  or  less  based),  but  particularly 
in  the  last  chapters  of  Isaiah :  "  For  behold,  I  create  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth  :  and  the  former  things  shall  not  be 
remembered,  nor  come  into  mind.  But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice 
for  ever  in  that  which  1  create  :  for  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem 
a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy.  And  I  will  rejoice  in  Jeru 
salem,  and  joy  in  My  people  :  and  the  voice  of  weeping  shall 
be  no  more  heard  in  her,  nor  the  voice  of  crying.  There  shall 
be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old  man  that  hath 
not  filled  his  days  :  for  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years 
old,  and  the  sinner  being  an  hundred  years  old  shall  be 
accursed.  .  .  .  They  shall  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  bring  fort] i 
for  calamity  :  for  tJiey  are  the  seed  of  the  blessed  of  the 
Lord,  and  their  offspring  with  them.  And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  that,  before  they  call,  I  will  answer,  and  while  they  are 
yet  speaking- 1  vvill  hear.  The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed 
together,  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox  :  and  dust 
shall  be  the  serpent's  meat.  They  shall  not  fmrt  nor  destroy 
in  all  My  holy  mountain,  saitJi  the  Lord"  l 

1  Isa.  Ixv.  17-20,  23-25.  Some  have  professed  to  find  a  contradiction 
between  the  words  of  Zechariah,  "  There  shall  be  no  curse,"  and  this  statement 
of  Isaiah  that  "  the  sinner  being  an  hundred  years  old  shall  be  accursed."  But  first 
the  passage  in  Isaiah  instances  what  are  probably  two  hypothetical  cases  illus 
trative  of  the  general  longevity  and  the  very  rare  occurrence  of  sin  in  renewed 
Jerusalem.  He  that  should  happen  to  die  "a  hundred  years  old"  will  be 
regarded  but  as  a  mere  "child,"  compared  with  the  average  length  of  days  to 
hich  man  shall  then  attain  ;  and  "the  sinner"  who  is  visited  with  God's  curse 
and  overwhelmed  with  the  punishment,  will  not  be  swept  away  before  the 
hundredth  year  of  his  life.  Secondly,  the  words  in  the  original  are  not  the  same. 
There  will  be  rare,  or  isolated,  instances  of  sin  in  the  Millennium,  and  God's 
curse,  nhh$,  qelalah  (Isa.  Ixv.  20 — literally,  "a  reviling"  "a  thing  lightly 
esteemed  "),  will  descend  on  individuals  ;  but  there  shall  be  no  more  cnn,  herem 
(Zech.  xiv.  u),  i.e.,  a  ban,  or  a  devoting  to  utter  destruction  of  the  city  and 
people,  which  shall  then  in  the  aggregate  be  cleansed  and  holy.  Isa.  xxv.  8 
carries  us  on  to  the  glorious  consummation.  Before  millennial  dawn  finally 
merges  into  the  Eternal  Day,  every  vestige  of  sin  and  death  shall  be  swept 
away.  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  for  ever,  and  the  Lord  God  will  wipe  away 
tears  from  off  all  faces,  and  the  reproach  of  His  people  shall  He  take  away  from 
off  all  the  earth  :  for  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it." 


516     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

The  glorious  picture  of  salvation  in  vers.  8-12  has 
its  obverse  side,  namely,  the  judgments  which  will  be 
inflicted  on  the  enemies  of  God  and  His  people.  Chrono 
logically,  vers.  12-15  follow  ver.  3,  for  the  terrible 
punishment  of  the  confederated  anti-Christian  hosts  which 
they  describe  (and  which  are  an  amplification  and  supple 
ment  to  the  prophetic  announcement  of  the  destruction  of 
these  same  Gentile  hosts  in  chap.  xii.  4—10)  are  the 
immediate  consequence  of  the  manifest  interposition  of 
Jehovah  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah  as  the  Deliverer  of 
His  people,  when  He  shall  "  go  forth  and  fight  against 
those  nations  as  when  He  fought  in  the  day  of  battle " ; 
but  the  detailed  description  of  the  judgments  on  Israel's 
enemies  is  passed  over  by  the  prophet  for  a  time  in  order 
that  the  wonderful  deliverance  of  God's  people  and  the 
glorious  transformation  of  Jerusalem  and  the  "  Holy  Land  " 
might  be  first  fully  described. 

Three  weapons  will  be  used  by  God  for  the  destruction 
of  the  enemies  of  His  Kingdom:  (i)  The  fearful  plague 
described  in  verse  1 2 ;  (2)  mutual  destruction  in  conse 
quence  of  a  great  panic  of  terror  "  from  Jehovah  "  ;  and  (3) 
the  superhuman  strength  of  the  saved  remnant  of  Judah, 
who  shall  suddenly  become  like  "  a  pan  of  fire "  among 
wood,  and  like  "  a  flaming  torch  among  sheaves "  l  and 
shall  devour  their  enemies  round  about,  on  their  right  hand 
and  on  their  left.  Of  these  three  simultaneous  judgments, 
the  first  two  are  spoken  of  as  being  inflicted  by  God's  own 
hand,  for  maggeplia,  rendered  "  plague "  (which  is  used  in 
the  Hebrew  for  "  infliction?  "  slaughter,"  "  plague,"  "  pesti 
lence  "),  always  denotes  a  plague  or  judgment  sent  direct 
by  God.2 

The  description  of  the  "  plague "  is  terribly  realistic. 
Literally,  "  He  (Jehovah}  makes  his  flesli  to  rot  (or  consume 
away},  while  he  standeth  on  his  feet "  (1y?1  -^  "J$?  Nimo  vehu 
omed  al  rag-lav),  which  is  perhaps  intended  to  express  the 
suddenness  with  which  God's  stroke  will  alight  upon  him  : 
"  And  his  eye  (singular}  shall  consume  aivay  in  their  sockets 

1  Chap.  xii.  6.  'J  See  Ex.  ix.  14  ;  Num.  xiv.  39 ;  i  Sam.  vi.  4. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  517 

(plural} ;  and  Jus  tongue  (singular)  shall  consume  away  in 
their  mouth  (plural)"  The  thought  which  the  prophet 
probably  intends  to  express,  by  the  use  of  the  singular 
suffix,  is  that  this  terrible  catastrophe  shall  overtake  each 
one  and  the  whole  company.  "  It  is,"  as  another  has 
expressed  it,  "the  act  of  God  in  His  individual  justice  to 
each  one  of  all  those  multitudes  gathered  against  Him." 
One  by  one  tlieir  eyes,  of  which  they  said,  "  Let  our  eye 
look  (or  '  gaze  ')  upon  Zion  "  x  (i.e.,  with  joy  at  her  desolation), 
shall  consume  away  in  their  sockets,  and  their  tongue,  with 
which  (like  Rabshakeh  and  the  Assyrians  in  a  former  siege 
of  Jerusalem  2)  they  blasphemed  God,  shall  consume  away 
in  their  mouth — a  truly  terrible  judgment,  intended  as  a 
warning  to  men  that  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  be  arrayed 
against  Jehovah  and  His  Anointed,  or  against  the  people 
and  the  city  with  which  He  and  His  cause  shall  in  that 
day  be  identified. 

The  niiT1.  nroinD,  m'humatJi  Yehovah — literally,  a  "  tumult 
of  Jehovah,"  with  which  the  gathered  hosts  shall  also  be 
seized  in  that  day,  is  the  supernatural  panic  and  "  con 
fusion  "  which  Jehovah  sends  among  His  enemies,  with  a 
view  to  their  utter  discomfiture  and  self-destruction.  It  is 
the  same  as  the  "  astonishment "  and  "  madness "  with 
which  the  horses  and  the  riders  of  these  same  hosts  are 
spoken  of  as  smitten  in  chap.  xii.  4,  and  as  a  consequence 
"they  shall  lay  hold"  (*\>^r«}.,hecfiziqu,  a  verb  which  is  used 
generally  but  not  exclusively  of  "  laying  hold,"  or  "  seizing 
violently  "  with  evil  intent)  "  every  one  on  the  hand  of  his 
neighbour."  Each  in  that  tumultuous,  panic-stricken 
throng  shall  seize  the  other's  hand,  "  mastering  him  power 
fully,"  with  a  view  to  his  destruction — "  and  his  hand  (i.e., 
each  man's  hand)  shall  be  lifted  up  against  the  hand  of  his 
neighbour,"  with  a  view  to  deliver  a  deadly  blow. 

Such  "  confusions  "  or  tumult  the  Lord  had  sent  be 
fore  in  the  midst  of  Israel's  enemies.  Thus  the  hosts  of 
Midian  were  discomfited  before  Gideon  and  his  little  band, 

1  Mic.  iv.  ii. 

-  Isa.  xxxvi.  18-22,  xxxvii.  4. 


5i8     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

and  the  multitude  of  Philistines  at  Michmash  "  melted 
away  "  before  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer.1 

But  the  historical  instance  of  the  self-destruction  of  the 
enemies  of  God's  people  by  means  of  such  a  "  confusion  " 
or  panic  sent  by  the  Lord,  to  which  the  prophet  seems 
specially  to  allude  as  an  illustration  of  what  will  overtake 
the  confederated  anti-Christian  hosts  in  the  future,  is  that 
recorded  in  2  Chron.  xx.,  when,  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of 
Jehoshaphet,  the  hosts  of  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Mount  Seir, 
which  were  gathered  against  Judah,  suddenly  fell  on  one 
another.  "  And  when  they  began  to  sing  and  to  praise,  the 
Lord  set  Hers  in  wait  against  the  children  of  Ammon,  Moab, 
and  Mount  Seir,  which  were  come  against  Judah  ;  and  they 
were  smitten.  For  the  children  of  Ammon  and  Moab 
stood  up  against  the  inhabitants  of  Mount  Seir,  utterly 
to  slay  and  destroy  them :  and  when  they  had  made  an 
end  of  the  inhabitants  of  Seir,  every  one  helped  to  destroy 
another." 

The  first  clause  of  the  I4th  verse  has  been  rendered  by 
some,  "  And  Judah  also  shall  fight  against  Jerusalem"  but 
there  is  no  justification  for  it  in  grammar,  and  it  is 
altogether  contrary  to  the  context:2  literally,  "  And  Judah 
also " — which  stands  here  for  the  whole  remnant  of  the 
people — •"  shall  fight  at  (or  '  in  ')  Jerusalem"  It  indicates 
the  third  weapon  which  (in  addition  to  the  "  plague "  and 
the  "  tumult ")  will  be  used  by  God  for  the  destruction  ol 

1  Judg.  vii.  22  ;   I  Sam.  xiii.  16-20. 

2  The  Targum  has  the  mistranslation  "against,"  and  so  also  the  Vulgate  ;  but 
the  Septuagint  and  the  Syriac  render  properly  "at"  or  "in."     Luther,  Calvin, 
Ewald,  etc.,  follow  the  Vulgate  ;  but  Koehler,  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Von  Orelli, 
Pusey,  Dr.  Wright,  and  almost  all  competent  modern  Hebrew  scholars,  translate 
"in  "or  "at  Jerusalem."     After  the  verb  cn^>j  (fight)  the  preposition  3  (be)  is 
often  used  in  a  local  sense,  especially  when  used  in  relation  to  places.     The  very 
same  idiom  as  in  this  passage  in  Zech.  xiv.  14  (3  cn^p)  is  found  in  Judg.  v.  19, 
where  it  certainly  means  "fought  in  Taanach,"  and   Ex.    v.    8.     Then    came 
Amaleh  and  fought  with  Israel,  OT?~)3 — "in  "  or  "at "(certainly  not  "against") 
Rephidim,  and  so  in  other  places.     The  English  Revised  Version  is  very  incon 
sistent  ;  for  whereas  it  renders  "against"  in  Zech.  xiv.   14,  it  has  translated  the 
same  proposition  "  at  "  or  "in "  in  the  other  passages  just  quoted,  and  in  other 
places.     It  is  properly  rendered  "at  Jerusalem"  in  the  "American  Standard 
Edition." 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  519 

the  confederated  hosts,  which  had  all  but  succeeded  in 
utterly  exterminating  the  remnant  of  His  people. 

While  their  foes  are  consumed  by  the  "  plague "  and 
engaged  in  fighting  with  one  another  in  consequence  of 
the  "  confusion  "  or  tumult  sent  among  them  by  the  Lord, 
the  remnant  of  Judah,  "  also "  conscious  now  that  the 
Captain  of  the  Lord's  host  is  with  them,  and  that  Almighty 
power  is  now  on  their  side,  are  suddenly  stirred  up  to  do 
valiantly  and  have  a  share  in  utterly  destroying  them. 

One  consequence  of  the  utter  discomfiture  of  these 
hosts  around  Jerusalem  is  that"  the  wealth  of  all  the  nations 
round  about  shall  be  gathered  together,  gold  and  silver  and 
apparel  in  great  abundance " ;  where  again  we  have  an 
allusion  by  the  prophet  to  historical  incidents  in  the  past 
history  of  the  nation  as  foreshadowments  of  the  future. 

Thus,  in  2  Chron.  xx.,  to  which  reference  has  already 
been  made,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  hosts  of  Ammon  and 
Moab  and  the  inhabitants  of  Mount  Seir,  we  read  that 
Jehoshaphat  and  his  people  gathered  into  Jerusalem  "  spoil 
in  abundance,  both  riches  and  garments  and  precious  jewels  "  ; 
and  thus  also,  when  the  hosts  of  Syrians,  who  were  besieg 
ing  Samaria,  were  suddenly  seized  with  panic,  fled  because 
the  Lord  had  made  them  "  hear  a  noise  of  chariots  and 
horses  and  of  a  great  host " — they  left  behind  abundance  of 
silver  and  gold  and  raiment.1 

And  inasmuch  as  these  hosts,  by  their  enmity  against 
God  and  His  people,  have  brought  themselves  under  His 
ban  for  utter  destruction,  the  animals  which  they  have 
brought  with  them  for  this  campaign  against  the  holy  land 
and  city,  will  also  be  overtaken  with  the  same  fate  as  their 
masters. 

"  And  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  horse,  of  the  mule,  and  oj 
the  camel,  and  of  the  ass,  and  of  all  the  beasts  that  shall  be  in 
those  camps  as  their  masters" 

This,  as  Hengstenberg  points  out,  is  in  accord  with  the 
Mosaic  law  in  reference  to  the  cJierem,  or  "  ban."  When  a 
whole  city  had  committed  the  crime  of  idolatry,  not  only 

1  2  Kings  vii.  2-8. 


520     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

the  inhabitants,  but  the  animals  also,  were  put  to  death  ;  in 
which  case  the  same  law  affecting  the  relation  between  the 
irrational  and  rational  portions  of  the  creation  was  repeated 
on  a  small  scale  as  that  which  caused  the  animal  creation 
to  be  "  subject  to  vanity,"  not  willingly,  "  on  account  of  the 
sin  of  man."  An  instance  of  this  we  have  in  the  case  of 
Achan,  whose  oxen,  asses,  and  sheep  were  stoned  and 
burned,  along  with  himself  and  his  children.1 

Blessed  be  God,  "  creation,"  which  has  become  involved 
in  the  sin  and  consequent  suffering  and  death  of  man,  is  to 
participate  also  in  the  benefits  of  the  great  redemption 
which  has  been  accomplished  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  shall  yet  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption 
into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.2 

But  there  is  a  beneficent  end  in  the  very  judgments  of 
God,  for  through  them  the  nations  will  at  last  learn 
righteousness,  and  the  fruit  will  be  "  universal  homage  to 
the  Universal  Ruler,"  3  Jehovah  of  Hosts,  and  in  the  person 
of  the  Messiah,  under  whose  sway  all  nations  shall  then  be 
blessed.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  every  one  that  is 
left  of  all  the  nations  that  come  up  against  Jerusalem  shall 
go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship  the  King,  Jehovah  of 
Hosts,  and  to  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles." 

First,  it  should  be  observed  that  when  it  is  said  that  all 
nations  and  families  of  the  earth  shall  come  up  to 
Jerusalem  from  year  to  year  to  worship  Jehovah,  and  in 
acknowledgment  of  Israel's  national  supremacy  in  the 
millennial  earth,  it  is  not  meant  that  every  individual  in 
each  nation  shall  come  up,  but  that  the  nations  shall  come 
up  representatively.  "  The  actions  of  nations  and  all 
corporate  bodies  is  always  spoken  of  in  Scripture  with 
reference  to  those  who  are  officially  appointed  to  express  or 
carry  out  their  will.  Thus  in  the  great  gathering  against 
Jerusalem  the  nations  concerned  therein  are  represented  by 
their  armies.  Every  individual  in  each  nation  will  not  be 
present,  yet  each  nation  is  said  to  be  there."  4 

1  Josh.  vii.  24,  25.  2  Rom.  viii.  20-22. 

3  Von  Orelli.  4  B.  W.  Newton. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  521 

The  commentators  differ  as  to  ivhy  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles  is  singled  out  as  the  one  which  all  the  nations 
are  represented  in  this  prophecy  as  coming  up  to  Jerusalem 
to  celebrate  ;  and  very  few  see  the  deep  typical  and  spiritual 
truth  set  forth  by  this  "  Hag-  Yehovah  " — the  "  Feast  of 
Jehovah,"  x  as  it  is  emphatically  called  in  Lev.  xxiii.,  which 
has  been  properly  styled  "  The  Sacred  Calendar  of  the 
History  of  Redemption,"  because  it  sets  forth,  by  a  series 
of  striking  types,  not  only  the  great  facts,  but  the  very 
order  in  which  the  various  stages  of  God's  great  redemption 
scheme  for  the  world  were  to  unfold  themselves  in  the 
course  of  time.  Briefly,  it  may  be  said  that  the  nations 
are  represented  as  coming  up  to  Jerusalem  to  keep  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles  because  the  spiritual  truths  set  forth 
by  this  particular  type  shall  then  be  realised — for  Jerusalem 
shall  then  be  the  metropolis  of  God's  Kingdom  on  earth, 
and  the  joy  and  blessedness  foreshadowed  by  that  feast  will 
then  not  only  be  the  portion  of  saved  Israel,  but  shall  also 
pervade  all  nations  of  the  earth. 

But  to  understand  this  more  clearly  we  must  examine 
a  little  more  fully  the  historical  and  prophetic  character  of 
this  feast.  Primarily  2  Tabernacles  was,  above  all  the  other 

1  Lev.  xxiii.  39.  Dr.  Wright  and  others  have  built  an  argument  against  the 
literal  interpretation  of  this  prophecy  on  Isa.  Ixvi.  23,  which,  according  to  them, 
represents  the  Gentile  nations  as  going  up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship,  not  only 
once  a  year,  but  at  all  the  festivals,  and  even  on  the  new  moons  and  Sabbaths. 
But  the  words  of  Isaiah  are  these :  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  from  one  new 
moon  to  another,  and  from  one  Sabbath  to  another,  shall  all  flesh  come  to  "worship 
before  Me,  saith  Jehovah."  He  says  nothing  about  their  going  up  to  Jerusalem 
to  keep  these  weekly  and  monthly  festivals.  Even  Israel  in  the  land  did  not  go 
up  to  Jerusalem  to  celebrate  their  Sabbaths  and  their  new  moons,  but  wor 
shipped  God  wherever  they  were.  And  so  "all  flesh  "  in  that  renewed  earth,  in 
which  shall  dwell  righteousness,  shall  come  together  (in  their  own  lands)  to 
worship  Jehovah  on  these  frequent  regular  occasions.  Zechariah,  however, 
speaks  distinctly  of  their  going  up  to  Jerusalem  at  the  annual  Feast  of  Taber 
nacles — not  at  all  an  impossible  thing.  An  argument  has  been  based  on  the 
opinion  that  the  more  distant  nations  could  not  obey  this  command  because  of 
the  time  required  for  the  journey,  but  we  do  not  yet  know  what  the  facilities  of 
travel  will  be  in  the  Millennium. 

z  This  section  on  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  quoted  here  from  the  ist 
chapter  of  Types,  Psalms,  and  Prophecies,  entitled  "The  Sacred  Calendar 
of  the  History  of  Redemption." 


522 

feasts,  "  the  harvest  festival  of  joy  and  thanksgiving,  in 
celebration  not  only  of  the  full  ingathering  of  the  '  labours 
of  the  field,'  but  also  of  the  fruit  and  of  the  vintage,  and  is 
therefore  pre-eminently  styled  '  the  Feast  of  Ingatherings  ' ' 
(Ex.  xxiii.  16;  xxxiv.  22;  Deut.  xvi.  13). 

It  had,  moreover,  a  clear  retrospective  or  commemora 
tive  significance,  as  is  plainly  stated  in  the  command  that 
they  should  dwell  in  booths  :  "  And  ye  shall  take  you  on  the 
first  day  the  fruit  of  the  goodly  trees,  branches  of  palm  trees, 
and  boughs  of  thick  trees,  and  willoivs  of  the  brook,  and  ye 
shall  rejoice  before  Jehovah  your  God  seven  days ;  ...  ye 
shall  dwell  in  booths  seven  days,  .  .  .  that  your  generations 
may  know  that  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  to  dwell  in 
booths  when  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt ;  I 
am  Jehovah  your  God"  (vers.  40—43) — an  ordinance  well 
calculated  indeed  to  keep  alive  in  their  mind  the  grateful 
remembrance  of  the  God  of  Israel,  who  sustained  them 
miraculously  in  the  wilderness,  and  led  them  by  the  hand 
of  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Joshua,  safely  into  the  promised  land. 

The  Rabbis  in  later  times  regarded  the  SukkaJi  (taber 
nacle),  in  which  they  dwelt  during  the  feast,  as  more 
especially  symbolical  of  the  cloud  of  glory  which  hovered 
over  the  Tabernacle,  and  which  led  and  shielded  Israel  by 
day  and  illumined  them  by  night  in  their  forty  years' 
wilderness  wanderings ;  but  even  the  Mishna  and  the 
Talmud  single  out  this  feast  from  all  the  others  as  being 
of  an  anticipative  or  prophetic  character,  while  Christian 
scholars  and  Bible  students  are  in  agreement  that  there  is 
nothing  in  this  dispensation  to  answer  to  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles.  No,  its  fulfilment  is  yet  in  the  future,  when, 
after  Israel's  national  Day  of  Atonement  shall  have  come 
to  pass,  and  the  nation  which  was  destined  of  God  from 
the  beginning  to  be  the  channel  of  blessing  to  the  world 
shall  have  been  reconciled  and  cleansed,  and  equipped  by 
the  power  of  God  to  go  forth  on  its  mission  of  spreading 
the  knowledge  of  their  Messiah  over  the  whole  earth,  the 
great  "Feast  of  Ingathering"  shall  take  place,  and  "all 
peoples  "  shall  sit  down  to  the  "  feast  of  fat  things,  yea,  a 


THE   GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  523 

feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow," 
which  Jehovah  of  hosts  has  prepared  for  them  on  Mount 
Zion.1 

Though  not  part  of  the  original  Mosaic  appointment, 
the  ceremonial  service  of  this  feast,  which  was  in  practice 
in  the  Temple,  was  also  designed  to  point  and  emphasise 
its  symbolic  and  prophetic  significance.  I  will  mention 
only  two  or  three  features  of  that  ritual. 

I.  Simchat-bet-ha-Shdebhak  —  literally,  "Joy  of  the 
House  of  Drawing  (the  water) ;  or,  the  Ceremonial  of 
Water  Libation." 

Every  morning  of  the  feast,  a  joyous  procession,  accom 
panied  by  music  and  headed  by  a  priest  bearing  a  golden 
pitcher,  measuring  just  a  little  over  two  pints,  made  its 
way  from  the  Temple  courts  to  the  Pool  of  Siloam.  At 
the  same  time  another  procession  went  to  the  place  in 
the  Kedron  valley  called  Moza,  or  Colonia,  whence  they 
brought  willow  branches,  which  they  bound  on  either  side 
of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  "  bending  them  over  towards 
it  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of  leafy  canopy." 

Then  the  ordinary  sacrifice  proceeded,  "  the  priest  who 
had  gone  to  Siloam  so  timing  it  that  he  returned  just  as 
his  brethren  carried  up  the  pieces  of  the  sacrifice  to  lay 
them  on  the  altar.  As  he  entered  by  the  '  Water  Gate,' 
which  obtained  its  name  from  this  ceremony,  he  was 
received  by  a  threefold  blast  from  the  priests'  trumpets." 
Amid  great  demonstrations  of  excitement  and  joy  this 
water  was  poured  into  a  silver  basin,  or  tube,  on  the  altar, 
simultaneously  with  the  prescribed  libation  of  wine,  which 
was  poured  into  another  tube. 

On  the  seventh  day,  called  the  "  Hoshanna  rabba,"  the 

1  Isa.  xxv.  "That  these  are  not  ideal  comparisons,  but  the  very  design  of  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  appears  not  only  from  the  language  of  the  prophets  and 
the  peculiar  services  of  the  feast,  but  also  from  its  position  in  the  Calendar,  and 
even  from  the  names  by  which  it  is  designated  in  Scripture.  Thus  in  its  refer 
ence  to  the  harvest  it  is  called  '  Feast  of  Ingathering ' ;  in  that  to  the  history  of 
Israel  in  the  past,  the  '  Feast  of  Tabernacles ' ;  while  its  symbolic  bearing  on  the 
future  is  brought  out  in  its  designation  as  emphatically  '  the  feast '  and  '  the 
Feast  of  Jehovah.'"— Edersheim. 


524     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

great  Hosanna,  the  joy  and  excitement  of  the  people 
reached  their  climax.  The  joyous  crowds  of  worshippers 
on  that  day,  seen  from  one  of  the  flat  roofs  of  Jerusalem 
overlooking  the  Temple  area,  would  resemble  a  forest  in 
motion,  for  all  carried  palm  branches  in  their  hands  which 
were  more  than  a  man's  height  in  length.  Great  silence 
would  fall  on  the  assembled  throng  as  the  choir  of  Levites 
commenced  to  sing  the  Hallel  (the  specially  prescribed 
"  Praise "  for  the  great  festivals,  consisting  of  Pss.  cxiii.- 
cxviii.),  to  each  line  of  which  the  people  had  to  respond 
with  "  Hallelujah."  Soon  the  whole  crowd  fell  into  order, 
and,  led  by  the  priests,  marched  in  procession  round  the 
altar.  Seven  times  they  encompassed  it.  As  the  singers 
reached  vers.  25  to  29  of  Ps.  cxviii.,  and  joined  in  the 
words,  "  Ana  Adonai  Hoshio-na!"  ("Hosanna,  make  Thy 
salvation  now  manifest,  O  Lord!"),  "Ana  Adonai 
Hatslicha-na  ! "  ("  O  Lord,  send  now  prosperity  ! "),  the 
people  waved  their  palm  branches  and  accompanied  the 
song  with  loud  exclamations  of  joy.  And  as  they  reached 
the  words,  "  Blessed  is  He  that  cometli  in  tJie  Name  of 
Jehovah"  the  godly  and  spiritual  among  them  would  in 
their  hearts  greet  the  coming  Messiah  and  King,  to  whom 
they  well  knew  these  words  applied. 

The  joy  accompanying  this  ceremonial  was  so  great 
that  it  became  a  proverb.  "  He  that  hath  not  seen 
Simcliat-bet-Jia-Shdebkali,  the  joy  of  the  drawing  (and  the 
pouring)  of  the  water,  hath  not  seen  joy  in  this  life." 
Now,  though  the  Rabbis  attached  a  symbolic  significance 
to  the  ceremonial  in  connection  with  the  dispensation  of 
the  rain,  the  amount  of  which  for  the  year  they  imagined 
was  determined  by  God  at  this  feast ;  and  perhaps  also  a 
commemorative  sense,  as  reminding  them  of  the  wonders 
God  wrought  in  the  wilderness  in  giving  them  water  out 
of  a  rock,  the  main  reference  according  to  themselves,  as 
already  said,  was  to  the  future  blessings  to  be  bestowed 
on  them  in  Messiah's  time,  and  especially  pointed  to  the 
pouring  out  of  the  Spirit ;  as  is  to  be  inferred  from  the 
singing  by  the  multitude  of  Isa.  xii.  3,  and  from  the  distinct 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  525 

statement  in  the  Talmud  (Jer.,  Sukkah  v.,  also  Tosefta 
Sukkah  iv.).  "  Why  is  it  called  Bet-ha-ShtfebJuih  ?  (the  joy 
of  drawing  or  pouring).  Because  of  the  pouring  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  according  to  what  is  said  :  '  WitJi  joy  sJiall  ye 
draiv  ivater  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation' "  Now,  in  a 
limited  though  very  blessed  degree,  this  has  already  been 
fulfilled,  for  it  was  in  reference  to  this  ceremonial  of  the 
pouring  of  water  that  our  Lord  Jesus  "  on  the  last  day — 
the  great  day  of  the  feast " — stood  and  cried,  saying,  "  If 
any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink.  He  that 
believeth  on  Me,  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  His  belly 
shall  flow  rivers  of  living-  water  :  and  tliis  He  spake  of  the 
Spirit  which  they  that  believed  were  about  to  receive " ;  in 
accordance  with  which,  when  once  Jesus  was  glorified,  on 
being  raised  from  the  dead  and  taken  up  to  the  right  hand 
of  God,  the  Spirit  came  down  from  heaven  like  a  rushing 
mighty  wind,  and  the  Church  of  this  dispensation  was 
formed,  every  living  member  of  which  knows  experiment 
ally  of  the  indwelling  of  this  blessed  heavenly  Paraclete. 

In  its  fulness,  however,  such  a  prophecy  as  Isa.  xii.  and 
the  wonderful  prediction  of  Joel — "And  it  shall  come  to 
pass  afterward  tJtat  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all 
flesh " — will  only  be  realised  subsequent  to  Israel's  great 
national  Day  of  Atonement.  Then  "  the  ransomed  of 
Jehovah  shall  return  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and 
everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads ;  they  shall  obtain  joy 
and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away " 
(Isa.  xxxv.  10).  Then  shall  Israel  nationally  experience 
the  truth  of  Christ's  word,  "  But  the  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into 
eternal  life "  ;  and  then  also  "  shall  living  waters  go  out 
from  Jerusalem  "  for  the  quickening  and  refreshing  of  the 
whole  world  (Zech.  xiv.  6). 

2.  Another  feature  in  the  Temple  service  of  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  also  deserves  mention,  because  of  its  rich 
symbolic  import. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  first  day  of  the  feast  the 
worshippers  congregated  in  the  Court  of  the  Women,  where 


526     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

a  great  illumination  took  place.  Four  huge  golden  lamps 
or  candelabras  were  there,  each  with  four  golden  bowls, 
against  which  rested  four  ladders.  Four  youths  of  priestly 
descent  ascended  these  with  large  pitchers  of  oil  from 
which  they  filled  each  bowl.  The  old  worn  breeches  and 
girdles  of  the  priests  served  for  wicks  for  these  lamps.  So 
great  and  brilliant  was  the  light  that,  according  to  a  saying, 
"  There  was  not  a  court  in  Jerusalem  that  was  not  lit  up 
by  it."  Around  these  great  golden  burning  lamps  a  sacred 
dance  took  place,  in  which  even  the  Jiassidim  (saints)  and 
"  the  men  of  deed,"  or  prominent  leaders  of  the  people, 
with  flaming  torches  in  their  hands,  danced  before  the 
people  and  sang  before  them  hymns  and  songs  of  praise. 
"  The  Levites  also,  with  harps,  and  lutes,  and  cymbals,  and 
trumpets,  and  with  instruments  of  music  without  number, 
stood  upon  the  fifteen  steps  which  led  down  from  the  Court 
of  Israel  to  that  of  the  Women,  according  to  the  number  of 
the  fifteen  '  Songs  of  Degrees '  in  the  Book  of  Psalms." 

This  illumination,  too,  was  regarded  as  of  the  same 
twofold  symbolic  significance  as  the  pouring  of  the  water. 
It  reminded  them  of  the  past  when  God  led  them  in  the 
wilderness  with  the  cloud  of  glory  and  the  pillar  of  fire — 
of  the  Shekinah  glory  which  dwelt  in  the  first  Temple, 
but  was,  alas  !  already  absent  in  the  second  ;  but  it  also, 
and  chiefly,  was  meant  to  remind  them  of  the  Messianic 
promises  in  the  future  when  the  light  of  Jehovah  should 
arise  upon  their  land  and  people. 

Now  this,  too,  has,  in  a  partial  degree,  been  already 
fulfilled,  for  He  who  cried,  "  If  any  man  thirst  let  him 
come  unto  Me  and  drink,"  at  this  same  feast,  and  in 
reference  to  this  illumination,  again  spake  unto  them, 
saying,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world  ;  he  that  followeth 
Me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  Light  of 
Life  " ;  and  since  then  hundreds  of  millions  who  have  heard 
His  voice,  and  have  followed  in  His  steps,  have  had  their 
hearts  and  souls,  their  present  and  their  future  eternity 
illumined  by  His  Gospel.  But  while  this  is  so,  Israel,  as  a 
nation,  still  walks  in  darkness,  and  the  other  peoples  of  the 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  527 

earth  are  still  covered  by  the  shadow  of  death — until  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing  in  His  wings, 
and  the  word  shall  go  forth :  "  Arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is 
come,  and  the  glory  of  Jehovah  is  risen  upon  thee."  Then 
"  nations"  as  nations,  "  shall  come  to  thy  light ;  and  kings 
to  the  brightness  of  thy  glory"  (Isa.  Ix.  1—3);  and  the 
promise  confirmed  by  the  oath  of  Him  who  cannot  lie  shall 
be  fulfilled  :  "  As  truly  as  I  live,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled 
with  the  glory  of  Jehovah"  (Num.  xiv.  21). 

The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was  the  only  one  that  had 
an  octave,  "  the  last  and  great  day  of  the  feast,"  the  Azereth 
— "  conclusion,"  or  "  crowning  feast  of  all  the  feasts  of  the 
year,"  as  Philo,  the  Alexandrian,  called  it ;  on  which  Israel 
dwelt  no  longer  in  booths  to  remind  them  of  the  wilderness 
but  returned  to  their  homes  to  rejoice  there,  and  to  begin, 
so  to  say,  a  cycle  beyond  the  one  of  seven  which  they  had 
just  completed. 

Now  the  eighth  day  in  Scripture  is  the  Resurrection 
Day,  and  points,  I  believe,  to  the  Eternal  Day,  after  the 
cycle  of  time  in  which  the  history  of  the  earth,  as  set  forth 
in  the  Sacred  Calendar  of  the  History  of  Redemption,  shall 
have  been  finished,  when  the  consummation  of  earthly  rest 
shall  synchronise  with  the  commencement  of  heavenly  glory 
— "when  a  great  voice  out  of  the  throne  shall  go  forth, 
saying :  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  He 
shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  His  people.  And 
God  Himself  shall  be  with  them  and  be  their  God.  And 
God  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from  their  eyes,  and  there 
shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither 
shall  there  be  any  more  pain  :  for  the  former  things  have 
passed  away"  (Rev.  xxi.  1-8). 

"  Then,"  to  conclude  with  the  words  of  an  old  divine, 
"  the  mystery  of  the  water  which  was  poured  upon  the 
sacrifices  shall  be  fulfilled,  when  He  who  is  the  Alpha  and 
the  Omega  shall  proclaim,  //  is  done.  '  /  will  give  to  him 
that  is  athirst  of  the  water  of  life  freely.'  Then  He  who, 
at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  invited  sinners  to  come  to 
Him  and  drink,  shall  lead  His  redeemed  people  by  living 


528     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

fountains  of  water ;  and  make  them  drink  of  tJie  river  of  His 
pleasures.  Then,  too,  the  symbol  of  the  palm  branches 
shall  be  accomplished  in  the  final  victory  of  the  redeemed 
over  Death  and  Hades ;  and  they  shall  realise  the  blessed 
fulfilment  of  the  promise,  '  He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit 
all  thing's  ;  and  I  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  My  Son! 

"  Then,  too,  shall  be  the  great  Hosanna,  when  that  great 
multitude,  which  no  man  could  number,  out  of  all  nations, 
and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,  shall  stand  before 
the  throne  of  God,  and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white 
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands,  and  shall  '  cry  with  a  loud 
voice,  saying :  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb'  (Rev.  vii.  9,  10)." 

During  that  blessed  millennial  period  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  Jehovah  shall  indeed  cover  the  earth,  and  all 
nations  shall  walk  in  His  light.  Sin  and  iniquity  will  no 
longer  be  allowed  to  lift  up  their  head,  and  apostasy  and 
rebellion  will  be  visited  with  instant  punishment  whenever 
they  manifest  themselves.  Yet  we  know  from  prophetic 
Scripture  that  the  hearts  of  multitudes  among  the  Gentile 
nations  will  not  be  fully  subdued  to  God  and  His  truth, 
even  in  the  Millennium,  and  that  many  of  them  will  render 
only  a  feigned  submission  to  the  Divine  King,  whose  throne 
shall  be  on  Mount  Sion.  There  follows  therefore  the 
warning  to  the  nations  against  disobedience  to  His  com 
mand  to  come  up  to  Jerusalem  to  render  homage  to  the 
King,  Jehovah  of  hosts.  "  And  it  shall  be  tJiat  whoso  of 
the  families  of  the  earth  goetJi  not  up  unto  Jerusalem  to 
worship  the  King,  Jeliovah  of  Hosts,  upon  them  there  shall  be 
no  rain"  which  commentators  take  to  mean  the  "  early  rain," 
which  generally  falls  in  Palestine  about  the  end  of  October 
and  the  beginning  of  November  soon  after  Tabernacles,  but 
D^?.  (geshem — the  word  here  used)  usually  stands  simply  for 
heavy,  torrential  rain,  i"nv  (yoreli),  being  the  special  word 
for  the  "  early  rain."  Besides,  this  is  a  threat  uttered,  not 
against  Israel  and  Palestine,  but  the  Gentile  nations,  whose 
seasons  and  climates  may  be  altogether  different. 

The  word   is  to  be  taken   first  of  all  in  its  literal  sense. 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  529 

The  withholding  of  rain  was  one  of  the  ways  by  which  God 
was  wont  to  punish  the  apostasy  of  His  own  people  in  the 
days  of  the  theocracy,1  and  He  now  threatens  to  inflict  it 
on  the  Gentile  nations  in  case  of  disobedience.  At  the  same 
time,  there  is  also  here  a  blending  of  the  literal  and  the 
piritual,  and  the  punishment  threatened  includes  also  the 
withholding  from  the  disobedient  nations,  or  "  families,"  of 
the  showers  of  God's  grace  and  blessing,  of  which  the  literal 
rain  is  often  used  in  Scripture  as  an  emblem. 

For  this  punishment,  in  case  of  disobedience,  there  will 
be  no  exception  and  escape.  This  is  the  thought  ex 
pressed  in  the  two  following  verses :  "  And  if  the  family  of 
Egypt  go  not  up,  and  come  not,  then  also  not  upon  them ; 
tJtere  sJiall  be  the  plague  wherewith  Jehovah  will  plague  the 
nations  that  go  not  up  to  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles" 

This  is  the  literal  rendering  of  the  words  as  they  stand 
in  the  Hebrew  text,  but  the  actual  meaning  is  not  ab 
solutely  certain.2 

Egypt  is  especially  named  according  to  Von  Orelli, 
Koehler,  and  others,  because  of  its  peculiar  conditions  and 
climate — for  however  it  ultimately  depended  on  the  equa 
torial  rains,  which  overfilled  the  lakes  which  supply  the 
Nile,  it  did  not  need  that  fine  arrangement  of  the  rains  ot 
autumn  and  spring  which  were  essential  to  the  fruitfulness 
of  Palestine.  Hence  it  may  perhaps  encourage  itself  in  the 
thought  that  the  threatened  infliction  in  case  of  disobedience 
would  be  no  punishment  to  them.  The  prophet  therefore 

1  Comp.  I  Kings  xvii.,  xviii. 

2  Most  commentators  supply  the  words  Dffan  nvr,  yihyeh  haggashem,   "  and 
not  upon  (or  '  neither  upon  them  ')  shall  be  the  rain."     It  is  possible,  however, 
that  the  adverb,  vh  ("  not")  before  the  word  DivVy,  "upon  them,"  has  crept  in 
by  mistake  from  the  previous  line,  and  that  the  Septuagint  is  in  this  case  likely 
to  be  correct.     By  omitting  one  of  the  negatives,  it  reads  simply,  "  And  if  the 
tribe  of  Egypt  does  not  go  up  nor  come,  the  plague  will  be  upon  them   with 
which  Jehovah  will  smite  all  the  nations."     Lange,  following  Hitzigand  Bunsen, 
renders  the  passage  interrogatively :  "  And  if  the  family  of  Egypt  will  not  go 
up  and  will  not  come,  then   will  the  plague   not   fall   upon   them  with  which 
Jehovah  shall  smite  the  nation  which  will  not  go  up  in  order  to  keep  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles?"  to  which  question  the  igth  verse  is,  according  to  this  rendering, 
supposed  to  be  the  answer.     But  this  translation  is  rejected  by  most  scholars  on 
grammatical  grounds. 

34 


530     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

emphasises  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  Egypt's  apparent 
independence  of  rain,  it  would  suffer  the  consequences  that 
follow  the  withholding  of  rain,  as  much  as  the  other  nations 
that  are  dependent  on  it.  It  may  be  also,  as  Pusey  sug 
gests,  that  the  words  are  left  undefined  "with  a  purposed 
abruptness "  (the  word  rain  not  being  mentioned  in  the 
Hebrew  in  the  I  8th  verse),  "  there  shall  not  be  upon  them" 
namely,  "  whatever  they  need."  x 

The  thought  that  Egypt  if  disobedient  will  be  overtaken 
in  the  same  judgment  is  solemnly  repeated  in  the  19th 
verse :  "  This  shall  be  the  punishment  of  Egypt  and  the 
punishment  of  all  the  nations  that  go  not  up  to  keep  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles."  The  word  used  here  for  punishment  is 
nxipn,  hattath,  which  primarily  means  "  sin " ;  but  it 
signifies  also  sin  in  its  effects,  as  bringing  punishment  in  its 
train.  The  word  stands  also  sometimes  for  "  sin-offering," 
which  reminds  us  of  the  intimate  relation  that  exists  in 
God's  moral  government  of  the  world  between  sin  and  its 
punishment,  and  helps  us  to  understand  such  a  statement 
as  that  Christ,  who  knew  no  sin,  was  made  sin  for  us — 
namely,  a  sin-offering,  enduring  and  bearing  the  conse 
quence  of  sin  on  our  behalf. 

In  the  last  two  verses  we  reach  the  glorious  goal  and 
climax  of  vision  and  prophecy.  God's  original  purpose  in 
the  calling  and  election  of  Israel — "  Ye  shall  be  unto  Me  a 
Kingdom  of  priests,  an  holy  nation  " — shall  at  last  be 
realised  ;  the  aim  and  purpose  of  the  whole  law, — namely, 
that  His  people  might  learn  the  meaning  of  holiness  and 
become  holy  because  Jehovah  their  God  is  holy  ;  but  to 
which,  so  long  as  they  were  in  bondage  to  the  law,  they 
could  not  attain,  shall  at  last  be  fulfilled  when  they  are 
brought  into  a  condition  of  grace,  and  when  God  shall  put 
His  law  into  their  inward  parts  and  write  it  on  their  hearts 

1  Kiel,  Breclenkamp,  and  others  contend,  however,  that  the  prophet  mentions 
Egypt  especially,  not  because  of  the  fact  in  natural  history  that  this  land  owes  its 
fertility  not  to  rain,  but  to  the  overflowing  of  the  Nile— but  as  the  nation  which 
showed  the  greatest  hostility  to  Jehovah  and  His  people  in  the  olden  time,  and 
for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  this  nation  was  also  to  attain  a  full  participation 
in  the  blessings  of  salvation  bestowed  upon  Israel  (comp.  Isa.  xix.  19-25). 


THE  GLORIOUS  CONSUMMATION  531 

Then  the  world  shall  witness  for  the  first  time  the  glorious 
;pectacle  of  a  whole  nation,  and  every  individual  member 
it,  wholly  consecrated  to  Jehovah,  and  an  earthly  capital 
which  shall  truly  answer  to  its  name,  "  The  Holy  City," 
Because  it  shall  in  many  ways  be  the  earthly  counterpart  and 
reflection  of  the  glory  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  will 
come  down  out  of  heaven  from  God. 

And    not    only    shall    nin!>  Knp>  Qodesh    la-Yehovah— 
'  Holiness  (or  '  holy  ')  unto  the  Lord  "  be  written  on  their 
persons,  and   on  all    the   outward  and  inward  life  of   the 
whole  community,  but  on   everything  they   possess.      "  In 
tJiat  day  shall  there  be  (engraven}  on  the  bells  of  the  horses, 
Holy   unto  Jehovah :  and  the  pots   in  Jehovah's  House  " — 
which  were  used  for  the  boiling  of  the  sacrificial  flesh,  of 
which  the  common  people,  as  well  as  the  priests,  could  eat, 
and  were   therefore  regarded  as  less  holy — "  shall  be  like 
the    bowls    before    the   altar" — in   which  the  blood  of    the 
sacrifices  was  received,  and  out  of  which  it  was  sprinkled, 
or  poured,  upon  the  altar,  and  therefore  regarded  as  most 
holy.      In  the  words  of  a  deep  student  of  Scripture,  "  The 
whole  external  character  of  life — that  which  is  exhibited  in 
the  streets  of  a  city  (represented  by  the  tinkling  sound  of 
the  bells  of  the  passing  horses)  shall  bear  in  all  its  parts, 
throughout  all  its  detail,  the  impress  of  holiness  unto  the 
Lord.      Religious  life  and  fellowship  shall  be  holy  also ;  for 
the   pots    in  the   Lord's   House,  vessels  which  of   old   the 
priests  had   so  often  defiled,  shall  be  like  the  bowls  of  the 
altar.      Private  and  domestic  life  shall  be  hallowed  too ;  for 
'  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judah  (that  is,  througJiout  the 
holy  land)  shall  be  holy  unto  Jehovah  of  Hosts :  and  all  they 
that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take  of  them  and  seethe  (or  boil) 
in  them.'     For  everything  alike  shall  be  holy,  and  all  such 
distinctions    as    '  profane,'    '  holy,'    and    '  most    holy,'   shall 
completely  cease  '  in  that  day.' " 

"  The  distinction  between  holy  and  profane  can  only 
cease,  however,"  to  quote  yet  another  writer,  "  when  the  sin 
and  moral  defilement  njhich  first  evoked  this  distinction,  and 
made  it  necessary  that  the  things  intended  for  the  service 


532     VISIONS  AND  PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 

of  God  should  be  set  apart  and  receive  a  special  consecra 
tion,  have  been  entirely  removed  and  wiped  away.  To 
remove  this  distinction,  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  cleansing 
away  of  sin,  and  to  sanctify  once  more  that  which  sin  had 
desecrated,  was  the  object  of  the  sacred  institutions  ap 
pointed  by  God.  To  this  end  Israel  was  separated  from 
the  nations  of  the  earth ;  and  in  order  to  train  it  up 
as  a  holy  nation,  and  to  secure  the  object  described, 
a  law  was  given  to  it,  in  which  the  distinction  between  holy 
and  profane  ran  through  all  the  relations  of  life.  And  this 
goal  will  be  eventually  reached  by  the  people  of  God,  and 
sin  with  all  its  consequences  be  cleansed  away  by  the 
judgment.  In  the  perfected  Kingdom  of  God  there  will  be 
no  more  sinners,  but  only  such  as  are  righteous  and 
holy." ! 

Finally,  "  there  shall  be  no  more  a  Canaanite  in  the  House 
of  Jehovah  of  Hosts  in  that  day!'  The  Hebrew  word  S?V^, 
Klienaani,  means  also  "  trader,"  or  "  merchant,"  because  in 
early  times  the  Canaanites,  especially  the  Phoenicians,  were 
known  in  the  world  as  traders.  Some  therefore  prefer  to 
render  the  clause,  "  There  shall  no  more  be  a  trafficker  in  the 
House  of  the  Lord,"  which  is  also  the  rendering  of  the  Jewish 
Targum.  But  whether  we  take  the  term  Canaanite  to 
stand  for  the  unclean  and  the  godless,  or  understand  it  as 
meaning  merchant  or  trafficker,  the  sense  is  practically  the 
same.  Nothing  that  defileth,  or  that  maketh  an  abomination 
or  a  lie,  or  that  could  disturb  the  peace  or  mar  the  holiness, 
shall  in  anywise  be  permitted  to  enter  that  House,  which 
"  in  that  day  "  shall  be  the  House  of  Prayer  for  all  nations. 

"  For  this  shall  be  the  law  of  the  House :  upon  the  top 
of  the  mountain  the  whole  limit  thereof  round  about  shall 
be  most  holy.  Behold,  this  is  the  law  of  the  House."  - 

1  Kcil.  -  Ezek.  xliii.  12. 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Abarbanel,  commentary  of,  109 ;  on 
"  And  I  cut  off  three  shepherds  in  one 
month,"  380,  381  ;  on  the  "break 
ing  of  the  staves,"  389 ;  the  four 
horns,  46. 

Abarbanel  (Abrabanel),  repentance  and 
recognition  of  the  Messiah  by  Israel, 
440. 

Aben  Ezra,  191  ;  on  twofold  nature  of 
the  Messiah,  478. 

Abraham  ben  Ezra,  Rabbi,  repentance 
and  recognition  of  the  Messiah  by 
Israel,  440. 

Abraham,  God's  covenant  with,  anti- 
typical  ratification  of,  318. 

Abraham,  Isaac  ben,  Rabbi,  of  Troki, 
Chizztik  Emunah,  438  ;  on  repent 
ance  and  future  recognition  of  the 
Messiah  by  Israel,  438. 

Abraham,  Rabbi,  of  Toledo,  "foolish'' 
(wicked) shepherd,  415. 

Actions  of  the  Prophets  to  be  under 
stood  as  predictions,  390. 

Alexander  the  Great,  victories  of,  pro 
phesied,  286. 

Alford  (Dean),  on  passage  in  Epistle  of 
Jude  referring  to  "The  Body  of 
Moses,"  124 ;  what  Israel  will  learn 
on  "  that  day,"  436,  437. 

Alshech,  Moses,  sixteenth  century,  on 
repentance  and  recognition  of 
Messiah  (Messiah  ben  Joseph)  by 
Israel,  441. 

Angel  attendants,  referred  to  as  "  these 
that  stand  by,"  105. 

Angelic  riders,  the,  23,  24  ;  symbolism 
of,  27,  28  ;  their  report  concerning 
the  Gentile  world,  32. 

Angel  of  Jehovah,  the,  His  character, 

533 


23 ;  answer  of,  to  accusations  of  Satan, 
94 ;  answer  to  intercession  of,  35  ; 
appearance  in  Temple  of,  88  ;  as  ad 
vocate,  33,  34,  35,  88,  91,  95  ;  as 
judge,  89 ;  identity  of  interpreting 
Angel  with  the  ;  arguments  for  and 
against,  28-31;  identity  of  "the 
man  "  in  first  vision  with  the  ;  argu 
ments  for  and  against,  23,  24,  59  ; 
the  identity  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah 
with  the  "  Angel  of  His  Face,"  87. 

Angels,  chariots  and  winds  in  eighth 
vision  identified  with,  175  ;  minis 
tering,  31,  32,  91. 

Apocrypha,  the,  "The  Ascension,"  or 
"Assumption  of  Moses,"  123. 

Apostasy  of  the  people  of  Israel,  judg 
ment  as  punishment  for,  causes  and 
manner  of,  379 ;  judgment  conse 
quent  on,  predicted,  376,  377. 

Atonement,  Day  of,  the,  redeeming 
work  of  Christ  prefigured  by,  119, 
121,  140. 

Augustine,  327. 

Autocratic  ruler,  or  "Exactor,"  the, 
emblematic  of  the  Messiah  at  His 
second  coming,  355-357. 

Babylon,  command  to  flee  out  of,  69, 
70;  prophecies  concerning,  167,  168. 

Babylonia,  recuperative  power  of,  169, 
170. 

Bagdad  railway,  importance  of,  169, 
170. 

"  Battle  Bow,"  the,  emblematic  of  the 
Messiah,  354,  355. 

Baumgarten,  Die  Nachtgescichte  Sack- 
arias,  124  ;  on  mountains  of  brass, 
174  ;  the  stone  laid  before  Joshua, 


534 


GENERAL  INDEX 


114  ;  the  vision  of  the  Flying  Roll, 
146. 

Benaiah,  Rabbi,  on  meaning  of  word 
"Hadrach,"  287. 

Bernard,  Progress  of  Doctrine  hi  (he 
New  Testament,  112. 

Bernard,  St.,  quotation  from,  250. 

Bethel,  deputation  from,  210-211  ; 
answer  of  Jehovah  to,  214,  225 ; 
foreign  names  borne  by,  212,  213  ; 
message  to,  229  ;  question  put  by, 
213,  214,  248  ;  special  significance 
of,  211,  212. 

Blayney  (Dr.),  Benjamin,  Dissertation 
on  the  Seventy  Weeks  of  Daniel,  263  ; 
opinion  of,  with  regard  to  authorship 
of  final  chapters  of  Zechariah,  263, 
264,  277. 

Bleek,  on  meaning  of  word  "Had 
rach,"  287;  view  on  authorship  of 
second  part  of  Zechariah,  395. 

Body  of  Moses,  the,  contention  as  to 
connection  of  reference  in  Epistle  of 
Jude  to,  with  fourth  vision  of  Zecha 
riah,  122-124. 

Bottcher,  on  authorship  of  final  chapters 
of  Zechariah,  270,  273. 

Bredenkamp,  182,  on  authorship  of 
final  chapters  of  Zechariah,  276  ; 
colours  of  horses  in  eighth  vision, 
179-181  ;  reason  for  Zechariah  men 
tioning  Egypt,  especially  in  reference 
to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  530 ; 
woman  in  the  ephah,  165  ;  Prophet 
Sacharja,  157;  word  "Hadrach" 
regarded  by,  as  scribal  error,  287. 
Bunsen,  on  pre-exilic  authorship  of  the 
second  part  of  Zechariah,  395,  396. 

Calvin,  on  colours  of  horses  in  eighth 
vision,  177  ;  on  chap.  ix.  7,  297. 

Candlestick,  golden,  belonging  to  Tab 
ernacle,  not  Temple,  147  ;  catholic 
unity  symbolised  by,  133,  143  ;  de 
scription  of,  130,  131  ;  emblematical 
of  Israel's  religious  and  ecclesiastical 
position,  131,  134. 

"  Captivity,"  the,  237-238;  "a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire  "  as  figure  of, 


94»  9S»  96>  distinction  between  'The 
Desolations  "  and,  35  ;  influence  and 
result  on  Jews  of,  157,  158;  myrtles 
in  first  vision  as  symbolical  of,  25,  26; 
prophetic  period  termed  "  times  of 
the  Gentiles "  inaugurated  by,  96 ; 
uncertainty  as  to  starting-point  of,  34. 

"Carpenters"  or  Smiths,  the,  four, 
52-54  ;  divine  judgment  and  omni 
potence  symbolised  by,  52,  53. 

"Cedars "and  "firs"  (or  "cypresses"), 
referred  to  by  Zechariah,  figurative 
terms,  378. 

Chariot,  Jewish   Rabbis'  definition  of, 

173- 

Chariots,  the  four,  eighth  vision,  in- 
terpretation  of,  175  ;  significance  of 
number,  175,  176;  winds  identified 
with,  175,  176,  178. 

Chieftain,  Philistine  nation  referred  to 
as,  chap.  ix.  7,  296. 

Christ,  foundation-stone  of  Temple  as 
symbol  of,  115,  117  ;  national  rejec 
tion  by  Jews  of,  76-78  ;  prophetic 
forecast  of,  concerning  Jerusalem, 
66  ;  the  Messiah  of  Israel,  112. 

Christendom,  application  of  vision  of 
Flying  Roll  to,  146 ;  cruelty  and 
oppression  of  Jews  by,  50 ;  modern 
crimes  of,  against  Jews,  36,  37 ; 
nations  of,  prophetic  message  to, 
231. 

Clement  of  Alexandria,  quotation  from, 
252. 

Commentators,  Christian,  difference  of 
opinion  between  Jewish  and,  as  to 
term  "one  day,"  118,  120;  limited 
view  of,  with  regard  to  promise  given 
to  Joshua,  105  ;  Jewish  views  regard 
ing  the  number  "four,"  45,  46. 

Commerce,  characterised  by  Angel  in 
seventh  vision  as  "wickedness"  or 
"lawlessness,"  159,  161,  164  ;  dis 
tinctive  mark  of  England,  161-163  ; 
its  effect  upon  nations,  161  ;  Meso- 
potamian  prospects  with  regard  to, 
169-170. 

Corner-stone,  the,  emblematic  of  the 
Messiah,  140,  347,  350 ;  Solomon's 


GENERAL  INDEX 


535 


Temple,  corner  or  foundation-stone 
described,  349-350. 

Criticism,  Early  English,  on  authorship 
of  last  six  chapters  of  Zechariah,  262- 
264  ;  modern,  rationalistic  criticism, 
motives  of,  264  ;  rationalistic  pro 
phecy  reduced  to  human  divination 
by,  264-270  ;  uncertainties  and  con 
flicting  results  of,  270-272. 

Critics,  modern,  elimination  of  super 
natural  element  from  prophetic  Scrip 
tures  by,  264-267  ;  misconceptions 
and  misinterpretations  of,  concerning 
Book  of  Zechariah,  276-280. 

Crown,  iron,  of  Lombardy,  190. 

Crowns,  deposited  in  Temple,  203, 
204  ;  one  crown  only  placed  on  head 
of  Joshua,  189,  190,  192,  193  ;  of 
silver  and  gold,  made  by  Zechariah, 
189,  190. 

Cup  of  reeling  or  giddiness,  Israel's 
enemies  to  drink  from  and  fall,  426  ; 
symbol  of  God's  judgment  on  man, 
426. 

Cyril,  on  the  "brand  out  of  the  fire," 
95;  "And  I  cut  off  three  shep 
herds  in  one  month,"  398 ;  on 
symbolism  of  measure,  in  seventh 
vision,  156. 

Damascus,  judgment  on,  288-290. 
Davidson,  S.,  on  authorship  of  second 

part  of  Zechariah,  395,  396. 
Dead  Sea,   fresh  streams  of  "living" 

water  to  flow  into  it  on  "  that  day," 

502,  503. 
Delitzsch,  on  authorship  of  final  chapters 

of  Zechariah,  268. 
"  Desolations,"  the,  distinction  between 

"  the  Captivity  "  and,  35. 
Disobedience,    warnings   of    Zechariah 

against,  II,  16. 
Dispensation,  the  present  period  of  the 

silence  of  God,  81,  82. 
"  Double,"  word  expressing  a  principle 

of  God's  dealing  with  His  own  people 

(Israel),  324. 
Driver  (Canon),  Literature  of  the  Old 

Testament,  265,  381  ;  opinion  of,  re 


garding  authorship  of  final  chapters 
of  Zechariah,  265,  266,  268,  276. 

Ebrard,  on  Jerusalem  and  the  house  of 
David,  427,  428. 

Edersheim,  on  Christ's  entry  into  Jeru 
salem  as  the  fulfilment  of  Zechariah's 
prophecy,  304,  313  ;  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles,  523. 

Edward  (Rev.),  D.,  on  the  Flying 
Roll,  148. 

Egypt,  earliest  home  of  Israel,  49. 

Eichhorn,  on  authorship  of  final  chap 
ters  of  Zechariah,  268,  269,  276. 

England,  commerce  as  distinctive  char 
acteristic  of,  161-163. 

Ephah,  the,  as  emblem  of  trade  or 
commerce,  162  ;  close  relation  of,  to 
vision  of  Flying  Roll,  158;  "going 
forth  "  used  both  for  Flying  Roll  and, 
157  ;  Jewish  measure  for  dry  goods, 

156  ;  significance  of  talent  of  lead  as 
cover   to,    159;  symbolism   of,    156, 

157  ;  vision  of,  155-170;  woman  in 
midst  of,  155,  159. 

Ephod,  Holy  Scripture  now  takes  place 
of,  342. 

Ewald,  212,  217;  argument  against 
post-exilic  origin  of  second  half  of  the 
Book  of  Zechariah,  368  ;  Die  Pro- 
pheten  des  Alien  Bundts>  267,  422  ; 
on  crowning  of  Joshua,  189,  190  ; 
Joshua,  87  ;  on  pre-exilic  authorship 
of  second  part  of  Zechariah,  267,  268, 
269,  395,  396. 

Fasting,  days  of,  for  national  calamities, 
216,  217  ;  mourning  and,  weeping  as 
accompaniment  of,  213,  216;  re 
pudiation  by  God  of  outward  acts  of, 
216,  219. 

Fasts,  Jewish  traditions  concerning, 
248  ;  observance  of,  negative  answer 
as  to,  209-225,  229  ;  positive  answer 
as  to,  229-255  ;  turned  into  feasts, 
225,  229,  248,  249. 

"  Filthy  garments,"  reference  in  Epistle 
of  Jude  to,  124  ;  symbol  of  sin,  90, 
97-99,  '03,  129,  I44v 


536 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Fire,  punishment  symbolised  by,  97. 
Four,  the  number,  significance  of,  45, 
46,  176,  178,  179,  i  So. 

Ganneau,  M.,  inscription  on  Court  of 
Temple  discovered  by,  188. 

Gentiles,  post-restoration  prophecies 
concerning  Jews  and,  253-255  ; 
solemn  warnings  of  God  to,  37,  38. 

Gesenius,  on  signification  of  "  Regem- 
melekh,"  212  ;  on  meaning  of  word 
"Hadrach,"  287;  rendering  by,  of 
Hebrew  word  "  Mah'lekhim,"  104. 

God,  symbols  of  the  presence  of,  96  ; 
message  of,  its  eternal  and  unfailing 
character,  17. 

Godet,  Professor  (the  late),  no. 

Good  Shepherd,  Jehovah,  in  the  per 
son  of  the  Messiah,  will  act  as,  to 
Israel,  344. 

Gospels,  the,  John  ;  Divine  Sonship  of 
Christ,  the  keynote  of,  no,  113; 
Luke ;  Christ  as  Son  of  Man,  the 
keynote  of,  1 1 2,  1 1 3  ;  Mark  ;  perfect 
service  of  Christ,  the  keynote  of, 
in,  112;  Matthew;  kingship  of 
Christ,  the  keynote  of,  no,  ill  ; 
twofold  nature  of  Christ  predominant 
alike  in  prophecies  and,  113. 

Green  (Dr.),  Max,  The  Jewish  Question 
and  the  Key  to  its  Solution,  79- 

Grotius  on,  "And  I  cut  off  three  shep 
herds  in  one  month,"  396 ;  the 
woman  in  the  ephah,  160,  161. 

Hadrach,  former  city  of,  discoveries 
pointing  to  its  existence,  288  ;  land 
of,  threat  concerning,  285,  286 ; 
meaning  of  word,  Bleek  on,  287  ; 
Gesenius  on,  287 ;  Hengstenberg 
on,  287 ;  Rabbi  Benaiah  on 
(Kimchi),  287  ;  symbolical  or  mys 
tical,  287 ;  word,  regarded  by  Bre- 
denkamp,  Olshausen,  and  von 
Ortenberg  as  scribal  error,  287. 

Hamath,  barden  of  wrath  shared  by, 
290. 

Hammond,  on  authorship  of  last  six 
chapters  of  Zechariah,  263. 


Hauran,  Hadrach  regarded  as  scribal 
error  for,  287. 

Hecataeus,  description  of  Jerusalem  by, 
64. 

Hengstenberg,  89,  94,  201  ;  Christ- 
ology,  286,  304 ;  criticism  of,  con 
cerning  Messianic  prophecies  of 
Zechariah,  6 ;  on  authorship  of  final 
chapters  of  Zechariah,  268,  276 ; 
colours  of  horses  in  eighth  vision, 
177,  178;  foolish  (wicked)  shepherd, 
415  ;  interpretation  of  the  I4th 
chapter  of  Zechariah,  489  ;  meaning 
of  word  Hadrach,  287  ;  mountains 
of  brass,  174 ;  origin  of  Messiah, 
194;  "sleep"  of  Zechariah,  130; 
symbolism  of  stone  laid  before 
Joshua,  115;  the  four  horns,  46; 
the  land  of  Shinar,  167 ;  the  re 
tribution  which  fell  on  the  Jews  after 
their  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  385, 
386  ;  the  vision  of  the  Flying  Roll, 
146  ;  triumphal  entry  of  Christ  into 
Jerusalem,  312;  "two  parts  therein 
shall  be  cut  off,"  483;  visions  of 
Zechariah,  160  ;  woman  in  the  ephah, 
165  ;  rendering  of  MaKlekhim  by, 
104,  105  ;  views  of,  on  charge  to 
Joshua,  104. 

Herodotus,  story  of  Glaucus  recorded 
by,  149,  150. 

Hitzig,  71  ;  argument  against  post- 
exilic  origin  of  second  half  of  the 
Book  of  Zechariah,  368  ;  on  crown 
ing  of  Joshua,  189,  190;  mountains 
of  brass,  174  ;  on  pre-exilic  author 
ship  of  final  chapters  of  Zechariah, 

395,  396. 
Hoffmann,    von,   on,    "And  I  cut  off 

three  shepherds  in  one  month,"  393  ! 

foundation-stone    of    Temple,    115; 

mountains  of  brass,   174;   on  Zech- 

ariah's  reference  to  a  future  siege  of 

Jerusalem,  490. 
Holy     Scriptures,     oracles     of     God, 

343- 

Homage  to  Jehovah  at  Jerusalem  ;  with 
holding  of  rain  as  punishment  for 
neglect  to  render,  528. 


GENERAL  INDEX 


537 


"Horns"  and  the  "carpenters,"  the, 
45-54- 

Horns,  the  four,  symbolism  of,  45,  46. 

Horses,  colours,  divergence  of  opinion 
concerning,  176,  177,  178,  180,  181  ; 
in  first  vision,  significance  of  their 
colours,  23,  27,  28 ;  significance  of 
number  of  chariots  and  colour  of,  in 
eighth  vision,  175-181  ;  symbolic 
mission  of,  in  eighth  vision,  179, 
1 80. 

Isaak  ben  Abraham  (Rabbi)  of  Troki, 
Chizzuk  Emunah,  307. 

Isaiah,  chief  message  of,  12. 

Israel,  affliction  and  scattering  of,  by 
Gentile  world-powers,  45-48,  57, 
127,  128,  231  ;  analogy  between 
Church  of  Christ  and,  322,  323  : 
apostasy  of,  484,  494 ;  as  a  type 
of  man,  n,  12;  calling  and  elec 
tion  of,  530;  compared  with  "lost 
sheep  "  and  "  scattered  sheep,"  383, 
384  ;  continued  and  marvellous  pre 
servation  of,  48-51  ;  deliverance 
of,  predicted,  388 ;  desolation  of 
land,  accompanied  by  destructive 
judgment  of  the  people  predicted, 
376,  377  ;  dispersion  of  Judah  and, 
definite  prophecies  concerning,  47  ; 
Egypt  earliest  home  of,  49  ;  enemies 
of,  consequences  to  Jerusalem  of 
their  destruction,  516-518  ;  enemies 
of,  predicted  punishment  of  kings  of 
Assyria  and  Babylon,  384  ;  enemies 
of,  smitten  with  plagues,  431-432  ; 
weapons  for  their  destruction,  516- 
520 ;  final  national  deliverance  of, 
299  ;  gathering  together  of  the  houses 
of  Judah  and  Joseph  at  the  second 
coming  of  the  Messiah,  362-368 ; 
Gentile  world  contrasted  with  that  of, 
32,  33  ;  God's  interposition  on  behalf 
of,  on  ' '  that  day "  ;  history  of, 
lesson  taught  by,  235-237  ;  Ichabod 
period  of,  232,  233 ;  increase  of 
nation,  prediction  as  to,  364,  365- 
370  ;  jealousy  of  ancient  nations  with 
regard  to,  49,  50 ;  Judah  and,  union 


of,  245,  246 ;  living  and  prevailing 
power  of,  50,  51  ;  predictions  con 
cerning,  by  early  prophets,  360 ; 
prophetic  promises  as  to  restoration 
of,  232-240,  249  ;  refusal  of,  to  hear 
and  receive  law  of  Moses,  221,  222  ; 
religious  and  ecclesiastical  position  of, 
as  typified  by  the  golden  candlestick, 
131,  132 ;  restoration  of,  Divine 
promises  as  to,  230,  231;  its  effect 
on  history  of  world,  245,  246,  249, 
250-255 ;  blessed  and  prosperous 
condition  of,  foretold,  337 ;  promise 
of  God's  covenant  with,  401-402 ; 
wanderings  to  cease  in  restored  rela 
tionship  of  Jehovah  with  Israel  at 
second  coming  of  the  Messiah,  359  ; 
without  king,  prince,  prophet,  or 
priest  since  their  rejection  of  the 
Messiah,  398 ;  wretchedness  of  the 
people  under  Gentile  rule,  385. 

Israelites.     See  under  Jews,  Jewish. 

Israel's  Prince  of  Peace,  His  Kingdom's 
foundation,  314,  315  ;  His  mission  in 
the  world,  302-322. 

Jaddua,  high  priest,  Jerusalem,  dream 
of,  300-301. 

Jehovah,  glory  of,  its  departure  from 
Israel,  232,  233. 

Jehovah,  repetition  of  name,  reason  for, 
n,  230. 

Jeremiah,  prophecy  of,  concerning 
moral  purification  and  deliverance  of 
Israel,  86. 

Jerome,  230  ;  on  "And  I  cut  off  three 
shepherds  in  one  month,"  396,  398  ; 
on  Jerusalem  as  the  "  burdensome 
stone,"  428 ;  on  symbolism  of 
measure  in  seventh  vision,  156,  160. 

Jerusalem,  blessed  condition  of  in 
habitants  on  and  after  "that  day," 
513-515;  chosen  by  Jehovah  as 
city  of  His  sanctuary,  432 ;  divine 
protection  promised  for,  62,  434- 
436  ;  earthly  kingdom  of,  reasons  for 
supposition  that  reference  in  third 
vision  is  to  a  literal,  62,  63, 64, 65,  240, 
241  ;  fountain  of  living  water  to  flow 


538 


GENERAL  INDEX 


out  of,  in  "  that  day,"  502,  503  ;  ful 
filment  of  prophecy  by  Zechariah  con 
cerning,  64,  65-68  ;  nations  gathered 
against  in  "  that  day,"  predicted  judg 
ment,  428  ;  prophecy  as  to  future 
condition  of,  426,  427  ;  peace  and 
prosperity  of,  63,  65 ;  prophetic 
forecast  by  Christ  concerning,  66 ; 
restoration  and  enlargement  of, 
foretold,  58,  59,  60,  85,  234,  235, 
249  ;  siege  of,  434,  435  ;  enemies' 
success  culminates  in  their  destruc 
tion,  493-495  ;  Judah's  part  in,  427, 
428,  433,  434 ;  significance  of  vision 
of  Ezekiel  concerning  departure  of 
glory  of  Jehovah  from,  66,  67,  68  ; 
to  be  physically  exalted  above  the 
hills  surrounding  and  overshadowing 
her,  510-512  ;  used  as  term  to  repre 
sent  city  and  people,  88  ;  views  of 
allegorising  commentators  as  to 
whether  heavenly  or  literal,  240. 

Jewish  Family  Bible,  translation  in,  of 
Zech.  xii.  10,  440. 

Jews,  fate  of  nations,  as  affected  by 
treatment  of,  37,  38  ;  intercession 
and  compassion  of  Messiah  for 
sufferings  of,  33,  34  ;  and  Israelites, 
final  union  of,  51  ;  modern  crimes 
of  Christendom  against,  36,  37  ; 
national  rejection  of  Christ  by,  67, 
78  ;  oppressed  condition  of,  under 
foreign  yoke,  34,  35,  36,  37,  38; 
post-restoration  prophecies  concern 
ing  Gentiles  and,  253-255  ;  statistics 
of  increase  in  number  from  sixteenth 
century  to  1918,  365,  366  ;  sufferings 
of,  36,  37- 

Josephus,  Antiquities  of  the  Jews,  xi.  8. 
3,  302  ;  courts  of  the  temple  as 
described  by,  188,  189  ;  Jewish 
Antiquities,  64  ;  Jewish  Wars, 
64. 

Joshua,  the  high  priest,  as  type  and 
representative  of  Jewish  nation,  87- 
88,  95,  104,  106,  118,  129;  before 
the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  87-108  ;  civil 
and  ecclesiastical  powers  represented 
')V>  !35i  I3^)  1 66  ;  crowning  of,  99, 


100,  189-204  ;  its  symbolism,  189- 
190;  "filthy  garments,"  replaced 
by  sacred  and  symbolical  attire,  97- 
99,  103,  107  ;  message  delivered  to, 
by  Zechariah,  190-205  ;  solemn 
charge  and  promises  given  to,  103- 
108. 

"Jubilee,"  year  of,  as  prefiguring 
national  deliverance  and  rest  of 
people  of  Israel,  121. 

Judah,  dispersion  of  Israel  and,  definite 
prophecies  concerning,  47  ;  Israel 
and,  union  of,  244,  245  ;  Jehovah 
will  save  the  tents  of,  before  saving 
Jerusalem,  reason  for,  433,  434. 

Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem,  unusual 
designation  of  chosen  people  as,  51, 
128. 

Judgments,  Divine  "Carpenters"  or 
Smiths,  the  four,  as  symbols  of,  52, 
53- 

Kalmet,  on  "  And  I  cut  off  three 
shepherds  in  one  month,"  396. 

Kautzsch,  Die  Heilige  Schrift  des  Alten 
Testaments,  271. 

Keil,  22,  71,  95,  104,  205,  240,  245, 
247,  284  ;  Commentary  on  Zechariaii, 
264  ;  extract  from  writings  of,  473  ; 
Judah's  recognition  of  the  strength  of 
Jerusalem,  432  ;  on  "  And  I  cut  off 
three  shepherds  in  one  month,"  393  ; 
authorship  of  final  chapters  of  Zech 
ariah,  268  ;  colours  of  horses  in 
eighth  vision,  177  ;  crowning  of 
Joshua,  189  ;  deputation  from  Bethel, 
212  ;  fulfilment  of  prophecies  pre 
dicting  return  of  Israel  to  the  pro 
mised  land,  371  ;  Jewish  measures, 
156  ;  meaning  of  "  Israel  "  in  last  sec 
tion  of  the  Book  of  Zechariah,  489  ; 
means  employed  by  God  to  wipe 
away  the  sins  of  Israel,  530-532  ; 
reason  for  Zechariah  mentioning 
Egypt  especially  in  reference  to  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  530  ;  symbol 
ism  of  measure  in  seventh  vision, 
156  ;  symbolism  of  stone  laid  before 
Joshua,  1 14  ;  the  angelic  messengers, 


GENERAL  INDEX 


539 


32 ;  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  as 
"poor,"  "afflicted,"  riding  upon  an 
ass,  309,  310  ;  the  continual  work  of 
Jehovah,  425  ;  the  Flying  Roll,  147  ; 
the  land  of  Shinar,  166 ;  woman  in 
the  ephah,  165  ;  opinions  of,  with 
regard  to  Biblical  prophecies,  264  ; 
Tyre,  growth  of,  as  capital  of 
Phoenicia,  291,  292;  views  of,  on 
charge  to  Joshua,  107. 

Kidder,  on  authorship  of  last  six  chap 
ters  of  Zechariah,  264. 

Kimchi,  95,  138,  149,  191,  247; 
Commentary  on  Zechariah,  16,  24, 
53  ;  interpretation  of  ephah,  157, 
158  ;  on  "  And  I  cut  off  three  shep 
herds  in  one  month,"  396 ;  chariot 
and  horses,  173;  colours  of  horses 
in  eighth  vision,  177  ;  Judah's 
relation  to  Jerusalem  in  opposition  to 
the  nations,  427 ;  other  words  for 
bondsman,  467  ;  prophet's  wounds 
"  between  the  hands,"  469  ;  redemp 
tion  of  Israel  from  bondage,  320  ; 
the  four  horns,  46  ;  the  olive  trees 
in  fifth  vision,  130 ;  titles  of  the 
Messiah,  108 ;  Talmudic  tradition 
quoted  by,  in  relation  to  punishment 
of  apostasy,  378,  379. 

Kliefoth,  71,  107;  on  "And  I  cut 
off  three  shepherds  in  one  month," 
394  ;  authorship  of  final  chapters  of 
Zechariah,  276 ;  Jerusalem  and  the 
house  of  David  being  the  unbelieving 
portion  of  Israel,  427,  428  ;  symbol 
ism  of  measure  in  seventh  vision,  156, 

157- 

Koehler,  201,  212,  217;  on  "And  I 
cut  off  three  shepherds  in  one  month," 
392  ;  authorship  of  final  chapters  of 
Zechariah,  268, 276  ;  colours  of  horses 
in  eighth  vision,  177  ;  Gentile  World- 
Conqueror  and  Israel's  Prince  of 
Peace,  302 ;  the  blessed  condition 
of  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  513  ; 
the  stone  laid  before  Joshua,  115; 
triumphal  entry  of  Christ  into  Jeru 
salem,  312,  Zechariah's  reference  to 
future  siege  of  Jerusalem,  490. 


Land  of  Israel,  blessings  on,  to  be  dis 
pensed  in  "  that  day,"  502. 

"  Land  of  the  North,"  Babylon  referred 
to  as,  69. 

Lange,  J.  P.,  71,  230  ;  Bibelwerk,  158  ; 
on  authorship  of  final  chapters  of 
Zechariah,  276  ;  on  deputation  from 
Bethel,  211. 

Lebanon,  identified  by  Rabbis  with  the 
Temple,  378,  379. 

Leprosy,  as  a  type  of  sin,  150. 

Lowe,  W.  H.,  Hebrew  Sttidenfs  Com 
mentary  on  Zechariah,  16,  273,  282. 

"  Mah'lekhim,"  various  translations 
and  interpretations  of,  104,  105. 

Maimonides,  214. 

Martini,  Jews  accused  by,  of  corruption 
of  text,  442,  443. 

"  Massa,"  use  of  word  by  Isaiah,  286  ; 
in  Nahum,  286 ;  various  translations 
of  word,  286. 

Maurer,  217. 

McCaul(Dr. ),  Alexander,  Observations 
on  the  gth  chapter  of  his  (Kimchi's) 
Commentary,  304 ;  on  casting  the 
thirty  shekels  on  the  potter's  field, 
411  ;  titles  of  the  Messiah,  108. 

Mclntyre,  D.  M.,  The  Spirit  in  the 
Word,  112,  113. 

"  Measuring,"  symbolism  of  act,  58. 

Measuring  line,  man  with  the,  55-82; 
identity  of  "  the  man,"  58,  59;  in 
terpretation  of,  58-61  ;  reasons  for 
identifying  "the  man"  with  Angel 
of  Jehovah,  59,  60;  summary  of,  58. 

Mede,  Joseph,  Claris  Aporaliptica,  262  ; 
on  authorship  of  last  six  chapters  of 
Zechariah,  262,  263. 

Mesopotamia,  commercial  prospects 
of,  1 68,  169,  170. 

Message,  consolatory,  40,  45,  57,  60, 
65,  85,  229,  230,  231,  232. 

Messiah,  the,  as  priest  and  king,  106- 
109;  as  "the  Branch,"  107,  108, 
109,  190,  194;  character  and  mission 
of,  71-79;  coming  of,  spoken  of  in 
Old  Testament  as  the  coming  of 
Jehovah,  380  ;  establishment  of  His 


540 


GENERAL  INDEX 


righteous  and  beneficent  rule  on  earth, 
506-510 ;  four  aspects  of,  in  Old 
Testament,  109,  194,  305,  306  ;  ful 
ness  of  promise  to  Jews  only  fulfilled 
with  return  of,  38,  39 ;  intercession 
and  compassion  of,  for  suffering  Israel, 
33,  34 ;  mission  extends  to  whole 
world,  314,  315  ;  offices  of  Priest  and 
King  combined  in  person  of,  199-201 ; 
origin  and  dignity  of,  194  ;  person  and 
mission  of,  as  pictured  by  Zechariah, 
190-206,  314-316;  predicted  as  the 
ideal  King,  109  ;  predictions  concern 
ing,  107-119;  prophetic  picture  of 
fulfilment  of,  in  the  Christ  of  history, 
310-314  ;  rejection  of,  by  the  Jews  : 
retribution  which  followed,  387 ; 
return  of,  as  predicted  by  Zechariah, 
231-233  ;  return  of  Glory  of  Jehovah 
in  Person  of,  85  ;  riding  upon  an 
ass :  signification  of,  309 ;  second 
coming  of,  at  place  whence  He  was 
carried  up  to  heaven,  496  ;  Israel's 
transformed  condition  at,  357,  358  ; 
slaying  of,  the  great  crime  of  the 
Jews,  473,  474 ;  titles  of,  different 
aspects  of  character  portrayed  by, 
107-115,  194;  two  advents  of,  305; 
twofold  nature  of,  477,  478  ;  work 
of,  I94-I99- 

Messiahs,  Jewish  belief  as  to  two,  76. 
Messianic  Kingdom,  establishment  on 

earth  of,  67. 

Messianic  prophecies  of  Zechariah. 
See  Zechariah,  Messianic  prophecies 
of. 

Michelet,  M.,  The  Life  of  Ltither,  93. 
Midrashim,    Jewish,    legends  in,   123  ; 
J  traditions   from,  concerning  founda- 
3n-stone  of  Second  Temple,  115.  »: 
desiium,  forecast  of  conditions  on 
Anttj.,  S^-S^.  528-532- 
64.        ificance  of,  99,  100. 
Joshua,  thof,  refusal  of  Israel  to  hear 
representai22O,  221,  222. 
88,  95,    104,"  or  copper,  in  eighth 
the  Angel  of  jt  probable  reference 
and  ecclesiastical1  Olivet,  173,  174  ; 
by,  135,  136,   166  ; 


Mount  Zion,  prophecy  concerning,  233, 

234- 

"  My  house,"  God  the  shield  and  pro 
tector  of,  298  ;  refers  to  the  Temple, 
298. 

Myrtle  trees,  in  first  vision,  symbolic 
meaning  of,  23,  24-27,  38. 

"  Naar,"  application  of  term  to 
Zechariah,  probable  reason  for,  7, 
60,  6 1  ;  meaning  of,  7,  8  ;  term  in 
applicable  to  angels,  60. 

Nail  in  the  sure  place,  the,  emblematic 
of  the  Messiah,  351-354. 

Nations,  ancient,  attitude  of,  in  relation 
to  Israel,  48-50. 

Newcombe,  Archbishop  William,  on 
authorship  of  final  chapters  of 
Zechariah,  262,  263  ;  Twelve  Minor 
Prophets,  by,  263. 

Newton,  B.  W.,  Babylon  and  Egypt, 
by,  163  ;  nations  represented  in  the 
gathering  against  Israel  by  their 
armies,  520 ;  on  the  gathering  of 
"all  nations  of  the  earth"  against 
Jerusalem,  429 ;  the  peace  and 
harmony  that  will  reign  on  earth  at 
the  millennium,  505;  "there  shall 
be  light  at  evening  time,"  501-502  ; 
Thoughts  on  the  Apocalypse,  133. 

Old  Testament  prophecies  :  reading 
New  Testament  into ;  Jewish  and 
rationalistic  writers'  objection  to. 

443- 

Olive  trees,  in  fifth  vision,  Joshua  the 
priest,  and  Zerubbabel  the  prince 
represented  by,  135,  136 ;  symbol 
ism  of,  130-131. 

Olshausen,  word  "  Hadrach"  regarded 
by,  as  scribal  error,  287. 

Orelli,  von  (Professor),  of  Basel,  argu 
ments  against  unity  of  Book  of 
Zechariah,  272,  275,  276,  279 ; 
Comm.  on  the  Twelve  Minor 
Prophets,  272  ;  judgments  of  God, 
leading  to  universal  homage  to  the 
universal  ruler,  520. 

Origen,  123. 


GENERAL  INDEX 


541 


Ortenberg,  von,  word  "  Hadrach " 
regarded  by,  as  scribal  error,  287. 

Paulus,  H.  E.  G.,  on  authorship  of 
final  chapters  of  Zechariah,  270, 
276. 

Pesikta  Rabbathai,  Yalkut  Shimoni, 
in,  255. 

Philistia,  cities  included  in  predicted 
conquest,  chap.  ix.  8,  294,  295. 

Philistines,  humbling,  mode  of,  Dr. 
Wright  on,  296. 

"  Poor  of  the  flock,"  interpretation  of, 
402-403. 

Pressel,  Commentar  su  Haggai, 
Sacharja,  und  Maleachi,  158;  on 
mountains  of  brass,  174;  the  talent 
of  lead,  159. 

Priesthood,  significance  of,  IOO ; 
Aaronic,  as  type  of  perfect  Atone 
ment  of  Christ,  106,  107  ;  as  type  of 
true  priesthood  yet  to  come,  106, 
193,  200. 

Promised  land,  the  extent  of,  369. 

Prophecies,  breaking  of  the  staves, 
388-390  ;  interpretation  of,  412-413  ; 
rupture  between  shepherd  and  sheep 
signified  by,  401-402  ;  cleansing  of  the 
people  and  land  of  Israel,  exposition 
of,  459-469  ;  deliverance  of  Israel, 
exposition  of,  444-454  ;  deliverance 
of  the  "  poor  of  the  flock  "  of  the 
people  of  Israel,  388 ;  desolation  of 
the  land  of  Israel  and  judgment  on 
its  people,  377,  378,  385;  de 
tails  frequently  given  by  prophets 
after  speaking  of  final  results  of  an 
event,  492 ;  fore-announcements  of 
great  and  solemn  events  contained  in, 
261,  262,  266 ;  Gentile  World-Con 
queror  and  Israel's  Prince  of  Peace, 
302,  303  ;  Old  Testament,  absence  of 
perspective  in,  316  ;  rejection  of  the 
True  Shepherd  and  rule  of  the  False 
one,  fulfilment  of,  in  our  Lord  Jesus, 
407  ;  summary  of  chief  points  of, 
407  ;  Zechariah,  of.  See  Zechariah, 
prophecies  of. 

Prophecy,  cessation  of,  in  Old  Testa 


ment,  13  ;  twofold  nature  of  Christ 
predominant  alike  in  the  Gospels 
and,  113,  114. 

Prophets,  accusation  of  being  a  false 
prophet  denied,  467 ;  comparison 
between  messages  of  ' '  former  and 
later,"  11-12,  13;  many-sided  and 
comprehensive  mission  of  "former," 
ii  ;  post-exilic,  announcements  con 
cerning  "latter  days"  by,  250; 
"hairy  mantle,"  sign  of  strict  life, 
also  symbol  of  mourning,  466  ;  the 
authenticating  formula  used  by,  229, 
230,  235. 

Pusey,  29,    104,  107,    149,   155,    181, 

l82,  199,  201,  217,  221,  224,  235, 
240,  245,  250,  252  ;  extract  from  writ 
ings  of,  474;  "Israel,"  meaning  of 
name  in  last  section  of  the  Book  of 
Zechariah,  489 ;  on  authorship  of 
final  chapters  of  Zechariah,  267,  268, 
270,  271,  273,  274  ;  benefits  bestowed 
on  Israel  by  Alexander  the  Great, 
300-302 ;  captivity  of  the  Jewish 
nation  by  the  Romans,  387 ;  causes 
leading  to  slaying  of  the  Messiah, 
474  ;  crowning  of  Joshua,  190 ; 
interpretation  of  "Burden  of  the 
Word  of  God,"  428  ;  Jerusalem,  62, 
63;  mountains  of  brass,  174;  the 
coming  of  the  Messiah,  306 ;  the 
condition  of  the  enemies  of  Israel  at 
the  second  coming  of  the  Messiah, 
357>  358  5  the  Flying  Roll,  146  ;  the 
land  of  Shinar,  166,  167  ;  the  rejec 
tion  of  the  Messiah  by  Israel,  399  ; 
St.  Gregory  quoted  by,  116;  The 
Minor  Prophets,  288,  304  ;  views  of, 
on  charge  to  Joshua,  104  ;  with  re 
gard  to  term  "  naar,"  60. 

Rain,  Hebrew  words  for  various  kinds 
°f»  3395  "latter  rain,"  symbol  of 
spiritual  gifts  and  blessings,  339,  340. 

Rashi,  95,  149,  191  ;  interpretation  of 
ephah  as  given  by,  157 ;  on  other 
words  for  bondsman,  467  ;  titles  of 
the  Messiah,  108,  109;  "wounds 
between  thy  hands,11  on  a  prophet, 


542 


GENERAL  INDEX 


468 ;  Rabbi  Solomon  Bar  Isaac, 
misinterpretation  of  Scripture  by,  to 
evade  claims  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 

439- 

Rawlinson,  Professor  George,  account 
of  siege  of  Tyre  by  Alexander,  294. 

Rawlinson,  Sir  Henry,  on  former  city 
of  Hadrach,  288  ;  translation  of  the 
Behistun  inscription  by,  70. 

Redeemer  of  Israel,  character  and 
mission  of,  345,  346. 

Remnant  of  Israel,  flight  into  the 
mountains,  497. 

Repentance,  a  call  to,  5-17,  21,  215, 
216,  220,  229 ;  preaching  of,  a 
distinguishing  mark  of  God's  mes 
sengers,  14,  15  ;  need  for  present- 
day,  15,  16. 

Return  of  Jewish  nation  to  Palestine, 
alleged  impossibility  of,  491  ;  manner 
of,  492-493- 

"  River  of  God,"  symbol  of  the  world 
wide  flow  of  the  Messiah's  teachings, 
504-506. 

Roll,  Flying,  155,157,  158,  160  ;  close 
relation  of,  to  vision  of  Ephah,  158  ; 
opinions  of  Keil,  Kliefoth,  and 
others  as  to  dimensions  of,  147,  148  ; 
significance  of  its  dimensions,  147, 
148;  vision  of  the  Flying,  143-151  ; 
as  typical  of  swift  judgment  of  God, 
146,  147,  148,  149 ;  emblematic 
meaning  of,  145 ;  resemblance  be 
tween  Tables  of  the  Law  and,  145, 
146. 

Rosenmuller,  arguments  against  unity 
of  Book  of  Zechariah,  273 ;  on 
symbolism  of  seventh  vision,  160. 

Sanctuary,  measure  of  the,  147,  148. 

Saphir,  Adolph,  lectures  on  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  509 ;  on  belief  in  literal 
fulfilment  of  prophecies,  491  ;  our 
ideas  of  Kingship,  507-508  ;  on  what 
Israel  will  learn  on  "  that  day," 

437- 

Satan,  as  accuser,  88,  89,  90,  91,  92, 
94 ;  author  of  oppression  of  Jews, 
36 ;  Hebrew  and  Greek  meaning  of 


word,  89  ;  position  of,  in  heaven  and 
earth,  89 ;  unceasing  malice  and 
hatred  of,  90,  91. 

Scholars,  modern,  views  of,  in  regard 
to  "seven  eyes"  on  foundation- 
stone  of  Temple,  116,  117,  118. 

Schottgen,  304. 

Septuagint,  the,  on  colours  of  horses 
in  eighth  vision,  177;  "this  is  the 
wickedness,"  as  rendered  by,  159. 

"Seven  eyes  of  Jehovah,"  as  symbol 
of  Divine  watchful  care  and  protec 
tion,  115,  117. 

Seven,  the  number,  symbolism  of,  in 
fifth  vision,  132,  133. 

"Sheep  of  slaughter,"  commentators' 
different  opinions  as  to  meaning  of 
phrase,  383;  "Poor  of  the  flock" 
interpreted  as,  391  ;  scattering  of, 
emblem  of  flight  of  Jesus'  disciples, 
482 ;  emblematic  of  dispersion  of  Jews 
after  their  rejection  of  the  Messiah, 
484  ;  to  be  scattered  as  punishment 
for  apostasy,  479. 

Shepherd,  foolish,  emblem  of  the 
personal  Antichrist,  417;  raising 
up  as  a  scourge  upon  a  godless 
generation  forecasted,  415  ;  variously 
interpreted,  415-418. 

Shepherd,  instruments  of  a  foolish, 
Jehovah's  command  to  prophet  to 
"take  again";  what  implied  by, 
414 ;  smiting  the,  rationalistic 
writers'  attempt  to  identify  with  the 
"foolish  shepherd,"  476. 

Shepherd?,  "three  cut  off,"  various 
interpretations  of  expression,  393- 
400. 

Shinar,  the  land  of,  166,  167,  170,  182. 

Sin,  "  filthy  garments  "  as  a  symbol  of, 
90,  97-99,  103,  124,  129,  144; 
leprosy  as  a  type  of,  150. 

Sinaitic  covenant,  ratification  of, 
Zechariah's  reference  to,  319. 

Sleep,  ordinary  and  spiritual  conditions 
of,  compared,  130. 

Smith  (Principal),  George  Adam,  on 
authorship  of  final  chapters  of 
Zechariah,  268,  270,  271,  274,  275, 


GENERAL  INDEX 


543 


276  ;  The  Book  of  the  Twelve  Prophets, 

268,  270. 
Sorrow  and  mourning  of  Israel,  their 

rejection     of    the    Messiah    causing 

spread  to  whole  world  of,  498-499. 
Stade,  Bernard,  on  authorship  of  final 

chapters  of  Zechariah,  270,  276. 
Stahelin,  Einleitung  in  die  Kanon.is.che 

Biicher  des  Alien  Testaments,  27 1 . 
St.  Gregory,  quoted  by  Pusey,  116. 
Svedberg,    Jasper,    on    mountains    of 

brass,  174. 

Tabernacle,  the,  candlestick  in.  See 
Candlestick. 

Tabernacles,  feast  of,  celebration  of,  at 
Jerusalem  by  those  left  from  the 
enemies  of  Israel,  520  ;  ceremonial 
service,  features  of,  and  symbolic 
significance  attached  to,  521-527  ; 
Egypt  especially  threatened  if  absent 
from,  529  ;  historical  and  prophetic 
character  of,  52I~522> 

Tables  of  the  Law,  duty  of  man  to  God 
and  his  neighbour  contained  in  third 
and  eighth  commandment  of,  146 ; 
resemblance  between  Flying  Roll 
and,  145. 

Talent,  significance  of,  as  cover  to 
ephah,  159. 

Talmud,  the,  16,  78,  117,  123,  148; 
legends  in,  123;  quotation  from, 
122 ;  tradition  from,  concerning 
foundation-stone  of  Second  Temple, 
115,  117. 

Targum  of  Jonathan,  the,  191  ;  titles  of 
the  Messiah  as  interpreted  by,  109. 

Targum,  the  Jewish,  95,  138 ;  on 
colours  of  horses  in  eighth  vision, 
177  ;  view  of,  with  regard  to  promise 
made  to  Joshua,  105. 

Temple,  the,  building  of,  40,  88,  95, 
209  ;  building  of  second,  191,  192  ; 
completion  of,  40  ;  courts  of,  as  de 
scribed  by  Josephus,  188,  189  ; 
foundation-laying  of,  242 ;  founda 
tion  of  second,  probable  allusion  to, 
115,  117  ;  rebuilding  of,  9,  21  ;  as 
a  visible  proof  and  symbol,  137  ; 


commenced,  243  ;  hindrances  with 
regard  to,  138,  242  ;  sacred  letters 
"graven"  on  foundation-stone  of, 
116,  117  ;  symbolic  meaning  of,  195- 
198. 

Ten,  the  number,  different  use  of,  in 
Scripture,  253,  254. 

Teraphim,  the,  280 ;  modern  Chris 
tian,  343  ;  nature  of,  341  ;  passages 
of  Scripture  in  which  referred  to, 
341,  342. 

Tertullian,  quotation  from,  252. 

"  That  day,"  blessed  issues  of  the  great 
and  solemn  events  of,  foretold,  502- 
532  ;  day  of  the  manifestation  of  the 
Messiah  in  His  glory,  423  ;  light  at 
evening  time  after  dark  and  gloomy 
day  foretold,  501  ;  natural  phenomena 
and  physical  characteristics  foretold, 
499-501  ;  on  which  the  names  of 
idols,  prophets,  and  unclean  spirits 
will  be  put  out  of  the  land  of  Israel, 
463-464  ;  prophecies  shall  be  dis 
credited  and  prophets  "thrust  out" 
of  the  land  of  Israel,  465  ;  prophets 
will  then  become  ashamed  of  telling 
their  visions,  465  ;  reference  to,  in 
Ps.  cxviii.,  430 ;  the  great  day  of 
Israel's  national  atonement,  119-122, 

459-463- 

Theodoret  (423-457  A.D.),  on  "  And  I 
cut  off  three  shepherds  in  one  month," 
398. 

"Third  part,"  remnant  of  Israel,  "  re 
fining  " — "  trying  " — "  testing  "  of, 

485- 
Thomson    (Dr.),    The   Land  and   the 

Book,  392. 

Trypho,  quotation  from,  252. 
Tyre,   conquest  of,    by  Alexander   the 

Great,     293-294  ;      siege      of,      by 

Nebuchadnezzar,   292  ;    wisdom   of, 

how  shown,  291. 

Unity  of  God  the  Father  and  God  the 
Son,  Jews  unable  to  grasp  idea,  443. 

Vatke,  on  authorship  of  final  chapters 
of  Zechariah,  270,  276. 


544 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Visions,  prophetic,  use  of  perfect  or 
preterite  tense  in,  47,  48  ;  use  of, 
by  God,  22,  29  ;  prophecies  and, 
glorious  goal  and  climax  of,  530. 

Vitringa  on  triumphal  entry  of  Christ 
into  Jerusalem,  312. 

Wages  asked  for  by  shepherd,  symbolic 

of  spiritual   fruit   of  labours   of  the 

Good  Shepherd,  403. 

Wages  of  shepherd  cast  unto  the  potter, 

interpretation     of    words,    404-406, 

409 ;    prophecies   in    Jeremiah    and 

Zechariah   compared,    411-412;   St. 

Matthew's  allusion  to,  as  a  prophecy 

by  Jeremiah,  407-412. 

Willcocks,    K.C.M.G.,    Sir    William, 

lecture  by,  169,  170. 
Winds,    the,    four    chariots  in    eighth 

vision,  compared  to,  175,  178- 
Woman,    reason    for    introduction    of, 
into   seventh   vision,     160,     161  ;  in 
the   ephah,    divergent   views    as    to 
Jewish  people  being  symbolised  by, 
159 ;    moral    pollution   as    signified 
by,    1 60,     161  ;    punishment   of,    its 
symbolic   meaning,    164,    165 ;  with 
talent  weight,  155,  159. 
Women,  stork-winged,   155,  156,  165; 

typifying  systems  of  evil,  165,  166. 
World-power,  overthrow  of,  and  estab 
lishment  of  Messiah's  Kingdom,  285. 
World-powers,  ancient,  disappearance 
of,  231  ;  and -Christian,  final  over 
throw  of,  182,  183  ;  Gentile,  gradual 
and  final  overthrow  of,  5°>  5r>  52, 
53,  54,  57,  85,  173,  179;  Israel 
afflicted  and  scattered  by,  45-48,  57, 
127,  128,  231  ;  overthrow  of  Baby 
lonian,  182,  183  ;  sin  of,  against 
Israel,  33,  35,  36,  37;  "strength" 
the  outstanding  feature  of,  181. 
Wright  (Dr.),  C.  H.  H.,  71,  107,  148, 
149,  2OI,  2O2,  211,  221,  232,  240, 
245,  250,  378,  482  ;  on  "  And  I  cut 
off  three  shepherds  in  one  month," 
393)  399  5  authorship  of  final  chapters 
of  Zechariah,  273 ;  casting  to  the 
potter  the  shepherd's  wages,  406 ; 


colours  of  horses  in  eighth  vision, 
177;  deputation  from  Bethel,  211; 
fulfilment  of  prophecies  predicting 
return  of  Israel  to  promised  land, 
371  ;  "I  will  turn  My  hand  upon  the 
little  ones,"  480,  482  ;  denial  of  literal 
interpretation  of  prophecy  as  to  Feast 
of  Tabernacles,  521 ;  meaning  of  name 
"  Israel  "  in  last  section  of  the  Book 
of  Zechariah,  489  ;  mountains  of 
brass,  174 ;  origin  and  dignity  of 
Messiah,  194 ;  prophets  ashamed  of 
their  visions,  465,  466  ;  stork-winged 
women  in  seventh  vision,  165 ;  the 
angelic  messengers,  32  ;  the  "  Blood 
Accusation,"  329,  330  ;  "  the  body 
of  Moses,"  123;  the  land  of  Shinar, 
167;  "the  man"  with  the  measur 
ing  line,  59;  the  "  scattering  of  the 
sheep,"  482  ;  the  talent  of  lead,  159  ; 
Zeckariah  and  his  Prophecies,  23, 
63,  124,  504. 

Writers,  modern  critical,  opinions  of, 
with  regard  to  spiritual  value  of 
divine  oracles,  261. 

Wiinsche,  Die  Leiden  des  Messias, 
pp.  66,  103,  etc.,  304. 

Zechariah,  connection  between  gth  and 
loth  chapters  of,  317,  318;  Haggai 
and,  known  as  "  the  prophets,"  241, 
242  ;  messages  of  "  former  prophets  " 
summarised  by,  247  ;  note  to  Chapter 
III.,  122-124,  I28;  previous  Mes 
sianic  prophecies  summed  up  by, 
107,  114. 

Zechariah,  Book  of,  arguments  against 
unity  of,  272-276  ;  internal  marks  of 
its  unity,  280-282  ;  pre-exilic  origin 
of,  arguments  against,  269,  270 ; 
second  part,  character  of,  422 ;  dis 
puted  authorship  of,  262 ;  modern 
criticism  on,  261-282 ;  predictions 
refer  to  a  distant  future,  422 ; 
proof  of  pre-exilic  origin  of,  313; 
theory  of  pre-exilic  origin  of,  303  ; 
varying  style  of,  reasons  for,  273. 

Zechariah,  Messianic  prophecies  of, 
criticism  of  Hengstenberg  concern- 


GENERAL  INDEX 


545 


ing,  6 ;  final  events  clearly  foretold 
in,  7,  8 ;  opinion  of  Luther  with 
regard  to,  5  ;  reasons  for  their  special 
value  to  Christians,  5,  6,  7  ;  their 
vivid  and  detailed  nature,  5,  6. 

Zechariah,  prophecies  of,  compared  with 
those  of  Haggai,  9,  10  ;  fulfilment  of, 
concerning  Jerusalem,  64,  65,  66, 
68 ;  peace  and  prosperity  for  Jeru 
salem,  foretold  in,  63-65,  234-235  ; 
post-exilic,  238-240 ;  return  of 
Messiah  as  predicted  by,  232-234 ; 
their  special  characteristic,  46  ;  their 
structure  and  division,  9,  10  ;  their 
symbolic  nature,  85,  86. 

Zechariah,  the  prophet,  crowning  of 
Joshua  by,  significance  of,  21  ; 
descent  of,  7  ;  final  messages  of,  21  ; 
Haggai  as  contemporary  and  fellow- 
labourer  of,  8  ;  introductory  address, 
10-17,  21  ;  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel 
compared  with,  7,  8;  "  Naar," 
probable  reason  for  application  of 
term  to,  7,  60,  61  ;  outburst  of 
prayer  by,  99  ;  personality  of,  7. 

Zechariah,  visions  of,  first  vision,  the 


Angel  of  Jehovah  among  the  myrtle 
trees,  21-41  ;  second  vision,  the  horns 
and  carpenters,  45-54  ;  third  vision, 
the  man  with  the  measuring  line, 
57-82 ;  fourth  vision,  Joshua  before 
the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  85-122 ;  fifth 
vision,  "  The  Candlestick,"  130-140  ; 
sixth  vision,  the  Flying  Roll,  143- 
151  ;  seventh  vision,  the  ephah,  155- 
170  ;  eighth  vision,  the  four  chariots, 
173-183;  climax  of,  crowning  of 
Joshua,  187-206 ;  connection  be 
tween  fourth  and  fifth  visions,  135, 
136;  consolatory  message  conveyed 
in  three  first  visions,  40,  45,  57,  59, 
62,  85,  127-129,  229,  230,  231,  232; 
reference  to  recapitulation  of,  375  ; 
striking  connection  between  first  and 
last,  175;  symbolical  significance  of 
details  in  the,  165. 

Zerubbabel,  civil  and  ecclesiastical 
powers,  represented  by,  166  ;  crown 
ing  of,  no  justification  for  interpreta 
tion  as  to,  189-190,  192. 

Zohar,  on  the  coming  of  the  Messiah, 
306. 


35 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


OLD  TESTAMENT 


GENESIS. 


in.  15 
iii.  21 
xv.  I 
xv.  9,  10 

xv.  13,  14,  17 
xv.  18     . 
xviii. 
xviii.  3    . 
xviii.  22  . 
xxxi.  7    . 
xxxvi. 
xxxvii.  24 
xli.  46     . 
xlv.  5 
1.  20 


i.  7 
iii.  7 
iii.  8 

iv.  22,  23 
v.  6-10  . 
v.  8 
ix.  14 
x.  23       . 
xiii.  21,  22 
xiv.  12,  20 
xv.  10     . 
xv.  15     . 
xviii.  23  . 
xix.  5,  6 
xix.  6 
xxi.  22    . 
xxi.  32    . 
xxii.  31  . 
xxiii.  31 


EXODUS. 


PAGE 

r>.\uuus  —  commu 

ca. 

PAGE 

101 

xxiv.        .... 

.     318 

102 

xxiv.  8    . 

.     318 

.            328 

xxvii.  19 

351 

319 

xxxv.  1  8 

351 

96 

xxvii.  2O,  21    . 

135 

315 

xxviii.  36-38   . 

100 

236 

xxx.  7,  8 

135 

29 

xxxii.  15 

145 

87 

253 

LEVITICUS. 

296 

xii.  2       .... 

460 

320 

xiv.  1-9  .... 

461 

87 

xiv.  45    . 

150 

454 

xv.  19-24 

460 

454 

xvi.  30  (Heb.) 

1  20 

xxiii.  39  . 

521 

xxv.  9,  10 

121 

364 

xxv.  15  . 

476 

298,  299 

xxv.  23   . 

331 

369 

xxvi.  3,  4 

•            338 

49 

xxvi.  26  . 

253 

298 

xxvi.  44  . 

.    27,  94 

.         518 

xxvii.  29          ... 

514 

.         516 

194 

NUMBERS. 

68 

iii.  18      . 

452 

68 

viii.  7 

460 

25 

xii.  6       .... 

22 

296 

xii.  6-9  .... 

29 

247 

xii.  7       .... 

104 

100 

xiv.  21     . 

253,   525 

86 

xiv.  22    . 

253 

379 

xiv.  39    . 

•            516 

404 

xvi.  5       .... 

IOO 

404 

xxi.  4      .... 

400 

315 

xxiii.  24  . 

329 

546 


INDEX  OF 

SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 

547 

N  u  M  B  ERS  —  continued. 

JUDGES  —  continued. 

I'AGE 

PAGE 

xxv.  7,  8 

448 

v.  19       .         .         .     •   .        . 

5I8 

xxvii.  2  . 

89 

v.  13       

32 

xxvii.  20          .... 

199 

vii.  II     

241 

XXXV.    12 

89 

vii.  22     . 

5I8 

viii.  3      

181 

DEUTEROiNOMY 

viii.  28    

32 

i.  38       

87 

xviii.  5,  6 

342 

96 

xviii.  7,  27       .         .         .         . 

32 

x.  8         

87 

xx.  26     

213 

X.    12,    13 

219 

XX.   28        

87 

xi.  13-15          .... 

338 

xx.  45-47        .... 

5" 

xvi.  13    

522 

xvi.  18    

247 

i  SAMUEL. 

xvii.  8-10        .... 

104 

i.  7         

213 

xviii.  15  . 

Ttf 

i  8         

2<~\ 

xviii.  15-19     .... 

J  JW 

347 

ii-  3        

*O  j 
148 

xix.  17    

89 

IsQ 

xxi.  15-17       .... 

j 

124 

jy 
Si6 

xxi.  19  (etc.)  .... 

•J""T 

247 

XV.  22,  23 

J 

218 

xxiii.  3    

295 

xv.  23     

341 

xxvi.  17-19     .... 

486 

xvi.  21    . 

87 

xxviii.  I  . 

205 

xvii.  33  

8 

xxviii.  1-12     .... 

338 

xvii.  45  . 

327 

xxviii.  15-68  .... 

145 

xix  13-16 

342 

xxviii.  28         .... 

43  * 

xxviii.  47         .... 

221 

2  SAMUEL. 

xxviii.  49,  50,  64,  65 

224 

i.  12         

213 

XXX.    I        . 

145 

ii.  7         

241 

xxx.  4,  5 

364 

viii.  2      ..... 

483 

xxxii.      ..... 

74 

xiv.  14    

15 

xxxii.  8  . 

I3I 

xvii.  28  . 

426 

So 

xxiii.  3    .         .         .         .         . 

306 

xxxii.  36-42    .... 
xxxiii.  8-10     .... 

424 
213 

xxiv.        ..... 

xxxiii.  1-4  (R.V.)    . 

297 

508 

xxxiii.  29         .... 

308 

I  KINGS. 

JOSHUA. 

i-  2-4      

87 

vii.  24,  25        . 

520 

ii.  21       

103 

xi.  23      

32 

iii.  6        ..... 

240 

XV.   21        

218 

iii.  16      

89 

xviii.  13  . 

211 

vi-  3        

147 

xviii.  24. 

5" 

vii.  2        

379 

xix.  13    

5" 

vii.  7       .         .        i 

147 

xx.  6       ..... 

89 

vii.  50     

426 

x.  29       

173 

JUDGES. 

xvii.  i      ..... 

87 

iii.  II,  30 

32 

xvii.,  xviii.       .          .          ... 

529 

v.  16 

162 

xviii.  28  .                   ... 

468 

548 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


i  KINGS — continued. 


NEHEMIAH— continued. 


xx.  42 

PAGE 

5M 
4.0  C 

ix.  36      .... 
ix.  •?6.  17 

PAGE 

33 
182 

2  KINGS. 
18         .... 

466 

xi.  31       . 
xii.  4-16 

211 

7 

iii.  14-16 
iv.  38      . 

87 

106 

Xlll.    IO     . 

xiii.  23,  24      .         . 

151 
464 

106 

vii.  2-8  .... 
ix.  27 
xiv.  13    . 
\xiii.  29,  30    .          .          . 

519 
4Si 
513 
451 

ESTHER. 
ix.  19 

JOB. 

61 

290 

xi.  19               .         .         . 

217 

xxiv.  IO-I7      •          •          • 

34 
196 

xxxi.  26  . 

499 

249 

PSALMS. 

xxv.  6,  7,  20,  21 

290 
248 

ii.   . 
iii.  T. 

306 
^28 

i  CHRONICLES. 

•524 

xiv.  i      .... 

414 

xxi.          .... 

297 
199 

xvi.  8      .... 

213 
89 

Sl'9 

2  CHRONICLES. 

xvni.  13 
xviii.  6-9 
xviii.  15  . 

327 
92 

xxxv.  20-27    . 
xxxvi.  14-16  . 
xxxvi.  1  6 

EZRA. 
i.  1-3      . 

ii.  28       . 

4Si 
.  13.  223 
•        385 

34 

21  I 

xx.  7        . 
xxi.  5      .... 
xxii.  8     .         . 
xxii.  20  .         .         .         . 
xxiii.        .... 

XXV.    IO    .             .             . 

XXV.   22    . 

3H 
199 

3" 
448 
330 
375 
322 

iii.  8,  13           ... 
iii.  10-13 

.             138 
139,    195 

7 

xxvii.  2,  3                 .         . 
xxvii.  4  . 
xxviii.  3  . 

69 
333 
3M 

332 

vi.  14,  15         •         •         • 

•     7,  138 
40   209 

xxxiii.  1  6 

.        308 

446 

xxxiv.  7  . 

68 

2n 

xxxv.  20          ... 

3M 

NEHEMIAH. 

213 

xl.  2,  3   . 
xliv.  4,  5 
xliv.  23  . 

32i 
•  76,  435 

81 

vi.  10 
vi.  12-14 
vii.  32     . 
ix.  29 
ix.  30      . 

464 
280 

211 
221 
222 

xiv.  5      .... 

Xiv.    12      . 

xlvi.  4     .         .         . 
xlvi.  5     .                  .         . 
xlviii.  2  . 

354 
213 

503 
433 
510 

INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


549 


PSALMS—  continu 

td. 

PROVERBS—  continued. 

PACK 

PAGE 

1.  i         .... 

•               238 

V.  22 

l64 

li.  7        •        •        •        • 

46l 

xvi.  15    . 

340 

lix  

268 

xix.  6      .... 

213 

Ix.   12        . 

328,   436 

Ixv.  9      .... 

503,    505 

ECCLESIASTES. 

Ixvi.  IO-I2 

485 

x.  4 

181 

Ixviii.  6  . 

81 

Ixviii.  17 

175 

ISAIAH. 

Ixix.  9     . 

340 

i.  8,  9     . 

91 

Ixxii.        .... 

200,  306 

i.  26 

214 

Ixxii.  8-1  1 

508 

ii.  2 

512 

Ixxv.  4,  5,  xcii.  IO  . 

45 

ii.  2,  3(R.V.) 

250 

Ixxv.  8    .... 

426 

ii.  2-4     .... 

195 

Ixxvii.  16—19  . 

327 

iii.  22 

99 

Ixxviii.  63,  64 

234 

iii.  26      . 

148 

Ixxx.  3    .         ... 

16 

iv.  2        . 

109,  194 

Ixxx.  1  6,  cxix.  21,  cvi.  9. 

92 

iv.  3,  4    . 

98 

1            '      Q 

iv.  5,  6   . 

68 

1XXX1.   o—  IO        .             .             . 

Ixxxi.  12-16    . 

341 

400 

v.  26,  27          ... 

362 

Ixxxiii.  4          ... 

51 

vi.  IO 

221,  390 

Ixxxv.  8  . 

3M 

vi.  13      . 

483,  485 

Ixxxv.  9  . 

333 

vii.  18,  19       ... 

362 

Ixxxviii.  6        ... 

25 

vii.-xii.,  xii.  6 

76 

ci.  I 

375 

viii.  1-2  .... 

389 

cii.  13-22 

77 

viii.  4      .... 

39° 

ciii.  20,  21 

i°5.  *75 

viii.  8      .... 

331 

civ.  4      .... 

175 

viii.  14,  15       ... 

349 

cvii.  23,  24      .. 
cviii.  13  . 

25 
328 

viii.  1  8    . 
ix.  1-7  (R.V.) 

106 

.        316 

cix.  6,  31,  cxxi.  5     . 

89 

ix.  6 

101,  477 

cxiii.  3    . 

.        238 

ix.  7 

352 

cxv.  9              ... 

3»3 

ix.  18 

Q7 

cxviii.  22         ... 

115 

xi.  9 

253 

cxviii.  23         ... 

235 

xi.  II,  12 

239,  368 

cxix.  21  . 

92 

T\ 

cxxvi.  4  . 

503 

xii.          .... 

305 

cxxix.  3  . 

49 

xiii.  I      .... 

286 

xiii.  10   . 

500 

cxxx.  7,  8 

321,  322 

xiv.  i      .... 

•     39,8o 

cxxx.  8   . 

•         364 

xiv.  1-3  .... 

65 

cxxxv.  7  . 

34° 

xiv.  19    . 

404 

cxliv.  6,  7                 .         . 

327 

xiv.  28    . 

286 

XV.    I 

286 

xvii.  i     .         .         .         . 

286 

PROVERBS. 

xvii.  1-8 

290 

••7         .... 

xvii.  13  .         .         .         . 

92 

i.  24-33  .... 

223 

xix.  i      .... 

286 

3Q 

xix.  16    . 

7"? 

550 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


ISAIAH  —  con 

tinned. 

ISAIAH  — 

•ontinucd. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

xix.  24    .          .          . 

245 

xliv.  3     . 

340,  445 

xix.  25    . 

80 

xliv.  4     . 

413 

XX.  2 

389 

xlvii.  6    . 

•        •        •          36 

xx.  3       . 

106 

xlviii.  i   . 

239 

xxi.  i      ... 

327 

xlviii.  10 

96 

xxi.  I,  II,  13  . 

286 

xlviii.  18 

400 

xxii.  i     . 

286 

xlviii.  20 

.         •        .          69 

xxii.  22,  23 

35i 

xlix.  6 

108 

xxii.  22-24  (R-V.)  . 

351 

xlix.  13  . 

486 

xxii.  23,  24 

199 

xlix.  19,  20 

61 

xxii.  25  . 

352 

li.  i,  2    . 

446 

xxiii.  i    . 

286 

li.  3        •         • 

4i 

xxiii.  4    . 

291 

li.  10 

370 

xxiv.  23  . 

500 

li.  21-23 

426 

xxiv.-xxvii. 

265 

lii.  5       .        . 

.        .        •          36 

xxvi.  I    . 

514 

Hi.  ii 

.        .        .          69 

xxvi.  i,  5 

62 

lii.  13      . 

191 

xxvi.  8,  9 

290 

liii. 

308 

xxviii.  1  6 

115.347 

liv.  5 

509 

xxix. 

267 

liv.  6       . 

101 

xxx.  26  . 

499 

Iv.  . 

12 

xxx.  30-33      . 

•         •         328 

Ivi.  3-6  . 

77 

xxxi.  4,  5  (R.V.)     . 

435 

Ivi.  6,  7  . 

•     v    •         195,  37i 

xxxi.  9    . 

484 

Ivii.  15    . 

25 

xxxii.  i   . 

306 

Iviii.  3-5 

218 

xxxiii.  14 

97 

Iviii.  6-8  (R.V.) 

219 

xxxiii.  21 

505 

Iviii.  6-12 

219 

xxxv.  5  . 

462 

Iviii.  9     . 

360 

XXXV.    IO 

525 

lix.  13     . 

151 

xxxvi.  10 

144 

lix.  13     . 

•         •        •         138 

xxxvi.  18-22    . 

517 

Ix.  1-3    . 

134,  527 

xxxvii.     . 

268 

Ix.  14 

234 

xxxvii.  4 

517 

Ix.  19 

62 

xxxvii.  33 

.         .        328 

Ixi.  I 

121,    32O 

xxxvii.  38 

212 

Ixi.  6       . 

.  86,  loo 

xxxviii.  6 

•            •            328 

Ixi.  7 

325 

xl.  2 

325 

Ixi.  10     . 

.  98,  255 

xl.  9 

Ixii.  i,  2 

\*1A 

xli.  17     . 

360 

Ixii.  II    . 

*  J*T 

312 

xlii.  I      .          .          . 

191 

Ixii.  12    . 

.    So,   121,  234,  364 

xlii.  1-6  . 

1  08 

Ixiii.  i     . 

177 

xlii.  5 

425 

Ixiii.  2-4  (R.V.) 

354 

xlii.  22    . 

320 

Ixiii.  9     . 

26 

xliii.  2     . 

.            .              96 

Ixiv.  6     . 

97,  98  101 

xliii.  5,  6 

•            •            238 

Ixv.  16    . 

249,  510 

xliii.  28  . 

5H 

Ixv.  17-20,  23-25 

515 

xliv.  1-5 

254 

Ixv.  20-22 

234 

INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


ISAIAH  —  continued. 

JEREM  IAH  —  continued. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Ixvi.  2     .... 

25 

xxxi.  38  . 

513 

x  vi.  6,  7 

195 

xxxii.       ....          236 

,   247 

Ixvi.  8     .... 

459 

xxxii.  19           .... 

289 

Ixvi.  18  . 

254 

xxxii.  37          .... 

358 

JEREMIAH. 

xxxii.  38-42    .         .          206,  240 

,486 

i.  10 

39° 

xxxiii.  15,  16  .         .         .         . 

109 

.ii.  8-26  .... 

397 

xxxix.  i            .... 

249 

iii.  ..... 

86 

xxxix.  3-13      .         .         .         .   . 

212 

iii.  12,  13         ... 

.               12 

xii.  1-3  

248 

iii.  19      .... 

224 

xlii.  18    

245 

V.   10 

36 

xlvii.  6,  7        •         •         •         . 

475 

£ 

1.  4,  5     .        .        .        . 

77 

VI.       2O                   .... 

vii.  IO     . 

449 
87 

1.  17,  18.        .        .        .        . 

384 

Ii.  6,  45  

7o 

x.  13       . 

34° 

/ 

xii.  7       .... 

36,  231 

Iii.  6,  7,  12,  13         ... 

248 

xiii.  15-17 

17 

xiv.  22    . 

•         338 

LAMENTATIONS. 

xvi.  8      .... 

325 

ii.  11-19          .... 

234 

xvi.  13    . 

224 

V.   21 

16 

xvi.  19-20  (R.V.)    . 

510 

xvii.  i     .... 

221 

EZEKIEL. 

xviii.  1  8  . 

397 

ii.  9,  10  

M5 

xix.  I,  2          . 

405 

221 

xix.  9      .... 

385 

iv.  1-2    . 

xxii.  18  . 

199 

iv.  22      . 

324 

xxiii.  5,  6        .         .           109, 

194,  306 

272 

xxiii.  6    . 

477 

V.    I 

•*/  J 

xxiv.  i,  9-11  . 

34 

V.    12          

483 

xxiv.  9    . 

245 

vi.  9 

366 

xxv.         .         .         .         .' 

294 

viii.  i      ..... 

I  O6 

xxv.  15-27 

390 

xii.  6-1  1           .... 

106 

xxv.  30   . 

81 

xiv.  i       ..... 

1  06 

xxix.        .... 

70 

xv.  3      

*7  T 

xxx.  7     .... 

484 

xx.  i.                ... 

7' 
106 

xxx.  10  . 

5'4 

xxii.  14  (etc.)  .... 

241 

XXX.    II     . 

.    27,  49 

•      T    _ 

xxx.  16  . 

384 

xxiv.  26  

249 
245 

xxx.  18  . 

511 

xxvii.-xxviii.  .... 

273 

xxx.  25  . 

347 

xxviii.  12         .         .         .         . 

292 

16 

•        „ 

-}  A   f 

J 

XXXIV.    I  y             .            .            .            . 

345 

xxxi.  ii  . 

•         364 

xxxv.  7   .         .         .  -       . 

282 

xxxi.  17  . 

322 

xxxvi.  ii          .         .         .         . 

359 

xxxi.  27  . 

•         365 

xxxvi.  16-32   .... 

98 

xxxi.  31  . 

.         318 

xxxvi.  26,  27  . 

445 

•3  r  Q 

^ 

^ 

«J  J  S 

xxxvi.  37          *          *          ... 

J  j/ 

xxxi.  VI  . 

94 

xxxvii.  H-I4  . 

^67 

552 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


EzEK  I  EL  —  continued. 

JOEL  —  continued. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

xxxvii.  23-28  .... 

486 

iii.  9-12  .... 

429,   430 

xxxviii.  ii. 

6l 

iii.  15      .... 

500 

xxxviii.-xxxix. 

265 

iii.  18      . 

5°3 

xxxix.  29         .... 
xl.-xliii.  ..... 

445 
195 

AMOS. 

.... 

iv.  II       . 

XIlll.    12    . 

S32 

xlvii.  1-12       .... 

5°5 

v.  4-6     .... 

»3 

xlvii.  18  

287 

vi.  13      . 

45 

vii.  10-14 

467 

DANIEL. 

vii.  13     . 

211 

i.  I          

34 

viii.  5      ... 

.            IS8 

ii.  I         

47 

viii.  IO    . 

449 

ii.  44,  45  (R.V.)      . 
vii.           ..... 

54 
304 

MlCAH. 

vii.  1-3  

176 

iv.  1-7    .... 

195 

vii.  6-8  

54 

iv.  1  1 

517 

vii.  7       ..... 

181 

v.  2         .         .         .           316 

,  347,  477 

vii.  13,  14       . 

54 

V.   2,  4,    10,   II 

.        316 

vii.  19,  23        . 

416 

v.  8 

329 

viii.         ..... 

45 

vii.  10     . 

357 

viii.  16    . 

vii.  15     . 

37o 

ix.  12 

325 

NAHUM. 

ix.  26      

479 

i.  4 

92 

x.  4-21   ..... 

21 

x.  5-18   

3' 

HABAKKUK. 

xi.  21       . 

IQQ 

ii.  i 

ss 

ii.  14 

.        506 

HOSEA. 

81 

277 

*•!  J 

in.  12—14         .         .         • 

327 

i-  7          

313 

i.  8         

360 

ZEPHANIAH. 

i.  9-11    

486 

i.  7 

81 

ii.  18-20          .... 

4O2 

ii.  2,  3    . 

13 

ii.  19,  20 

239 

iii.  13      .... 

233 

ii.  23       

365 

iii.  14,  15         ... 

76 

iv.-xiv.   ..... 

273 

iv.  16      

221 

HAGGAI. 

v.  IS       38, 

233 

i.  3-5     • 

242 

vi.  1-3    38, 

233 

i.  4 

209 

xi.  i        

49 

i.  6 

243 

i.  8 

xiv.  i      ..... 

13 

i.  12-15  .... 

242 

TOEL. 

i.  IT 

213. 

j 
ii.  12,  13          .... 

IT, 

i.  14 

*    3 
ne 

».  17       

J 

147 

i.  14,  15- 

21 

ii.  28,  29 

444 

ii.  3        .         .         .         . 

139,  195 

T2I 

ii.  4 

241 

iii.  2        ..... 

J 
174 

ii.  4,  5    • 

»                    «C}B 

138 

INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


553 


HAGGAI  —  continued. 

PAGE 

LUKE. 

PAGE 

ii.  7,  8,  22,  23         ... 

12 

i.  10,  21  

I  2O 

<  ii.  10-23          .... 

•J 

21 

i.  67-80  

112 

ii.  19       

243 

iii.  31 

452 

MALACHI. 
i.  I          

287 

xxii.  6l,  62 
xxiv.  46-49     .... 
xxiv.  47  . 

431 
14 
112 

i.  ii        
ii.  3(R.V.)     .... 

92 

xxiv.  50,  51     . 

496 

iii.  2-4    

485 

JOHN. 

iii.  5        

216 

i.  14        .         . 

197 

iii.  7 

11 

ii.  29       

192 

iii.  8       

j-j 

v.  17       

425 

viii.  58    

"3 

APOCRYPHA 

x.  30       

477 

xii.  14,  15        . 

312 

i  MACCABEES. 

xii.  20-33        .... 

1  88 

viii.  9-18         .... 

326 

xvi.  32    

482 

xix.  37    

443 

2  MACCABEES. 

iv.  13-15          .... 

326 

i    xii.  40     

280 

ACTS. 

i.  23,  24 

3" 

NEW  TESTAMENT 

ii.  39      
iii.  19      

204 
IS 

148 

MATTHEW. 

iv.  28      

J"TV 

474 

i.  22 

412 

x.  41       

1  20 

»•  5-15  
ii.  17      

412 
263 

xv.  13-18        .... 
xv.  14-18        .... 

79 

40 

iv.  17               .         .         .         . 

vii.  15     
ix.  36(R.V.). 

280 
344 

xvii.  30  . 
xxvi.  6,  7 
xxviii.  20         .... 

»S 
323 
323 

xiii.  35    

412 

xxi.  4,  5.         .         .        .         312, 

316 

xxi.  42    . 
xxi.  42~*44        .... 

348 

ROMANS. 

xxii.  1-14        .... 

1  02 

viii.        

•3 

224 

398 

viii.  20-22       .... 

518 

xxvi.  31,  32     . 

O^ 

481 

viii.  22-25      .... 

323 

xxvii.  3-10      .... 

408 

viii.  33,  34      . 

91 

xxvii.  9,  10               .         .         262, 

263 

xi.  i        

92 

xxvii.  39-43    .... 

3" 

xi.  11-15         .... 

67 

xv.  8 

67 

MARK. 

xv.  8,  9  

319 

vii.  19     

148 

xiii.  24,  25      . 

500 

xiii.  32    

501 

i  CORINTHIANS. 

xiv.  27  (R.V.) 

481 

v.  7        

148 

554 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS 


~    x^vjuin  i  n  i  j\ria. 

PAGE 

1  11  US. 

PAGE 

i.  2O        

319 

ii.  13 

•\2T. 

ii.  14       . 

437 

J^J 

v.  10       

105 

HEBREWS. 

V.   2 

20O 

GALATIANS. 

v.  9         

312 

i".  13      

iSi 

vi.  10 

203 

vi.  10      

203 

ix.  13      . 

46l 

x.  14       . 

1  08 

El'HESIANS. 

327 

i.  9-11    ..... 

203 

3*1  1 

i.  18        

80 

i  PETER. 

ii.  7  (R.v.)    .... 

203 

ii.  4-8    

348 

»•  13       

204 

ii.  13,  14 

189 

2  PETER. 

ii.  14,  15 

350 

i.  10-12  

444 

ii.  14,  16,  17  . 

202 

i.  20,  21          .... 

222 

ii.  19-22  (R.V.) 

198 

i 

ii.  19-22          .... 

3Si 

i  JOHN. 

ii.  22       . 

192 

ii.  i,  2    

91 

iii.  10      

198 

v.  1  8 

36i 

JUDE. 

ver.  21     

102 

I'HILIPPIANS. 

ii.   8            

312 

REVELATION. 

iii-  7-9    

101 

i.  7         

290 

iii.  7       

352 

COLOSSIANS. 

v.  6         

116 

ii.  o 

1  07 

vi.  2                  .         . 

28 

!7/ 

vi.  4 

27 

i  THESSALONIANS. 

xiii.  1-6  ..... 

464 

i.  8         

133 

xvi.  13,  14       . 

464 

xvii.  3-12        .... 

45 

2  THESSALONIANS. 

xviii.  12,  13     . 

1  68 

i.  7-10  (R.V.) 

355 

xix.  6-8  

102 

ii-  4         

464 

xix.  11-16  (R.V.)    . 

355 

ii.  8        

165 

xxi.  1-8  ..... 

527 

ii.  II,  12 

343 

xxi.  15-27       .... 

60 

ii.  18       

164. 

xxi.  23    ..... 

62 

t 

xxii.  i 

505 

i  TIMOTHY 

xxii.  2     - 

506 

vi.  15      

510 

xxii.  n  (R.V.) 

164 

MORGAN    AND   SCOTT    LTD., 

12,    PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS, 

LONDON,    E.C.  4. 


7  r 

3  5 


'  ^  o  u, 

6  0  o  j 

WORKS     BY     DAVID     BARON. 


Types,  Psalms,  and  Prophecies. 

A  Selected  Series  of  Old  Testament  Studies.     Second  Edition. 

Crown  8vo,  nearly  400  pages,  6s. 

"There  is  always  something  especially  interesting  in  the  interpretation  of 
Scripture  by  a  Jewish  Christian,  and  those  who  are  acquainted  with  Mr.  Baron's 
previous  works  will  know  .  .  .  that  this  volume  is  particularly  valuable."  —  Record. 

The  Ancient  Scriptures  and  the  Modern  Jew. 

Fourth  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d.  net. 

"A  notable  volume,  in  which  the  Jewish  Question,  from  the  prophetic  words  in 
the  ancient  Scriptures,  to  the  lives,  position,  and  general  condition  of  the  Hebrew 
people  at  the  present  time,  is  discussed  broadly  and  with  real  force  by  one  who  has 
made  a  long  study  of  the  subject."  —  Bookman. 

Christ  and  Israel. 

Lectures  and  Addresses  on  the  Jews.     By  ADOLPH  SAPHIR, 
D.D.     Collected  and  Edited  by  DAVID  BARON.     Price  3s.  6d.  net. 
"To  those  interested  in  the  subject  of  Jews   and   Missions  to  the  Jews,    the 
present  volume  will  be  indispensable,  as  setting  forth  in  eloquent  language,  and  in 
fervent  and  unquenchable  love  for  his  own  nation,  Israel,  the  plans  and  purposes  of 
God  as  revealed  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments."  —  Evangelical  Christendom. 

The  Jewish  Problem. 

Its  Solution  ;  or,  Israel's  Present  and  Future.    Sixth  Edition, 

Revised.     Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  Is.  ;  Paper,  6d.  net. 

'  '  To  understand  this  book,  and  to  grasp  its  great  expository  argument,  is  to  get 
the  key  to  all  Scriptures  pertaining  to  the  past,  present,  and  future  of  God's  ancient 
people."  —  Dr.  A.  T.  PIERSON. 

The  Shepherd  of  Israel  and  His  Scattered  Flock. 

A  Solution  of  the  Enigma  of  Jewish  History.  Second 
Impression.  Cloth  Boards,  Is.  6d.  net. 

"Mr.  Baron's  exposition  is  fresh  and  convincing  ;  and  his  acquaintance  with  the 
history  of  his  people  is  thoroughly  intimate.  ...  Of  the  profoundest  interest." 

Methodist  Times, 

Israel's  Inalienable  Possessions. 

The  Gifts  and  the  Calling  of  God  which  are  without 
Repentance.  A  companion  volume  to  "A  Divine  Forecast  of  Jewish 
History."  Attractively  bound  in  White  Embossed  Paper,  8d.  net  ; 
Cloth,  Is.  net. 

"Much  precious  teaching  is  embodied  in  the  treatment,  whereby  the  reader  is 
compelled  to  praise  the  grace  and  faithfulness  of  God.  and  at  the  same  time  urged  to 
a  prayerful  interest  in  the  nation  which,  notwithstanding  its  many  failings,  is  still 
'beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes.'  "  —  The  Christian. 

The  History  of  the  Ten  Lost  Tribes: 

Anglo=Israelism  Examined.     Cloth,  Is.  net. 

"The  subject  is  carefully  examined  by  one  who  has  made  a  long  and  thorough 
study,  and  his  conclusions  cannot  be  neglected  by  those  who  wish  to  get  to  the 
truth.  '  '—Life  of  Faith. 

A  Divine  Forecast  of  Jewish  History: 

A    Proof    of    the    Supernatural     Element    in    Scripture. 

Attractively  bound  in  White  Embossed  Paper,  6d.  net  ;  Cloth,  Is.  net. 
"Confidence  in  the  divine  inspiration  of  Moses  must  follow  a   reading  of  this 
excellent  book."  —  Watchword  and  Truth. 

MORGAN  &  SCOTT  LTD.,  12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  London,  E.C.; 

or  from  THE  HEBREW  CHRISTIAN  TESTIMONY  TO  ISRAEL, 

"Northfield,"  Chorley  Wood,  Herts. 


